Proceedings o f  1993 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks

Abstract  A simple invertebrate animal like the marine mollusc Aplysia exhibits an impressive variety of learning behaviour. The underlying biophysical and biochemical cellular mech- anism has been for the most part well described by the group of Kandel. We propose a mathematical model which applies to the simple circuit of a synapse between three neuronal cells with non-hebbian learning rules and with temporal associations of condi- tioned and unconditioned stimuli. This model mimics the synaptic plasticity of the sen- sorimotor synapses responsible for the habituation, sensitization,classical conditioning of gill-withdrawal reflex. The evolution of the neuronal states is described by a set of differ- ential equations for the dynamics of membrane potential, potassium conductance, calcium conductance and calcium concentration in dendritic and assonic regions.

Introduction  Learning behaviour of the marine mollusc Aplysia has been studied extensively and has become a good model for artificial neural networks which take into account interesting aspects of elementary forms of learning such as habituation, sensitization and classical conditioning'.

Aplysia reacts to a stimulus on its siphon by the defensive response of contracting its gill through a neural circuit which consists of a population of about 25 sensory neurons that innervate the siphon and make monosynaptic connections with interneurons and with gill  motoneuron^^-^.

A repeated mild stimulus to the siphon causes habituation with a decrease in the response which can last for several hours. An unconditioned stimulus as a shock to the tail cause an enhancement of defensive response with a sensitization to even the mild siphon stimulus that has caused the habituation behaviour. In the classical conditioning experiments the mollusc learns to anticipate an unconditioned shock to its tail following a conditioned All these learning mechanisms can be schematized by the same system of sensory neurons from the siphon that make excitatory monosynaptic connections with motor neurons that control the gill withdrawal (see Fig.1). The weight of the senso- rimotor synapse is reduced during his habituation through a diminished influx of calcium ions into the presynaptic terminal. The associative changes produced by conditioning occur through presynaptic facilitation of the synaptic connection. This pre-modulatory coincidence mechanism is different from the pre-post coincidence proposed by Hebb5. The group of Card6,7 has developed analog VLSI circuits to mimic qualitatively the learning     interneuron motor neuron  Fig.1. Diagram of gill-withdrawal reflex neural circuit in Aplysia. This ternary synapse includes inputs from both the sensory neuron (conditioned stimulus CS) and the the interneuron ( which conveys unconditioned stimulus US).

mechanism of Aplysia. In this paper we describe a more realistic model which is based on the circuit of Fig.1 and takes into account ionic concentrations and conductances in the neuron cell.

The proposal model  The neuronal state is characterized by the membrane potentials, potassium conduc- tances, calcium conductance and calcium concentration. Their values are kept in two distinct regions, the dendritic tree and the axon. The evolution of the neural state as a dynamical system is ruled by the following set of differential equations, modified from the two-point model neuron described by McGregor* :     d  The dendritic current I D  being the input stimulus, the response or output function is  VfJ = VA + s  (Vs - VA) +'I  where Vs is the spike amplitude, q is a small white noise, and s is the spike variable  1, if VA > e A s = {  0, if VA < 8 A .

The apices A,D indicate the values of the variable in the axon and dendritic tree respectively. VA,VD are the membrane potentials,gg,gf: the potassium conductances,pc, and gCa are the calcium concentration and calcium conductance. These variables char- acterize the state of the system, that can be therefore represented with a point x ( t )  = ( V D ,  SE, pCa, gca, VA, g$) moving in a six-dimensional vector space.

TM, rK,rK,rca, A D  r&a are the relaxation times for the membrane potential, dendritic and The properties of the neuron are fixed by the following list of parameters:  assonic potassium conductance, calcium concentration and calcium conductance in the dendritic region respectively.

Vip,V': are the equilibrium potential for the ions K+,Ca++.

eD,OA are the spike threshold for the potential in the dendrites and in the axon.

gDA is the conductance between the two regions.

y is the coefficient which bind the change of the calcium concentration whit the calcium conductance.

S is the coefficient of calcium conductance change in response to a spike.

cp is the increasing in dendritic potassium conductance in response to an increase in calcium concentrat ion.

PO is the threshold level of calcium ions which trigger potassium conductance.

between three neurons:  is the rise in potassium conductance in response to a spike.

We propose as learning rule the following time variation of synaptic efficacies W(t )  W(t  + At)  - W(t )  = Q1 5 Q(t) 2 a 2     where WO is the amplitude of a sudden change in W ,  and a(t)  is introduced as an ad- ditional variable for the short-term memory. The value of a(t)  can be increased from a unconditioned stimulus only in a temporal window following the conditioned stimulus  a(t + At) = a(t)  + w(t  - t*)  (Vus - 8us) where t* is the time of the last conditioned stimulus Vcs,Bus is a threshold for reinforcing action of Vus on a,  and w is the function  -- w(t> = wo . e +: e (I - e-+>  which is about zero except for the time interval (71,~). No biological interpretation of the variable a( t )  is done, being his introduction justified only by a phenomenological modelling of simple neural system of the Aplysia.

The proposed learning rule for W ( t )  is sufficient to mimic qualitatively the cellular mechanism of learning behaviour, and it can be used to build neural nets in which the temporal association of stimuli plays a fundamental role. Work is in progress to analyze the results of the simulations and to locate the limits of the model and the possible extensions.

The implementation of the model Numerical simulations was carried on graphical workstation (SGI, Linux486).

The simple integration scheme used is  -- dx(t) - -a( t )x( t )  + b ( t )  -+ x( t  + At) = z( t )e-aAf + -(I b - e-aAf) dt U  and this alghoritm was implemented in C language.

Acknowledgement Thanks to Kristina Reinfeld for the preparation of the figure. This work was supported  by SGS Thompson under National Project for Bioelectronics.

