Associative Memory System Using Fuzzy Sets

Abstract An associative memory (AM) system using fuzzy sets is  presented in this paper.  Vectors to be stored in the AM are  transformed into fuzzy sets.  Fuzzy rules are constructed  from the fuzzified vectors to associate vector when a  stimulus vector is input to the AM system.  Computational  experiments are carried out to evaluate performance of the  AM system.  The experiments show that the AM system is  responsive to feature of the stimulus vectors.  In addition,  the AM system performs more than 95% correct association  rate until 20% of the binary valued elements of the stored  vectors are flipped randomly from either zero or one.

1.  Introduction  An associative memory (AM) stores information  in a  whole area of a memory system, unlike a standard com-  puter memory system where information corresponds to a  specific address (Kohonen, 1972 and 1987).  This distribu-  tive memory system makes AM tolerant to noisy and/or  partial input, and it is most attractive features for applying  the AM to real-world problems.

As we intend to apply the AM systems to real-world  problems such as pattern recognition, data mining, image  processing, and so on, relevant available information  involves imprecision, uncertainty, and partial truth.  We are  looking for a design method of the AM system which is  tolerant to the problems related to the real-world.  Zadeh  introduced soft computing (SC) to exploit the tolerance for  imprecision, uncertainty, and partial truth, and approxima-  tion to achieve tractability, robustness, low solution cost and  better rapport of reality (Zadeh, 1997).

In this paper, we will present a design method of an AM  system using fuzzy sets.  In the AM systems, the impreci-  sion, the uncertainty, and the partial truth of the given  information are included into membership functions of  fuzzy sets, and fuzzified information is stored in the AM  system.  The paper is organized as follows.  Procedures to  form  fuzzy stimulus and response vectors are described in  section 2.  In section 3, association rules to associate a  stimulus vector with response vector is introduced.  In  section 4, the performance of the AM system is evaluated by    computational experiments.

2.   Transforming stimulus and response  vectors into fuzzy sets  We assume that elements of vectors are binary values as  either zero or one.  We transform stimulus vectors to be  stored in the AM system into fuzzy set based on the follow-  ing idea:  when we observe an element of the binary valued  as zero, we cannot negate the possibility that the observed  value is one by an uncertainty and/or imprecision related to  the real-world problems.  The converse is also true.  This  transformation enables us information processing while  maintaining the possibility of the binary value which is not  observed.

A binary value of an element of stimulus vector is  transformed into the fuzzy set as   ? ( ) / ( , , ,..., )?A x x j pi  j A l l  l  L  i j= =  =  ? ? ?   0 1 2  where  ? ? ( )A lij x  is the membership function and  x l Ll ( , , ,..., )= ?0 1 2 1  is a discrete value between 0.0 and 1.0 (Mizumoto, 1989).

? ? ( )A lij x  is determined as follows:  if the value of the  Ai j  is zero, a grade of membership function is 1.0 at xl = 0 0.

and decreases linearly along the hypotenuse of the right-  angled triangle until the grade becomes zero at x xl = ? .

On the other hand, if  the Ai j  is one, the grade of the  membership function is 1.0 at xl = 1 0.  and decreases linearly along the hypotenuse of the right-angled triangle  until the grade becomes zero at x xl = ? .

The elements of the response vector to be stored in the  AM system are transformed into fuzzy sets according to the  following idea.  We assume that if an element at a location  occurs as either zero or one at a low rate of frequency for all  stimulus vectors stored in the AM system, the value of the  element at that location is essential.  Conversely, if an  element at a location occurs as either zero or one at a high  rate of frequency, the value of the element at that location is  not essential.  The fewer the occurring frequency of the  value of the element, the more essential.  A right-angled  triangle is used to form the membership function which is  right-angle triangle formed.  We determined shape of the  triangle as follows.  If the element of the response vector is  essential, uncertainty of the membership function is small.

On the other hand, the element is not essential, uncertainty  of the membership function is large.  The more essential the  element of the response vector, the larger the membership  function.  Therefore, the length of the base of the triangle is  given as  length n  n = ?  where ?n  is the occurring frequency of the element at a location as either zero or one. n   is the number of stimulus vectors stored in the AM system.  The height of the triangle  is also given as 1/ ?n .

3.  Association Rules  Association rules consists of an exciting rule and inhibit-  ing rule.  The association rule generates fuzzy output vector  when a stimulus input vector is given to the AM system.

The exciting rule gives a large grade of membership  function in the area around 1.0 of the element of the fuzzy  output vector, when an element of an incoming vector is  almost the same as the element of the stored vector in the  AM system.  On the other hand, the inhibiting rule gives a  large grade of membership function in the area around 0.0  of the element of the fuzzy output vector, when an element  of input vector is different from element of the stored  vectors.

We made the exciting AM rule using Cartesian product    between each element of stimulus and response vectors to  be stored in the AM.  To make an inhibiting rule, element of  each stimulus and response vectors stored in the AM system  is flipped either zero or one or vice versa.  The inhibiting  AM rule is made from these flipped stimulus and response  vectors by the same procedures to make exciting AM rules.

When a stimulus vector is input to the AM system, the  AM rules generate n fuzzy vectors, respectively.  The  membership function of each element of the output vector is  composed by max-min operation.  If the present vector is  close to one of the stored vector, the grade of membership  function of the elements of the output vector will be larger  in the area around 1.0 than the area around 0.0.  Converse is  also true.

The membership functions of all elements of the output  vectors are summed and normalized to produce averaged  output vector.  Then, we compute a centroid of averaged  membership function which gives the similarity between the  presented vector and vectors stored in the AM system.  The  AM system chooses the largest centroid out of n centroids  each of which gives the similarity between the presented  vector and n stored vectors.  The vector showing the largest  centriod is associated with the input vector.

4.  Performance of the AM system  Performance of the AM system was evaluated by  computational experiments.  Alphabetical characters  consists of 64 elements are prepared for the experiments.

These characters are stored in the AM system as stimulus  vectors.

Since C, O, and G are very similar patterns when  they  are represented in 64 size, it is difficult to distiguish pattern  C from O and it is also difficult to distiguish pattern C from  G.  We flipped one elemet of C which is part of elements  composing the pattern O.  Since the rate of ocurring fre-  quency of the element is low, the element is an essential  element of the pattern O.  The AM system associates vector  pattern O, however the AM with correlation matrix method  (CMM) associates pattern C.  We also flipped two elements  of patern C which are essential elements to represent pattern  G.  The AM system associates pattern G, but the AM with  CMM associates pattern C.  The same experiment is carried  out using similar pattern O, G, and Q.  The AM system  associated correct pattern when a part of essential elements  are flipped.  In the similar pattern such as P and R, the AM  system associated correct pattern.  These experiments show  that the AM system is robust  when the essential elements  are flipped.  We speculate that this robustness is advantage  to use the AM system for real-world problems.

