Research on Case Organization and Retrieval of Case and Rule ased Reasoning  Approaches for Electric Power Engineering Design

Abstract: Electrical engineering design is a weak-theory field, in which a great deal of domain knowledge is not extracted yet.

Although CBR technique can perfectly simulate expert's thinking process such as association, instinct, analogy, learning and, recollection, it appears to be farfetched, unexplainable and unsystematic during its reasoning procedure because of its lack of deduce ability. In this paper the authors present case and rule based reasoning(CRBR3 approach and bring forward a retrieving technique in the process of CRB and an organizing method of CRBR system for electric engineering design. The goal of the methods is to accomplish the whole tasks from scheme design to construction design.

Keywords: eiecuic power system, engineering design, case based reasoning, rule based reasoning, case retrieval and organization

I. INTRODUCTION  CBR is based on human's cognizance procedure. The clou of a CBR system is to search its case memory for an existing case that matches the input specification, and then reason on the basis of previous successful cases similar to our input situation, rather than tackle the whole design work from the beginning.

So a representative procedure of CBR can be summed up as that: + Retrieve the most similar past cases that is relevant  to the input situation + Adapt the selected cases to meet the needs of current situation. + Son the new cases into design database in the light of certain learning policy.

Therefore, CBR is an analogy reason methodology in deed and has been applied to many design fields such as mechanical, electronic, architecture etc.[1,2]. In brief, CBR technique can perfectly simulate expert's thinking process such as association, instinct, analogy, learning and recollection.

However it appears to be farfetched, unexplainable and unsystematic in its reasoning procedure because of its lack of deduce ability. If introducing rule based reasoning (RBR) techniques having strong deduce ability when necessary, we wobld not only strengthen the system's flexibility and deduce ability, but reduce considerable works of retrieving cases and maintaining database. Thus it can be seen that combination of  Liu Baizhen North China Electric power Design Institute  Beijing, China, lo0011  CBR and RBR techniques, i.e. Case and Rule Based Reasoning(CRBR) , is the optimal choice of the electrical engineering ICAD system.

To build CRBR system, some fundamental works have to be tackled first such as case representation, case strategy, organization of the characteristic roots, case adaptation and case learning and etc..

In this paper the authors bring forward a retrieving technique in the process of CRB and an organizing method of CRBR system for electric engineering design. The goal of methods is to accomplish the whole tasks from scheme design to construction design.



II. CASE ORGANIZING AND INDEXING STRATEGY  A CBR system derives its power from its ability to retrieve relevant cases quickly and accurately from its memory.

Building a structure or process that will return the most appropriate case is the goal of the case's organizati6n and retrieval process. Generally, each case possesses its features, with which retrieval strategy couldfind relevant cases. Ifthose features could represent a case sufficiently and necessarily, we call the case well defined. In current AI field, cases' organization and retrieval strategies usually fail into one of the three kinds: nearest neighbor, inductive, and knowledge- guided, or a combination of the three.

1). Nearest neighbor approach Nearest neighbor approaches let the user retrieves cases  based on a weighted sum of features in the input case that match cases in memory. This approach is a good one to use if the retrieval goal is not well defined or if few cases are available. As to electric engineering design, however, engineering cases and their features are numerous. Along with the different projects and different design phases, many features may emerge dynamically and be context dependent.

Therefore, this kind of indexing approach can not be used exclusively in electric engineering designs .

2). Inductive approach Inductive approaches can automatically, and objectively  analyze the cases to determine the best features for distinguishing them. At the same time, design cases were organized into a hierarchical structure similar to discrimination net based on those best features ( components of cases). Applying discriminating tree for retrieving, the system is good at tackle hierarchical problem. Nevertheless it  0-7803-4754-4/98/$10.00 0 1998 IEEE -1082-    needs the cases being well defined, and having reasonable quantity of cases to generate accurate discriminating features.

However, electrical engineering design is an ill-structured problem, whose cases are generally ill-defined, so that it is difficult to applying inductive approaches into our work.

3). Knowledge-guided approach Knowledge-based indexing approaches try to apply  existing knowledge to each case in the library to determine which features are important for retrieving each case and use these features to organize and index cases. Having indwted the heuristic knowledge, we can reduce the number of retrieval features and narrow the searching scope. Meanwhile the case organization and retrieval are endowed with certain dynamic nature. This approach possesses high efficiencywhen a case base contains numerous features and each case does few. A part of subcases and their features in electric engineering design follows that.

Regarding the Properties of electric engineering design, the authors propose the retrieving strategy combining neighbor and knowledge-guided approaches. The function the strategy is nothing but using the set of features and retrieving appropriate cases, so the relationship between cases and the set of features is pivotal. If the relationship can be represented with heuristic knowledge, then called those features as explicable features, otherwisecalled unexplainable features. In the engineering design, the knowledge-guided approaches can keep the high efficiency for the explicable features, while we have to use nearest-neighbor approaches to carry on the associative retrieval for the unexplainable features. As to the knowledge-guided method, we adopt the method of rule-based reasoning, which will be discussed in detail in the coming paper. We discuss the nearest-neighbor approaches in this paper, and bring forward the corresponding algorithm as follows.

p,, pp .......... Pzm P= p3 , p3* .......... p3m  .........................

......................

pa, pd .......... Pm  m. NEAREST-NEIGHBOR ALGORITHM  A2 A, (1)  An ...

Let the set of cases be C=(C,,C,, ... C,},and Cj be thej- th case in the case base. The set of features of C is A=(A~,A~,.?..AJ,& is the i-th feature. Then the associative matrix of feature with case is as follows:  and all the weights form the matrix W:  n  W==(wI, wz,. ..w,},and wi =1 (2) i= i  The weight of general feature is confiimed by experienced experts. Letting al l  weights havethe same value is thesimplest implementation.

Let the current case be CO, and CnesPonding feature values are (pI p, ..pJ. We can define its similarity (called case similarity) to the j-th case Cj as follows:  , > *  n  1= 1 s(c:,, CJ =c w, 4 P ,  9 P,,) j=1, 2, ... m (3)  Where s(p,, p,, ) called feature similarity is the similarity of feature PI to PIJ , and could be calculated with the distance between Ithem. Then s(co* c ~ )  is obtained according to Eq.(3).

However, we have to normalize the features value before calculatinig the similarity since the data types and their value- range are different .

In irespect of numeric feature Ai, its value is generally limited with value interval, letting it be la* b]. Then the distance between p, and pa is d= I p, - p,, I ,and its normalized value is obtained from:  (4) The similarity can be defied as:  Generally, the feature of character data Ai can be sorted into tow h d s :  compatible features and incompatible features.

Each value of the compatible feature has a certain similarity with other values. For example, the distance from a load to ai generator can be defined as (?short? , ?shorter?, ?medium?, ?longer?, ?long? 1, and be quantized as { 0, 0.2, 0.5,0.8, 1.0 } by engineering experience. The similarity of the value ?short? with the value ?shorternshould take a larger value than with the others ( of course except ?short? itself), because their distance value is more similar. Then their distance value and the similarity between them can also be obtain from Eq. (4) and Eq.(5):  d.= 10.2 - 01/1=0.2 s=0.8/1.2=0.667  In respect with incompatible feature, for example, the case feature ?device name? could take different values such as ?current relay? or ?voltage relay? etc, since all of its values  -1083-    have no relations with each other, the distance between them are the longest and its similarity has the following form:  d + = l  and s@,, pi] )=O when pi#pj  e those with small similarity(S<e), forming the set of candidates Cs.

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * e * * *  I I Fig. 1 Structure of case base of eleclric engineering design  case is. Then it?  strategy needs some c  F THE CAS ELECTRIC ENGINEERING DESIGN  Akhoughthere are numerous case features in electric engineering design, the authors classify them features as three groups: global features, local features, and micro-adapting  whole design,scheme, change the entire volumes or books, and determine the  existence of some subcases. The relationships between the global features and global case base are generally explicable, and can be represented in rule form. It is just the reason that expert system technology (i.e.rule-based reasoning) is widespread used in the scheme design. Although these global features are not enough for us to obtain the final solution: the  an lead the design procedure to find the e the most similar case is, and extremely scope. The properties of global feature  oncluded in Table 1.

TABLE 1 CLASSIFICATION AND PROPERTIES OF CASE FEATURES FOR  CTRIC ENGINEERING DESIGN  Influence Whole design scheme Saucture of Graphic of area volumes, andbooks drawings drawings  Yes No Yes forgrapbc No for case  Retrieving Knowledge-guided Nearest neigh- Nearest neighbor method approach bor approach approach  CBR for retrieving RBR for adapting  ch we can determine the  just make some impact on the partial structure of design scheme, for example, c graphic layout and structure of design drawings. owledge generally is mexplhable, and difficult to be expressed in rule form. It is just the reason that current AI techniques hardly set foot in the field of graphic design. However with nearest-neighbor indexing strategy, the problem can be solved conveniently, that is to say, having established the local case-bases, we can obtain one or several similar cases by local features, and form the candidate case set. Obviously the cases are all generalized cases. Nevertheless, the design solution is the specified case[3] that still needs to use the adapting features.

C. Adapting features Compared with global features and local features, the  adapting features merely have an influence on the graphic variables inside design drawings. The relationships are easy to  -1084-    be defined with rules or procedures since those features act nearest-neighbor approaches. If failing, we retrieve directly on every graphic object. For graphic primi generalized cases only with local features. The characteristics features are explicable. However, adapting feature and functions of the three kinds of features in design cases are take various values, with which graphic primitives may shown in Table 1.

change greatly, for example, some equipment specifications or settings in the equipment table. Furthermore, there are many adapting features and graphic primitives in a piece of drawing.

So if every combination of graphic primitives has been A CBR. system derives its power from its ability to retrieve registered as aspecified case, thescale of the case-base would relevant CaSeS quickly and accurately from its memory. Building a  the indexing structure or process that will return the most appropriate case is the goal of the cases' organization and retrieval process. Generally,  is just the every case pomesses its features. with which retrieval strategy could disadvantage of current indexing method making use of find relevant tmses.

database. Therefore, besides reserving some typical specified According to the relationship between a case and its features, cases aptly, the case-base should mainly Store the generalized the authors divide all the features into global, local and adapting cases with a wider adjusting range. What affects on such features, and propose knowledge-guided approaches and nearest- adjustments is the adapting features. By inspiring the neighbor approaches to retrieve relevant case and adapt it. Using this operating bowledge inside each subcase, these features method, the author has successively built a C D R  system for electric change the values of graphic variables, and convert the engineeringde)sign* generalized cases into the specified cases. The specified would be stored into the specified case base if the case possesses the typical significance and may be applied with less adaptation for future projects.

features and graphic primitives are explicable, those between adapting  explain. To retrieve the specified cases for design solution, we must use the local features and readjust features together in

VI. CONCLUSION  infinitely, and the system lo for

VII. REFERENCES  Byralph Barletta. "An Introduction to Case-Based Reasoning". AI &pen, Aug. 1991.pp43-49 John Hunt, Roger Mites. "Toward an intelligent architectural design aid". Expert Systems, August 1  Reasoning Approaches for Electric Power Enginee POWERCON'98, Beijing. China, 1998,8.

