THE COLLABORATIVE ELECTRONIC NOTEBOOK SYSTEMS  CONSORTIUM

Abstract  Electronic laboratory notebook systems have the potential to provide increased access to scientific data. The Collaborabve Electronic Notebook Systems Associa-bon (CENSA) has been formed through the support of eleven major pharmaceutical and chemical companies. The consortium is working with scienhfic software and hadware vendors to facatate the design of a system that wdl meet the needs of the consortium members, including compliance with recordkeeping rules by the various regulatory authorities and w e n t  offices.

Introduction  Startmg in October 1994, researchers at TeamScience, a science oriented software research and engneering compny located in Wobum, Massachusetts, initiated a research study culled "the R&D T e a m  Computmg Study"[ 1,2]. The study was commissioned by nine multinational corporations in the pharmaceutical, chemical, biotechnology, and related industries.

The study detailed the vision, the business requuements, and the software functional requirements for companies to be effective using the new class of systems called 'R&D T e a m Computing System." A purpose of the study was to evaluate potential electronic notebook solutions. The study evaluated Digital Equipment Corporations's "Linkworks", Documenturn's 'Enterprise Document Management System," ForeFront Group's "Virtual Notebook System," Helix Systems and "Researchstation," Lotus Development Corporation "Notes." The study uncovered mqor areas of improvements requlTed  in these products. It also measured sigmficant process improvements possible with the proper application of electronic notebooks. In December 1995, in response to the R&D T e a m  Computmg Study results, several global chemical and pharmaceutical companies decided to enter into a consortium to specify and facilitate the creation of robust electronic notebook solutions designed to meet member needs.

Results  The Consortium has started the development of a t e c h c a l  architecture that will build on top of already successful bcrse platforms. It will place valueadded services for electronic recordkeeping and records management Mecycle supprt on the servers. It will build special modules and add-in components to facilitate the work of chemists, biologists, materials scienbts, and other technical professionals working on collaborative teams.

Finally, the architecture will build specialized and standardized integration hooks into these platforms and provide graphical application intqa-hon tools to take advantage of these hooks. There will be both desktop hooks and collaboration infrastructure hooks. The Consortium development prccess is designed to leverage the core competencies of both large and small "best-of-breed" vendors. The technology emphasis is on CENSAs open, modular, client/semer component architectures that can leverage current and near future infrastructure investments, and result in muss-marketed but customrmble products at reasonable prices. The tools developed by vendors are required to take advantage of popular base computing platforms, and U- successful integrabon and middleware  (O-7803-4262-3/97/$10.00 (C) 1997 IEEE)     tools and emerging standards such SQL3, CORBA, Java, OLE, X.400, X.500, DCE, http/html, PDF, SSL, DNS, and others. As of this wrihng the technical architecture design is in process.

Discussion  R&D records possess several unique characteristics: First, R&D activities are always ?project-oriented,? mar ing  that they comprise a closed set of activities with a fixed endpoint.

Electronic recordkeeping and records management are a core subsystem of an R&D Team Computmg System. R&D team activities nearly always result in specific deliver&les.

Very often those deliverables are materials, equpment, or reports, although often they are simply conclusions or presentations of results [31.

W e  the project orientahon of R&D is not particularly unusual, since many businesses are run using projects, R&D project structures are extremely variable and ad-hoc, and change or spcrwn new projects- quickly.

The second important and unique characteristic of R&D is that projects are frequently interrelated.

Project data may be s m a r  in one set of dunensions yet very different along others. This implicitly links projects across several dimensions.

In computer terminology such project data are ?hy-perhnked.? Yet there is now no way for people to easily drill backward or dnll forward from one project to another, to browse any data, and create reports from them. Roject data are very often locked up in paper  in notebooks or recordkeeping systems.

Because projects are rapidly spawned from one another, it is easy for a project portfolio to become unmanageable. Thus project data tracking and mcmagement capbfities are crucial in R&D. For example, a medium-sized chemical company may have hundreds to thousands of projects open at once. Sometimes thousands of people scattered across the globe must participate in the generahon, orgcmizdon, review, summary, and secure release of project mformation. Companies must have powerful ways of simplifying the Inherent complexity of their tasks. Sophisticated software tools for managing all data from projects are badly needed by scientsts.

Another unique characteristic of R&D is that laboratory record types are among the most varied anywhere. Typical data types encountered include text, images, grUPhcs, structures (molecular, protein, DNA), spectral data, protocols, audio, video, and others-each with perhaps tens of variahons of data formats whch change with successive releases of software. ThLS makes automation of lab data management a major challenge because there is so little consistency or standardizcrhon.

Conclusion  R&D data from laboratory notebooks is not always accesslble to scientists. CENSA has been formed to facilitate the creation of collaborahve electronic notebook systems designed to store experimental data. The consortium is desigrung a technical archtectuze that will bulld upon existing products and standards to solve many of the needs for scientific informabon. The consortium WILI be involving national laboratories, vendors and vcnious other companies to build components for member compames. The ultimate output of the consortium WIU be hardware and software systems that facilitates collaboration of scientific and technical teatns, the construction of R&D data and document warehouses, and specialized record repositories. Knowledge deliverables from the consortium WIU form the basis for standards for fully electronic recordkeping procedures and systems that meet all the legal and regulatory requirements. Eventually the group?s mission is to move the storage of R&D intellectual property away from ?pcrper as a necessity? to ?paper merely as a convenience? with fully electronic recordkeeping for the default storage mode. ThLS will enable much grecrter uhlizabon of R&D and corporate intellectual property, and allow much higher scientific productivity.

