Proceedings of The First Joint BMES/EMBS Conference Serving Humanity, Advancing Technology Oct 13-16, '99, Atlanta, GA, USA

Abstract. It is of prime importance to ascertain the prognosis of patients who have experienced heart attack or unstable angina, as they are prone to developing serious adverse after-effects. The aim of this study was to run machine learning algorithms over a cardiac database to derive associations between various clinical and pathological parameters and the occurrence of future adverse consequences. The rules induced from the data were used to build an expert system for prediction of outcomes for unseen cases and it was ported on the web for use over the Internet.

Key words - heart attack, prognosis, machine learning, web.



I. INTRODUCTION  The objective of our work was to determine associations between various clinical and pathological parameters, and adverse outcomes after acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and unstable angina (UA), by case-based learning of a myocardial infarction database.

11. METHODS  Retrospective data for 413 cases (316 cases of AMI {M : F :: 4 : l}, and 97 cases of UA {M : F :: 1.6 : 1)) from Ruby Hall Clinic, Pune, was gathered and entered in a machine readable, structured form. Data for each patient was gathered with reference to 48 chosen relevant attributes. The outcomes were categorized into 22 classes. The CN2' [ 1 J and the ITI algorithmsZ [2] were obtained from the Web and they were run over the two data sets. The one-year status of 166 patients (1 17 with AMI, and 49 with UA) could be ascertained by mail or telephonically.

111. RESULTS  The cross validation tests with the ITI, the CN2 (unordered) and the CN2 (ordered) algorithms showed that they had mean accuracies of 49.75%, 53.34% and 49.83% with standard deviations of 5.95, 3.48 and 9.02 respectively, when classifying outcomes after AMI. The mean accuracy with UA was 65.37%, 58.23% and 51.1% with standard deviations of 5.83, 7.07 and 8.5 respectively. Rules obtained  I http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/pclark/sofhvare.html#cn2 http://www-ml.cs.umass.edu/itilindex.html  User sitting on his Pc accessing the web server from anyvhere on the world wide web Web server that holds the  consultation system  Web browser  I- 7 a m  SERVER - LINUX-BASED  Fig. 1 ' Client server architecture of HEARTEXPERT Figure 1 illustrates the client-server structure of the system.

The Javam programming language and Common Gateway Interface scripts were used in implementation.



IV. DISCUSSION  Our study has demonstrated a stratification of patients into various risk categories to decide the future course of action for each patient. The accuracy of prediction obtained being much less than the desired figure of about 80 % could imply that the concept is very abstract and some other, possibly yet unknown factors, play a role. But, we had considered a number of clinical and laboratory factors. The size of our database was also small and, about 20 % of attribute values were missing in our database. We feel that prospects for future work addressing these issues seem to be bright.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  The authors are thankful to Dr. P. K. Grant, Ruby Hall Clinic, Pune for kindly allowing them to utilize the database of cases at Ruby Hall Clinic, m e ,  and to their colleagues in the Machine Intelligence Laboratory, IIT, Bombay.

