Huan Liu  School of Computing

Abstract  Finding patterns from data sets is a fundamental task of data mining. l f w e  categorize all patterns into strong, weak, and random, conventional data mining techniques are de- signed only to find strong patterns, which hold fo r  numer- ous objects and are usually consistent with the expectations of experts. In this paper; we address the problem of jind- ing weak patterns (i.e., reliable exceptions) from databases.

They are valid fo r  a small number of objects. A simple ap- proach is proposed which uses deviation analysis to identih interesting exceptions and explore reliable ones. Besides, it is flexible in handling both subjective and objective ex- ceptions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach through a benchmark data set.

1. Introduction  Data mining has attracted much attention from practi- tioners and researchers in recent years. Combining tech- niques from the fields of machine learning, statistics and database, data mining works towards finding patterns from huge databases and using them for improved decision mak- ing. We categorize patterns into three types: (a) strong pat- terns - regularities for numerous objects; (b) weak patterns - reliable exceptions representing a relatively small number of objects; and (c) random patterns - random and unreliable exceptions. We argue that weak patterns are an important part for data mining of discovery nature.

Conventional data mining techniques are only designed to find strong patterns which have high predictive accu- racy or correlation. This is because we normally want to find such kinds of patterns that can help the prediction task.

However, in certain tasks of data mining, we may seek more than predicting: as strong patterns are usually consistent  *on leave from School of Computing, National University of Singapore.

0-7695-0368-3/99 $10.00 0 1999 EEE  Mining Weak Rules   Hongjun Lu Department of Computer Science  Hong Kong University of Science and Technology*  luhj @cs.ust.hk  with the expectations of experts, we want to know what is in the data that we do not know yet. Therefore, in some cases, we are more interested in finding out those weak patterns with respect to the strong ones. Usually, such patterns (reli- able exceptions) are unknown, unexpected, or even contra- dictory to what the user believes. Hence, they are novel and potentially more interesting than strong patterns to the user who can then act upon the weak patterns. For example, if we are told that ?some kind ofjobless applicants are granted credit?, that will be more novel and interesting, as compared to ?jobless applicants are not granted credit?. Moreover, an exception rule is often beneficial for tasks with discovery nature since it differs from a common sense rule which is often a basis for people?s daily activity.

There is no sufficient support from current data mining techniques. Most current data mining techniques such as association rules, decision trees cannot effectively support weak pattern mining. Intuitive extensions cannot help ei- ther. We cannot simply use the existing data mining tech- niques to mine weak rules, or simply resort to generate-and- test: generate rules R on data D ;  remove D? from D that are covered correctly by R; then generate rules R? on D - D?, repeat the process until no data is left. Generating all possi- ble rules Rail will only produce too many rules: much more than the number of instances of data.

2. Our Approach  A simple yet flexible approach is proposed which uses deviation analysis to find reliable exceptions. Different from previous work [3], we shun searching for strong (or common sense) patterns, directly identify those exceptional instances and mine weak patterns from them. Besides the promised efficiency for weak pattern mining, the proposed method can also handle both subjective and objective ex- ceptions. To demonstrate the effectiveness of this novel method, we apply it to some benchmark data sets [2] and report one case here, and indeed find some interesting ex- ception patterns.

Our approach is based on the following observations: (01) Any exception would have a low support [ I ]  found in the data, otherwise it might be a strong pattern. (02)  A rea- sonable induction algorithm can summarize data and learn rules. (03) Attributes in the rules are salient features. Ob- servation (0 I ) suggests that exceptions cannot be discov- ered from the data by applying standard machine learning techniques. Observations ( 0 2 )  and (03) allow us to focus on the important features so that we are more focused and an efficient method is possible for finding reliable excep- tions. Our approach consists of the four phases: P1. Rule induction and focusing for subjective or objective interests (a window of the data is created); P2. Building contingency tables to find negative deviation; P3. Searching for reliable exception candidates; and P4. Obtaining exception rules with common sense and reference rules.

Before we verify the proposed approach, we would like to say a few words about the exceptions found by our ap- proach and those defined in [ 3 ] .  Briefly, Suzuki suggested that for an exception rule, we should also be able to find its corresponding common sense rule and reference rule. A reference rule should hold low support and low confidence.

Due to the nature of negative deviations, it is obvious that every exception rule found by our approach has a corre- sponding common sense rule (with positive deviation). A reference rule can also be found in our effort. In summary, our work suggests that common sense and reference rules can be obtained based on exception rules.

