The Use of an Association Rules  Matrix for Economic Modelling

Abstract  Knowledge discovery. techniques have not becn widely used with macroeconomic data despite the social and political importance inherent in accuratc economic forecasting. Rather, economic forecasting is currently performed with the use of models that rely heavily on theoretical assumptions. Economic assumptions are invariably contentious and model predictions are often rejected or accepted based on subjective perceptions about assumptions. We present an application of KDD that generates a forecasting model that avoids economic assumptions by focussing cntirely on existing data.

Although, association rules are typically used for finding interesting patterns in data, this is not a strategy wc employed. Our approach differs in that all possible association rules between variables representing the current state of an economy in a quarter and the state in the next quarter are generated to form a matrix. A metric based on the support, confidence nnd expected probability of each rule is then derived. The system has been used to perform economic analyses of existing and future government policies. The system has bcen developed using data from the US economy over the last thirty years.

1. Introduction  A national economy is such a complex object of study that direct analysis is not possible.

Therefore, economists havc limited research to the study of models of economies. However the development of a macroeconomic model is heavily dependent on a researcher's own subjective view of thc world and theorctical background and beliefs. For example, hypotheses generated by researchers who accept Keyncsiari assumptions are quite different from hypotheses from Classical theorists.

Hypotheses are not only dependent upon the subjective beliefs of their creators but can easily become obsolete. Completely different economic systems can emerge in different times in different countries and be described by different models.

Thus, if making assumptions and deriving hypotheses about an economy leads to subjective models, and successful theories do not last long, then the following questions arise: Is it possible to eliminate niodel dependence on the subjectivc researcher's assumptions about featurcs and properties of thc object of study?; Can there exist an approach that auitornatically generatcs B hypotlietical basis for constructing a model?; Can this approach be applied in different times to different types of economic systems?

In this paper we suggest an approach that uses domain data only. Our approach is based on the technique of deriving association rules.

Association rules (AR) wcre introduced by [2] and still attract the attcntion of many computer science researchers [7], [lo] but to date 110 attempt has been made to apply AR to inacroeconomic dfita.

Association rules are typically used to find interesting rules between attributes in a largc database. Here, we use AR to generate a data structure we call an Associution Mufrix (AM.

The Association tnatrix is a simple model that is automatically generated from macroeconomic data without the need for any background assumptions.

We have trialed the Association Matrix using macroeconomic data from the US cconomy.

Rcsults indicate the approach is suitable for economic policy analysis.

0-7803-58714/99/$10.00 0 1999 JEEE 836    The Association Matrix is described in the next section. Following that we describe the application of our approach with US data and then offer concluding remarks and future research .

2. Association Matrix  Our approach is based on only one general assumption that the current state of ai1 economy determines its state in the next period of time. This assumption seems reasonable if we take into account two arguments;  weights of a system's impact on each macroeconomic variable. However, to estimate the system of equations wc must assume thc functional form of this dependence because the exact form is unknown. The adoption of one fuiictional form over another is a very strong assumption about the nature of the dependence and is best avoided [6]. Furthermore, low quality data and the presence of noise can also significantly distort the picture of dependence.

This especially applics to rnacrocconomic data, which reflects a high level of data aggregation.

To avoid with these difficulties we fonnalise the mapping (1) into a set of Association rules: . A macroeconomic system typically IF variuble(i) cquals value(k),  changes slowly. If thc intervals of time when observations are made is small enough THEN vuriabb~)' '  cquals vcrluefl) (3) (quarter or month), then it is unlikely that huge changes in the state of an cconamy will bc  that noticed. Therefore, we expect macroeconomic variables will predict values in the next period of time.

The degree of certainty of this rule be defined by confirmed cases in the past using the rnetrics support, confidence and expected predictability.

Each state of the cconomy represents the result of numerous activities of many different economic agents participating in economic life. Most agents form cxpectatioris about the future that influcncc their behaviour. This assumption is broadly accepted in cconornic modelling. 'lhesc types of expectations are called "adaptive expectations" [3], [4] [SI.

.

The problem of forecasting the value of variables in the next timc period converges to determiiiiiig L mapping:  F: Y(l) -> Y(r-I-1) (1)  where "Y(,)'' is a set of imcroeconomic variablcs in period of time "t'! It is necessary to find the contribution of each variable in this mapping. The question arises: Why not use  The interestingness of milied rules is typically defined by a ininirnuin support and confidence of mined rules. However, we do not set a minimum value for support and confidence in generating association rules, but instead generate all rules possible. These rules are used to construct an association matrix.

The rows of AM represent the "IF" parts of association rules. The columns rcfIect the "THEN" parts. Each variable of the system and each value from a set of values for the variable define a ccll. I-Icncc, the intersection of row (vlrriah le (4, vulue(4 and colnrnn (variable 0).

value#) reflccts thc rule (3). This ccll stores a coefficient representing the degree of certainty of the ruIe (3) .  The coefficients for each rule, consequently for each cell in the matrix are obtaincd in the same way.

statistical techniques to estimate this mapping such as those employed in [5]? We might have built a system ofequations:  The degree of certainty of a rule can be calculated in various ways. For our purposes a coefficient that represcnts a degree of certainty     probability of appearance of this dependence in the data;  2) It must be proportional to the confidence of a rule, because the confidence value determines the trueness ofa nile;  3) It must be inversely proportional to the expected predictability of a rule. Thc expectcd predictability is the frequency of occurrence of the "THEN" items of the rules. The higher the expected predictability, the less significance the rule has, the morc likely the "THEN" item happens anyway and less likely it depends on the "IF" item.

The assaciation matrix represents t l ie hypotheses for our future model and can be automatically generated for any macroeconomic system in any country. It docs not depend on the modeller's personal assumptions about thc objcct's natturc or its behaviour arid it can be fairly easily calculated. in the next section a description of a simple modcl, which we can build on thc basis of this matrix, is given.

3. Example of a modcl  In this section we develop a siniplc macroeconomic model, which i s  based on the association matrix dcscribed above. The suggcsted model can be written in the following form:  where "A" is the association matrix. "X(,)" represents a vector of valucs, which are degrees of certainty for each variable o f  the system to hold each value from the set of possible values for this vwiable. These values represents the trueness of the "IF" part of the association rules as illustrated in Figure I .  For example, we see from this Figure that thc degree of certainty that variable I will have value I at time T-tl if it had value 1 at time t is 35.5%  Thus, knowing the degree of certainty for each value iu the current period of time for each  variable in the system we inilltiply them by coefficients of association matrix. Then, we summarise them by columns to obtain the accumulated dcgrce of certainty of each value in the iicxt period of time for each variablc representing the "THEN" parts of AR in columns. These values of degree of certainty form a vector "X(t+l)" and we start tlie process again. Provided the period of time for measuring the variables is relatively small, say, a month or a qiiarter for macroeconomic indicators, we can assume the linearity of the model reflected in the matrix transition.

I I  I I I I t I I  Figure 1. Association matrix  The described model is able to generate thc next state o f  the ccoiiomy on the basis of its current state. Thus, having determined the initial point we can recursively cvahatc thc ncxt point and construct a chain-trajectory of economic system devalopment.

The forecasting model consists of the following blocks: 1) The input, which roprosents the vector of the degree of certainty that variables will hold particular vaIucs in the current period of time; 2) The association matrix, which represents the parameters of the model based on the derived association rules between current and the next states; 3) The Output, which reprcsents a vector of the degree of certainty that variables will hold particular values in the next period of time.

Variables that reflect a government?s economic policies cannot be predicted. It is not appropriate to try to predict them, because they can be changed at any time by government decree. The set of these variablcs is represented in  the Control &lock of the system and can be manipulated by the user for scenario testing. This block allows the user to test different ecorioinic policy decisions and perform ?what if? scenarios. According to different values of the control variables of the Control Block different economic devcloprnent trajectories call be generated and the conseqiiences of these decisions can be compared and analysed. The next section describes an implementation of this model to the economic system of the USA.

4. Implcrnentation of the model  In this section we described the data used for the implementation of the model, how the association rules have been obtaincd and thc structure of thc forccastiiig model applied to the economic system of thc USA.

4.1. Data  The data chosen for our experiment was obtained from the Federal Rescrvc Economic Datn, which is supported by The Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louise. The total number of variables is 412. Thc records are made on an annually, quarterly or monthly basis depcnding on a particular variable. The records report economic indicators between 1900 and 1998, However, the values for some economic indicators were not collected for the entire period. The goal of data pre-processing was to prepare a data sample with variables recorded for the same period of time and with the same frequency. The largest possible samplc we could obtain contained 100 variables recordcd from 1960 until 1997, quarterly.

The most common form of trajectory for the development of most macroeconomic variables in thc short-run is similar to a monotonically increasing or dccrcasing  function and can be fairly well approximated by a linear function. In order to capture more complex underlying dependencies in an economy, we substituted values of the variables far the change from one quarter to the next. For each variable we fourid thc minimum and maxiinurn value of change i n  percentage and divided thc intervals into four sub-intervals.

Tho final stage of data transformation was to classify the value of change of each variable into the appropriate sub-interval category. This allowerl us to reduce the set of possible values of the variables to the sot of {one, two, three, four) which was done in order to map a 100- dimensionnl Quantitativc Rules problem to a Boolean Rules problem. Any algorithm for finding Boolean Association Rules could then be applied [lo]. In our application 80 variables werc chosen to represent the Input block, while the remaining 20 were allocated for the Control black of the systcm.

4.2. Deriving association rules  To derive association rules we used the ?Mineset? software package, on a UNIX platform. The standard Apriori algorithm [ 13 has been used to gcncratc rubs. Wc prepared two tables: the second table was the same as the first one, except that the first record was missing, It allowed us to generate rules, which predict variables horn the next ( H I )  statc of the system on the basis of the currcnt (I) state. In order to reflect all possible dependencies in the data, the threshold far support and confidcnco has been sct to the minimum value - 1.00 %. It allowcd us to obtain almost all possible rules. The total number of rules exceeded 57,000. Thc significancc of each rule has been presented by thrcc indicators: confidence, support and expected prcdictability.

4.3. Forecasting Model  Once the association rules were obtained, the support, confidence and cxpcctcd predictability of rules need to be combined in order to provide a value for each association matrix cell. The three metrics are combined in this study by simply taking their average. Thus, the     association matrix cell value represents the association between a value on a a variable and a Value on another variabel find is Tlie association matrix derived model was tested calculated from the association rule, A as with data from the first two quarters of 1998  5. Results  Only those rules, which have confidencc or support value less than I%, have "null" vaIiic in the corresponding cell. For example, the variable v51 has the value of "one" only once in the data set, therefore at Ieast tlie support valuc of all rules, which havc v5 I in their "IF" or "THEN" parts will be less than 1%. Thus, they do not satisfy the threshold value and "Mincsct" will not show those rules.

The output values of the system are evaluated by multiplying the input vector by tlie association matrix. Hence, for each vahic of each variable in  the next quarter wc obtain the value, which represents the accumulatcd influence of the entire system on this variable.

Although this number is  not the cxact probability of this value, it rcprcsents a degree of ccrtainty that this variable will have this valuo in the next period of time.

The degree of certainty varies from zero to 400*200/3 (when the support and confidcncc equals 100% and expected predictability equals 0% for each rule for this variable). Zero indicates that it is impossible for the variable to hold the value. Thc value "400*200/3" indicate that this variable will definitely have this value. We normalise this numbers to the interval (0,l) to kecp a balance between input and output. This vector i s  transfcrred to the spreadsheet, which reprcscnts thc next quarter forecasting system.

Before proccssing the next quarter, we pick up the value of each variable with the greatest value of the degree of certainty. These values generate the current point in the trajectory of development of the economic systcrn. Then, the process starts from the beginning,  SO iiidicntors were correctly predicted. The remaining 25 indicators, though not corrcctly predicted were still close to tlie real data. Most of these variablcs wcrc from the financial group and price indexes. Many changes have recently occurred within sector due to the influence of changing global conditions. Thcreforc possible inaccuracies in these predictions resulted because we didn't include the world's economic description in our data set. Fuhire research aims to test our approach with an expanded data set that capture global indicators in addition to national indicators.

Simulations of the system under different control regimes have been performed. Results wcrc largely consistent with some existing macroecoiiotnic models. For example, the impact of changes in taxation levcls on gross domestic product and employment is consistent with the main propositions of Kcyncsian General Theory. The impact of interest rates on consumption and gross domestic product was consistcnt with Classical Tlicory. On the other hand, some new dcpcndcncies in the US economic system have been discovered, which are not covered by cxisting theories. For example, nn increase in real national defense investment lcads to a dccrcasc in cmploymeiit in transportation and a decrease in non-financial corporate business profit after tax. An incrcasc in einployment in the government sector causes an increase in total automobile credit outstanding.

6.  Conclusions  In this paper we proposed an approach to enhance the economic modelling process with the use of association rules. A simple macroeconomic model, on the basis of this approach, has been built and implemeiited for the economic system of the USA. The simulation  X40    of the model showed that it could be used in are stable with regards to the Control block and economic policy analysis to test different can hardly be influenced arid monitoring by government economic decisions and analyse goveriiment as well as those, which are different scenarios of economic deveIopment.

It also allows us to explorc which indicators  especially sensitive to such a control,  7. Rcfcrcnces  [I]. Agrawal R., Srikaiit R., Fast Adgorilhm for Mining Association Rules in Large Databases, VLDB  [2]. Agrawal R., Imielinski T., Swami A., Mining Association Rules between Seis of laems in Large Databases, SIGMOD Conferencc 1993: 207-21 6 [3]. Brayton F., Mauskopf E., Reifschiieider P., Williams J., The Role of Expectations in the FRB/US Macroeconomic Model, Federal Reserve Bulletin, April 1997: 227-245.

[4]. Brayton F., Mauskopf E., The federal reserve Board MPS Quwlerly Ecanomelric Model of the USEcunomy, Economic Modelling, vol. 3, July, 170-292, 1985.

[5]. Fair C., Testing Mucroeconomelric Models, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1994.

[6] .  Glymour C., Madigan D., Pregibon D., Smyth P., Statistical Themes and Lclssons for Dafu Mining, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol.1 No.1, 1997.

[7]. Meo R., Psaila G., Cori S., A New SQL-like Operatorfor Mining Association Rules. VLDB 1996:  [SI. Murphy C., An Overview afthe Murphy Model, Australian Economic papers, Supplement, 1988:  [9]. Rubinov A., Nagiyev A.,  Elemenb ofEcunomic Themy, Baku, Bilik, 1992 (in Russian) [lo]. Srikant R., Agrawal R., Mining Quanlitative Association Rubes in Large Relalional Tables, ACM SIGMOD Conference on Management of Data, 1996.

1994: 487-499.

122- 133.

175-1 99.

