

ABSTRACT A distributed multiple access technique for radio resource management is presented. The proposed Distributed Dynamic Channel Reservation (DDCR) method applies to mutlicarrier wireless ATM LANs, where base stations act as hubs to offer wireless ATM access to mobile units. The method is suitable for unlicensed wireless systems, where base stations are installed in a common coverage area. According to the proposed approach, base stations compete to access and reserve time on separate frequencies, using a dynamic TDMA/TDD technique, combined with listening and competing periods. Etiquette rules, contention disciplines and medium access control mechanisms are proposed. Procedures for terminal association and registration, and solutions for the hidden terminal problem are introduced. Finally, the performance of the presented contention disciplines is evaluated and compared through simulations.



I. INTRODUCTION Wireless and mobile ATM (wmATM), as an emerging technology, is expected to enhance the services offered by cellular networks and by wireless LANs (such as IEEE 802.1 1 and HIPERLAN-1). Recently, the FCC has opened a 300 MHz unlicensed band at the 5GHz spectrum. The basic feature of this band is that no company can monopolize a portion of it. On the other hand, the electromagnetic spectrum is limited. Thus, efficient methods for the allocation of available frequencies to mobile users or geographical cells remain critical. Furthermore, under the QoS objectives of ATM, carrier allocation methods should be designed meticulously in order to accommodate the established ATM contracts. To support wmATM applications Dynamic Channel Allocation (DCA) seems to be more suitable than Fixed Channel Allocation (FCA), [ 13. This paper introduces a Distributed Dynamic Channel Reservation (DDCR) method, where the unlicensed Base Stations (BSs) compete and reserve wireless resources in a multicarrier wmATM network, based on time demands and taking into account the interference constraints. The Medium Access Control (MAC), followed by the BSs, is based on a dynamic TDMNTDD scheme. Each BS, after wining a competition, reserves a carrier for a period of time, which depends on its time frame duration.

11. SYSTEM ASSUMPTIONS An ATM wireless transport architecture is proposed in [2]. This architecture is based on a multiservice dynamic 0-7803-6465-5100 $10.00 0 2000 IEEE  reservation (MDR) mechanism, which uses a dynamic TDMA/TDD MAC scheme. Other variations of the dynamic TDMA approach have also been proposed for wmATM systems in [3], [4], [5], and [ 6 ] .  This paper takes into account BSs, which offer ATM wireless access to Mobile Terminals (MTs). Each MT maintains an association with one of the BSs, until it performs a handover. Each BS offers ATM wireless access to the MTs that are associated with it, and includes a MAC mechanism for sharing the resources among its associated MTs. The wmATM network may be structured or unstructured. In the former case, all BSs can communicate via terrestrial links and they can use a protocol (i.e., exchange of coded information) to regulate their access to the common wireless resources. In unstructured wmATM networks, the BSs can not use a protocol to coordinate their access to the wireless resources. In such a case, all the BSs should follow a set of rules to compete for the radio resources. BSs following etiquette rules, are referred to as self organized BSs. We assume a multicarrier unstructured wmATM network, where the available spectrum is divided into M carriers. We consider N BSs, each of which competes for, and reserves one of the M carriers at a time (i.e., single transmitter assumption). All the BSs and MTs are slot synchronized, and they use the same slot length. The BSs use a dynamic TDMA/TDD method to schedule downlink (BSs to MTs), and uplink (MTs to BSs) connections' data, during a reservation on one carrier.

Thus, when BSs reserve a carrier, they exchange information with their associated MTs based on a single carrier scheduling protocol, such as MDR [2] or MASCARA [4][5], which attempts to optimize the transmission in one carrier. On the other hand, prior to the reservation of a single carrier, the BSs follow the DDCR multicarrier scheduling method, in order to select the most befitting carrier (in terms of traffic load), to sense this carrier and then to compete for it. Thus, DDCR attempts to schedule efficiently the traffic load, by treating all the slots on all carriers as a two- dimensional scheduling problem (time and carrier).

According to the proposed DDCR multicarrier scheduling method, the BSs do not have to maintain interfering information about neighbouring BSs in order to regulate access to the shared resources. The approach is adaptive, and the BSs (of different providers) select a carrier and compete with other BSs (operating in common coverage area). Thus, providers do not have to produce interference matrices (e.g. compatibility matrix     [7]), and no frequency pre-planing is required. Each BS, once it selects a carrier to compete for, it dynamically realizes the adjacent or co-channel interfering BSs, through signal level measurements obtained during the competition and the sensing periods.

111. ETIQUETTE RULES OF DDCR A BS that wins the competition for a carrier, it reserves the carrier for a period, which is equal to its current time frame. The winning BS informs its associated MTs that it gained access to the carrier, exchanges data with the associated MTs, and releases the carrier once the frame period is elapsed. Each BS, committed to follow DDCR rules, transmits two special signal bursts: a) the Request Burst Signal (RBS), which declares the period of time the BS wishes to reserve a carrier, and b) the End Burst Signal (EBS), which signals that the BS has terminated the carrier reservation. The RBS represents the time period of the frame produced by the competing BS. An EBS can be used by any listening BS, for the latter to determine that a reservation period of a carrier has finished and a competition period is about to start.

A .  The steps of the DDCR process A self-organized BSi follows the steps given below (DDCR process): 1. BSI selects a carrier, say Fc.

2. BSI listens to Fc, and if it is reserved by another BS then it waits until it recognizes an EBS, otherwise it goes to step 3.

3. If BSi receives an EBS transmitted by another BS, or if no other BS uses the carrier Fc, the competition period starts. BSI broadcasts its RBS.

4. On the completion of the RBS transmission, BSi returns to the listening mode, on carrier Fc. If BSi detects the Fc busy (due to transmitted RBSs by other competing BSs), it loses the competition for carrier Fc, and, thus, it should change carrier (i.e., returns to step 1).

Otherwise, BSi realises that is the winner, and that it could reserve the carrier Fc for the requested period and goes to step 5.

5. BSI, as a winner, reserves the carrier, exchanges information with its associated MTs and on the completion of the reservation it transmits the EBS, and then goes to step 1.

B. Elimination of the hidden terminal problem Due to the frequency reuse characteristic, when a BS senses a busy carrier, this carrier could be used by more than one BS, simultaneously. Thus, the hidden terminal phenomenon could occur. To eliminate this problem, the following rule is added in the third step of the DDCR process: ?When a BS recognizes an EBS, it senses the carrier for one more slot. If the carrier is still busy, it goes to step 1, otherwise it continues with step 3?.

Moreover, a BS should sense the selected carrier for two slots, in order to realize that it is idle.

C. The carrier selection procedure In step 1 of the DDCR process, each BS selects the carrier to compete for it. The simplest selection mechanism is Random Choice (RC): the BS selects randomly one carrier to compete for. Another simple  mechanism is Round Robin (RR). Once the BS starts its operation, it randomly selects a carrier Fr (O4<M) to compete for. In the next selection, the BS chooses the next carrier (i.e., Fr+l, if r<M-1 or FO otherwise). The RC and RR mechanisms, though simple, do not take into account the carrier?s congestion level, that is the number of BSs reserving, or competing for this carrier in a recent period. In this paper, we introduce a carrier selection mechanism based on the carrier congestion level. To estimate the congestion of a carrier, we use one more burst, the Utilisation Burst Signal (UBS). This signal denotes the number of BSs, which compete or use the carrier during a recent period. If a BS has already selected a carrier Fr, it continuously updates the value of UBSi,r. The notation UBSi,r denotes the UBS maintained by BSI ( O 4 < N )  for carrier Fr (O9cM).

UBSi,r is updated as follows: 1. When BSi selects a carrier Fr it sets UBSi,r=l 2. When BSI realises that Fr is used by another BS (or BSs) it sets UBSi,r := UBSi,r+l 3. If BSi loses a competition for carrier Fr it sets UBSi,r:= UBSi,r+l 4. If BSi senses an UBSk,r broadcast by another BSk using carrier Fr, and if UBSi,r<UBSk,r, then it sets UBSi,r:=UBSk,r 5. When a BSi senses a EBS, broadcast by other BSk using the carrier Fr, and if it still senses Fr busy during the next time slot, it sets UBSi,r := UBSi,r+l A BS, which has reserved a carrier, broadcasts a UBS, after a predefined period of R slots. All the BSs understand that the UBS signals are broadcast every R slots. If BSi during the nR slot (n=1,2,3, ...,) uses a carrier Fr, it broadcasts the UBSi,r for this carrier, otherwise it receives the transmitted UBS. The transmission of UBS requires one slot. It is possible for BSI, listening on a carrier Fr, to sense two or more UBS signals, which are transmitted simultaneously by two or more BSs using the carrier Fr. In such case, the BSi may not be able to receive useful information due to congestion, and it sets UBSi,r:=UBSi,r+2. The value of the obtained UBS is used by BSs during the carrier selection procedure (step 1). When choosing a carrier, the BS should choose the carrier showing the less congestion. Each BS keeps a Selection Parameters (SP) list, as follows:  SPi,r=(CurrentTimei-LastVisitTimei,r+ 1 )/UBSi,r 0 H M ,  (eq. 1).

BSi, at step 1, selects the carrier illustrating the highest SPi,,r value. The CurrentTime factor represents the time a BS takes a carrier selection decision, and the LastVisitTimei,r factor represents the last time the BSi was using the carrier Fr. The rate of UBS, diminishes in value with time, because the UBS represents the congestion on a carrier during a recent time period.

Thus, an ageing threshold is used to represent the uncertainty of the congestion for a carrier visited in the distant past. We introduce the following threshold: CurrentTime-LastVisitTimei,r>M*MeanFrameSizei  0 9<M, and 0 9<N (eq. 2)     ....................

M-1 if: ..........

In step 1, BSi checks the time elapsed from the latest time the carrier Fr was used. If this time is greater than the mean frame size of the BSI, multiplied by the number of available carriers, then the UBSi,r is no longer valid. If for a carrier Fr the ageing threshold is exceeded, the BSI sets the UBSi,r to a predefined value.

For the assessment of the ageing criterion, simulations were performed, using different predefined values.

D. MT Association Procedures A mechanism that informs the MTs about the carrier selected by their associated BS is essential. Thus, we introduce a Frame Trailer (FT) mechanism. Each BS, when it reserves a carrier, and prior to the transmission of the EBS, broadcasts this FT. The FT is received by the associated MTs and includes the next selected carrier. Upon reception of the FT, the MTs switch their frequency to the selected carrier. On the other hand, a BS might select a carrier, compete for reservation and lose the competition. In this case, the associated MTs should be aware of the next carrier the BS will select. To overcome this problem, the BS, before the construction of the FT, calculates the SPr parameters, produces a carriers visiting list, and places this sorted list in the FT.

The list contains M elements, where the first element indicates the first carrier selected by the BS, and the last element represents the carrier that will be selected if the BS continuously loses the competitions for the M-1 carriers. Moreover, each BS, that has reserved a carrier, broadcasts a key (as a unique identifier) through the Frame Header (FH). This key is exchanged between BSs and MTs during the association phase. When a BS and its associated MTs are switched to a carrier, and if the BS loses the competition, the MTs will receive a FH with a cipher key identifying another BS. Thus they will realise that their associated BS has lost the competition, and they will switch to the next carrier of the visiting list.

E. Contention Period DDCR introduces a contention period, prior to reservation. During this period each BS broadcast its reservation requests (through the RBS), and realises the reservation requests of its interfering BSs. Each contention period comprises of an integer number of slots, each of which is divided in a number of minislots.

The contention discipline is Longest Job First; thus the BS that will reserve the carrier is the one with the longest time frame. During the contention period all the BSs sensing the carrier idle will transmit their RBS signals. The RBS duration is proportional to the time frame length. Thus, each competing BSy, having time frame duration equal to TFDy slots, will transmit an RBS for g*TFDy minislots. The g factor must be selected carefully, since g should be greater than the Turn Around Time (TAT), that is, the time required by a BS to switch from transmit to receive mode, and vice versa. For a BS, in order to realise that another BS competing for the same carrier has transmitted a longer RBS, on the completion of its own RBS transmission, it should switch to receive mode, upon, and sense the RBS transmitted from the latter BS.

Assume a scenario with three BSs, operating in a coverage area, as in figure I ,  which illustrates that BSO,  -7 FH2 MPDU, FT2FBS; .........-  BS 1 and BS2 interfere mutually. For the purposes of this paradigm assume that M=2 and that BSO is using carrier FO, whilst BS1 and BS2 sensing this carriers in order to compete for it, when it becomes idle. Assume, furthermore, that BSO ends its reservation, broadcasts the visiting list to its associated MTs through the FTO trailer, transmits the EBSO, using the k-3 slot, performs the step 1 of the DDCR process and selects carrier FO, again, to compete for its reservation. BS1 and BS2 sense the carrier FO idle, for two consecutive slots (k-2 and k-l), see figure 2, and realise that they could initiate the competition at slot k. On the other hand, during the slot k-2 the BSO switches to receive mode. During the slot k- 1, the BSO senses the carrier FO as idle, and during the slot k it senses the carrier FO as busy, and, thus it can not participate in the partial contention, which starts at slot k. Thus, only BS 1 and BS2 will compete. -. -----_ I-  /'  //- - - - -. \ \ / A  (I /--y-- \  I' I //' BSO \\\--.\\ ., \\ \\ I ' I  I / I ' I  I'  8 \I  -.-___--*  Figure 1. Coverage area for the paradigm.

Consider that BSI and BS2 have reservation demands TFDl and TFD2, respectively, and that TFDl<TFD2.

According to this assumption, the BS1 will use, say, the four first minislots of slot k to transmit its RBS 1, and the BS2 will use the five minislots of slot k to transmit its RBS2. During the fifth minislot of slot k, BS1 switch to receive state (this takes TAT time) and realises busy carriers, indicating that at least one BS requests larger reservation. On the other hand, the BS2 ends its RBS transmission on fifth minislot of slot k, switch to receive mode at the first minislot of slot k+l (this takes TAT time), and realizes idle carrier. This indicates that the BS2 is the winner of the competition.

I k-4 I k-3 I k-2 k-l I k I k+ll k+2 I  eontmtion  / 4- slot k .----$- window \ slot k+l + I  BSI  BS2 - r RBS,  Figure 2. Carriers usage before and after contention.

The BS2 does not uses carrier FO during the k+l slot.

Instead, it waits, and broadcasts its MAC PDU Frame Header during slot k+2. This time suspension is essential to keep BSs and MTs slot synchronised.

Iv SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT AND RESULTS To evaluate the DDCR performance, simulations were performed using the OPNET Simulator [8]. In the simulations, two parameters were measured: a) the delay between two consecutive reservations of a BS, and b) the utilisation of a carrier. Two different classes of frame size were used in the simulations. For class 1, the frame sizes are uniformly distributed between 14 and 21 slots.

For class 2, the frame sizes are uniformly distributed between 34 and 42 slots. If a BS wins a competition, it reserves the carrier for a time period equal to its frame, and at the end of the reservation it sets the frame size equal to zero. Then it selects the frame size of the next frame. If a BS loses a competition, it adds to the frame size the new outcome of the uniform distribution. Three different values of the design parameter R were used per class. For class 1, the values of R are 20, 40, and 60 slots, whereas for class 2 the values of R are 50, 75, and 100 slots. Two different disciplines were introduced and evaluated for a BSi, when the ageing threshold for carrier Fr is exceeded: 1. The UBSi,r is set to the lowest possible value, i.e., UBSi,r=0.5 2. The UBSi,r is set to a value that is the lowest among the existing UBSi,k values, i.e., UBSi,r=min(UBSi,k), k<M.

At the beginning of the simulations, each BS selects randomly the first carrier, and initialises the Selection Parameter list with random values. To simulate the interference environment we used a static compatibility matrix, which specifies if one carrier can be used simultaneously for each pair of BSs. To assess the performance of the DDCR method comparisons were made with the Round Robin (RR) and the Random Selection (RC) disciplines. For the RR and RC approaches the ageing criterion is not applicable. The difference between the DDCR method, and the RR and RC methods is only the first step of the DDCR process, i.e., the selection of the next carrier.

1:: fi\ Mean Delay, Class 1, N=15 !

211 Carriers  i 9 I O  11 12 13 14 15 16  Figure 3. Mean delay for class 1 for RC method and DDCR discipline 1 and 2 methods, when R=60 slots  Simulation Results From figures 3, 4, 5 and 6 it is concluded that the mean delay illustrated when RR, and RC methods are used is higher than the mean delay obtained when the DDCR   method is used. Moreover, DDCR gives improved delay results regardless of the ageing discipline, or the value of R, for both classes. Additionally, the RR method gives the highest mean delay results, and thus this method will not be evaluated further.

I O  I 8 9 I O  11 12 13 14 15 16  Figure 4. Mean delay for class 2 for RC method and DDCR discipline 1 and 2 methods, when R=75 slots  M e a n  D e l a y ,  C l a s s  1 ,  N = l S  / 3 4  1 2 4   4 t I  8 9 10 1 1  12  13 14 1 5  161  Figure 5. Mean delay for class 1 for RR method and DDCR discipline 1 and 2 methods, when R=40 slots  178 b M e a n  D e l a y ,  C l a s s  2 ,  N = l S  ------I I  I l 8   8 9 10 1 1  12  1 3  14 1 5  16  Figure 6. Mean delay for class 2 for RR method and DDCR discipline 1 and 2 methods, when R=75 slots  DDCR discipline 2 attains better delay performance, when compared to the discipline 1. This is because for discipline 1, when the ageing threshold is exceeded for a carrier, the BS sets the UBS of this carrier to 0.5, which produces a high SP value. Thus, the BS always selects the carrier visited in the distant past, that is, a carrier with uncertain congestion level. On the other hand, discipline 2 illustrates a balanced selection criteriori: since a BS has equal probabilities to choose a carrier that      experiences low congestion in the resent period, or a carrier illustrating exceeded ageing threshold. The delay improvement factor is given in figure 6. The improvement factor represents the percentage of the delay improvement obtained by the DDCR method when compared to the RC method. It is obvious than the improvement percentage is greater for higher values of frame sizes (i.e., for class 2).  Thus, it is concluded that the higher the TDMA time frames is, the greater the delay performance.

I  -- I Caniels  I I  Figure 6. Delay improvement between DDCR and RC methods, for class 1 and 2 .

During the simulations we observed that the frame sizes produced by the DDCR and the RC methods are about the same. Even under this condition, the mean delay values obtained by the DDCR methods are smaller.

Figures 7 and 8 show the mean frame duration for classes 1 and 2,  respectively. For class 1, the mean frame duration of the RC method is about 1 slot larger than the DDCR (discipline 2)  frame duration (Figure 7). For class 2,  the mean frame duration of the RC method is about 2 slots larger than the DDCR (discipline 2)  frame duration (Figure 8).

_ _  _____ 7 A ? 4 7 0  r I M e a n  Frame Sizes, Class 2, M=15 r6 O r5 O 44 0  43 0  L I / BSs 1  O  141 o 1 I 12 13 14 15 16  Figure 7. Mean frame sizes for class 1 for RC method and DDCR discipline 2, when R=60 slots  We have introduced a new comparison factor; the Normalised improvement Factor, NIF, which represents the number of slots gain of the DDCR method in respect to frame sizes. If MeanDelayRc, MeanFrameSizeRc and MeanDelayDDC,, MeanFrameSizeDDcR denotes the mean delay and mean frame of the RC and DDCR methods, respectively, then the NIF factor is defined as:  19.5  19.0  Mean Frame Size, C l a s s  I 12 13 14 15 I C  Figure 8. Mean frame sizes for class 2 for RC method and DDCR discipline 2,  when R=75 slots  (MeanDelayRc/MeanFrameSizeRc)= NIF*(MeanDelayDDcR/MeanFrameSizeoDcR).

Figure 9 illustrates the achieved NIF factor. According to Figure 9, for class 2,  the DDCR method achieves about 6 slots delay gain in comparison with the RC, with respect to the fiame sizes. This gain is about 2 slots for class 1. Thus, when the frame duration is increased, the DDCR delay gain is increased, as well.

11 Carriers 9 IO I I  12 13 14 15 16 1 7  Figure 9. NIF for class 1 and 2 Another important parameter is the percentage of idle carrier. If this parameter receives large values on a highly competitive system (i.e., large number of interfering BSs and small number of available carriers), then the resources are not effectively used. The percentage of idle carrier is shown in figures 10 and 1 1.

Id le  C a r r i e r ,  C l a s s  1,N=17       IO   IO I I  1 2  1 3  1 4  1 5  16 17 1 8  Figure 10. Percentage of idle carrier for class 1     As shown in figures 10 and 11, the DDCR method obtains better utilisation. This gain receives higher importance in respect to the mean frame sizes. As previously mentioned, the RC mean frame duration is about 1 (class 1) or 2 (class 2) slots larger than the frame duration of the DDCR method. Thus, the DDCR method spreads more effectively the BSs requests among the available carriers.

$ 0  3 5  $0  2 5  2 0  1 5  I O    I d l e  C a r r i e r , C l a s s  2 ,  N = 1 7  -___  Carriers 1 0  I I  1 2  1 3  1 4  1 5  1 6  1 7  1 8  Figure 1 1. Percentage of idle carrier for class 2

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS  We have introduced a distributed carrier reservation method, which applies to interfering BSs competing for reservation in an unlicensed wireless ATM environment.

The BSs offer wireless access to associated MTs using any dynamic TDMA/TDD mechanism; however, the proposed method can be easily modified to apply to BSs using a TDMNFDD mechanism. The DDCR method is based on etiquette rules, where BSs sense the carrier before they start competing for it. A carrier selection criterion was applied, based on congestion information, to enable the BSs to choose the carrier that experiences the lowest congestion. To assess the performance gain, the DDCR method was compared with the RC and RR disciplines. From the obtained results, it is concluded that the DDCR method achieves lower reservation delays and higher carrier utilisation than the RR, and RC method, especially for larger time frame periods (i.e., load class 2). Our recent simulation results, not presented here, show that if the DDCR process is combined with carrier congestion estimation and the Delayed Job First contention discipline then the delay stabilises. Thus, the DDCR process could be associated with a distributed Wireless Call Admission control (CAC) function. CAC can take into account the DDCR decisions, determine whether the system is under heavy load conditions, and regulate the admission policy, accordingly. From the recent results, we have also observed that a combination of a Longest Job First and Delayed Job First discipline performs better in terms of delay and carrier utilisation.

Another critical issue is the stimulation of step 1 of the DDCR process. According to [9], the BS triggers the selection of a new carrier a) when it looses a competition for a carrier, and b) upon the completion of its reservation on a carrier, approach that is followed in this paper, as well. Recent study focuses on further conditions for carrier selection. For instance, consider a  BS that senses idle slot in one carrier, and the consecutive slot is sensed busy. According to DDCR rules, this BS could not participate in the partial contention; thus, it could be efficient to trigger a carrier selection procedure.

The proposed mechanism is immune to topology changes (e.g., establishment of new BS on a coverage area), does not increase power consumption on MTs, and, finally, does not require any kind of frequency preplanning. Furthermore, in contrast to the approach described in [lo], the DDCR mechanism imposes no limit to the number of BSs operating on a common area, or to the number of neighbouring BSs. Moreover, BSs of any different dynamic TDMARDD technology ([2], [4], [5], [6]) can use the DDCR mechanism, when operating on a multichannel system. Another issue is the fairness of the proposed approach. From our simulations, we have observed that all the BSs with identical traffic loads and equal number of interferers, experience similar reservation delay performance.



VI. REFERENCES [ l ]  V. 0. K. Li and X. Qiu, ?Personal communications systems (PCS)?, in Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 83, Sept. ?95 [2] D. Raychaudhuri and N. Wilson, ?ATM-based transport architecture for multiservices wireless personal communication networks?, IEEE J. on Select. Areas in Commun., vol. 12, no. 8, October 1992.

[3] N. Wilson, D. Raychaudhuri, et. al., ?CDMA vs Dynamic TDMA for access control in an integrated of Universal Personal Communications, September 1992 [4] L. Merakos, N. Passas et al., ?A medium access control framework for wireless ATM networks?, in Proc. of International Workshop on Mobile Commun., Thessaloniki, Greece, September ?96.

[5] F. Bauchot, ?MASCARA: A wireless ATM MAC protocol?, in Proc. Wireless ATM Workshop, Helsinki, Finland, September 1996.

[6] N. Passas, L. Merakos, S. Paskalis, D. Vali, ?Quality-of-Service-Oriented medium access control for wireless ATM networks?, IEEE Commun. Mag., November 1997.

[7] M. Frodigh, ?Bounds on the performance of DCA algorithms in highway microcellular systems?, IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Tech., vol. 43, no. 3, August 1994.

[8] [9] Giannis F. Marias, and Lazaros Merakos, ?A distributed dynamic channel reservation for wireless ATM LANs?, in Proceedings of the IZS2000, the International Zurich Seminar on Broadband Communications, Zurich, Switzerland, February 2000.

[lo] J. H. Ju, and V. 0. K. Li, ?TDMA Scheduling Design of Multihop Packet Radio Networks Based on Latin Square?, IEEE J. on Select. Areas in Commun., vol. 17, no. 8, August 1999.

OPNET Modeler, MIL 3, Inc., 1993.

