

Mining Fuzzy Association Rules with Weighted Items  Joyce, Shu Yue Eric Tsang  Absfruct-In most models of mining fuzzy association rules, the items are considered to have equal importance.

Due to the diverse human?s interestingness and preference to items, such models do not work well in many situations.

To improve such models, we propose a method in this paper to mine fuzzy association rules with weighted items.

One of the major problems in the research of data mining is the development of good measures of interestingness of discovered rules. In this paper, the weighted support and weighted confidence for fuzzy association rules are defined.

The Kohonen self-organized mapping is used to fuzzify the numerical attributes into linguistic terms. A new fuzzy association rules mining algorithm, which generalizes the popular Apriori Gen large itemset based algorithm, is developed. The advantages of the new algorithm are shown by testing it on a census database with 5000 transaction records.

Index Tenns-Data mining, fuzzy association rules, linguistic terms, weighted items

I. INTRODUCTION long with the development of database techniques, a A huge quantity of large-scale databases have been  created in many fields. As we know, the automation of business transactions produces a deluge of data because even simple transactions like telephone calls, shopping trips, medical tests and consumer product warranty registrations are recorded in a computer. How can we explore this mountain of raw data? The objective of data mining is to extract and discover the valuable information in that data - hidden gold. Before we design a data mining system to support decision making, we have to know how  This work is supported by Hong Kong Research Grant Council?s grant no. GV762.

Joyce, Shu Yue is now with the Department of Computing, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong (telephone: 852-2766-7312, email: csyshu@comp.polyu.edu.hk), on leave from the Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China.

Eric Tsang is with the Department of Computing, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hum, Kowloon, Hong Kong (telephone: 852-2766-7245, email: csetsang@comp.polyu.edu.hk).

Daniel S. Yeung is with the Department of Computing, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hum, Kowloon, Hong Kong (telephone: 852-2766-7263, email: csdaniel@comp.polyu.edu.hk).

Daming Shi is with the Department of Computing, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hum, Kowloon, Hong Kong (telephone: 852-2766-7312).

Daniel Yeung Daming Shi  people make decision. Some sociologists carried out investigations into 60 highly successful California enterprise managers. These managers were asked how they make the business decision. Everyone answered they used the combination of their intuition and the data. No one said they make decision based on data alone.

Mining fuzzy association rules is an important approach in data mining research area. Despite many technical breakthroughs, some drawbacks still exist. They are:  These methods proposed in [ 1, 2, 3, 41 often generate a very large number of rules, most of which are trival or irrelevant.

Consider the following patterns in an adult data set:  cRelationship:H[usband> 3 cSex:Male>  with support = 0.4 and confidence = 1 .O  We have seen, this pattern may be obvious to any person and hence represents little added value.

. In other works [ l ,  2, 3, 41, all items (or attributes) in database are treated uniformly.

An item that is of interest to one user may be of no interest to another user. For example, facing the adult information selected by a census of the United States in 1990 (Table I ) ,  a pretty girl might be more interested in the attribut?e ?occupation? than the other attribute when she is selecting a boyfriend. But, if you are an insurance consultant, the ?age? should be the most important attribute in all items.

For different targets, different association rules (or large itemsets) are discovered by using the same mining system in the same database.

The importance of the attributes is not only an important measure of interestingness, but also a way to permit users to control the mining results by taking some specific action.

0-7803-6583-6/001$10.00 0 2000 IEEE 1906    Table 1: Adult Record  In this paper, we focus on using the definition of weights to describe the importance of the attributes with respect to the user's intuition and integrate the options into mining fuzzy association rule algorithm.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related works on the mining fuzzy association rules and studies on the interestingness are outlined. Section 3 investigates the definitions and methodology of mining fuzzy association rules with weighted attributes. Section 4 shows the experimental results. The last section concludes the paper.

11. LITERATURE REVIEW  2.1 Fuzzy association rule mining problem: Discovering the quantitative association rules is a major  step on mining association rules. Fuzzy set theory is more and more frequently used in intelligent systems. So, instead of using discrete ranges of quantitative attribute values, [4], [SI, [9] and [ 101 proposed using relevant fuzzy subsets specified by the user for the discovery of association rules.

In this part, two attempts in the approach are introduced:  Map the quantitative attributes to fuzzy sets. And then, follow the framework of Apriori Gen Algorithm [4, 5, 91 and modify the detail steps of the algorithm. Such as the measure of support and confidence.

A novel technique, called FARM, is used to mine fuzzy association rules for quantitative values [ 101.

FARM is an efficient solution for a special case that user-supplied thresholds are hard to determine. They pointed out a new way towards intelligent data mining systems.

These approaches have two advantages: (1) Using fuzzy set concept, the discovered rules are more understandable to human. As fuzzy sets provide a  smooth transition between member and non-member of a set, it is better than the partition method; (2) In real- world applications, transaction data are usually composed of quantitative values. Designing a sophisticated data-mining algorithm to deal with different types of data turns to be a challenge in this research topic.

When going back to see how people make decisions, we find no one make decision based on data alone. All of the previous works haven't provided the facility of dealing with the intuition of users for mining fuzzy association rules.

2.2 Mining problem of association rules with weighted items:  Weight of items is a set of values given by user to quantify the intuition of users. The definition can be found in [6] .  The weights are used to reflect the importance of attributes by eliciting users' beliefs based on the domain knowledge.

Definition I :  The weighted support of a rule X a Y is  f  Definition 2: A k-itemset X is called a large itemset if the weighted support of such itemset is no less than the minimum weighted support (wminsup) threshold,or  Definition 3: The weighted confidence of the association rule X 3 Y is:  111. MINING USER-DRIVEN FUZZY ASSOCIATION RULES WITH WEIGHTED A'ITRIBUTES  3.1 Definitions  This is a generalized version of association rule mining problem, called fuzzy weighted association rule mining, which includes the mining problems mentioned in Section 2.1. The notation of weighted items is used to represent the importance of individual items, the     weighted support and weighted confidence are considered. We formulate our mining problem as follows.

The explanation of item-weights. Given a set of items { i, , i, , * - , in } , a weight W, is assigned to each item i, with 0 I wj 5 1 to indicate the degree of importance of the item i, where j = 1,2,-..,n.

These weights will be used in computing the weighted support (Equations 1 and 2) and the weighted confidence (Equation 3) to mine some more interesting fuzzy association rules. One may argue that after deleting the entries of items with small weights and letting the big weights equal to 1, the existing mining methodology can be copied. In fact, this simple attempt to handle this problem is not fit for our situation. As pointed out in paper [6], an interesting fuzzy association rule for a heavy weighted items may also consist of low weighted items.

The explanation of item vector  = { f k , , f k , , . ' * , f k ,  1 where each element f k ,  (1 I i I m) (which corresponds to a column of the fuzzified table) is a membership function defined on the space of all records. The weighted support of the item vector x is defined as  where N is the number of all records.

Given two item vectors X = { f k ,  , f,, ,.e*, fkml ) and Y = { g p , ,  g p I  ;.-, gP,", } ,  the weighted support and the confidence for the fuzzy association rule X 3 Y are defined as  and  (6 )  Support(X * Y ) support ( X )  W- Confidence( X a Y )  =  where N is the number of all records.

This section is classified into two parts. The first part is to fuzzify each numerical attribute for the initial data set into several linguistic terms specified by their  membership functions. B,ased on the linguistic terms generated in first part, the second part provides a fuzzy association rule generation (algorithm which contains two steps: (a) find the set of all frequent item vectors with weighted support over a threshold and (b) generate all fuzzy association rules with weighted confidence over the minimum confidence.

3.2 Fuzzifying numerical attribute into linguistic terms  This is a process of fuzziFying numerical numbers into linguistic terms, which is often used to reduce information overload in hurnan decision making process.

The numerical salary, for example, may be perceived in linguistic terms as high, average and low. One way of determining membership functions of these linguistic terms is by expert opinion or by people's perception.

Yet another way is by statistical methods [ l l] .  Fuzzy clustering based on self-organized learning can also be used to generate membership functions [ 121. What follows is an algorithm for generating certain type of membership functions.

Let X be the considered data set. We intend to cluster X into k linguistic terms Ti ,  j =1, 2, ..., k. For simplicity, we assume the type of membership to be triangular. Each linguistic term, Ti ,  will have the triangular membership functions as follows:  (Uj+, - X ) / ( u j + ]  - - U j )  ' j  <X<'j+l ? ( X )  = (x -u j~ , ) / (u j  -U j - ] )  ' j - l  <X< ' j  I <  j e k .

0 x 5 I  Figure 1: Membership functions of the linguistic terms     Each pair of adjacent membership functions crosses at Input: A set of n transaction data, each with m attribute the membership value of 0.5. The only parameters needed values, a set of membership functions, a predefined to be determined are the k centers ( u , , u , ; . . , ~ ~ ) .  An minimum weighted support value wminsup, and a  effective method to determine these centers is the Kohonen predefined weighted confidence value wminconf.

feature maps algorithm [12]. At the initial time, k centers are set to be distributed evenly on the range of X. Let  A = {a,,  a2 ;-*, ak 1 Output: A set of fuzzy association rules.

Algorithm FWAL:  1 .

2. F =Mapping (D); 3.

4.

Main Algorithm (wminsup, wminconi D, F, W,)  //find all frequent itemvector of length 1 L1 = { 2 I x E A,n,  = 1 and W-Support(X) 2wminsup) ;  5. c= database F; 6. for ( k  = 2; Lk./ f & k++) do begin 7.

~ ( x , A )  = C x E X ~ i n i I x - u , I  A  ck =FWAL(Lk./) 11 generate new candidate b 8. itemvectors  The centers will be adjusted iteratively. Each iteration consists of three steps: 1 .  randomly take a value x from X, denoted by x[n ] ; 2. search for an integer m such that  Ix[nl-a,[n]l= ~ i n ~ l x [ n l - a ~ [ n ] l ;  3. put a , [ n + l ] = a , [ n ] + a ( x [ n ] - a , [ n ] )  and keep other centers unchanged, where n is the iteration time and a is the learning rate.

The iteration ends when d(X,A) converges.

- 9. c, = & 10. for all entries F E  E,-, do begin 11. I! determine candidate itemvectors in the tuple  t identified by F . TID 12. c, = (2  E c, I (g[lI.g[21. ... .g [k  -11 ( I )  > 0)  A ( g [ l ] . g [ 2 ] .  . g [ k - 2 ] . g [ k ] ( f ) > O )  1; 13. for all candidates E c, do 14.

15. if (c, # (b) then ck+ =< F.TlD, C ,  > ; 16. end 17.

SumX+ = g [ 1 1 . g [ 2 1 . . . . . g [ k l ( t ) ;  IISumX is used for evaluating W-Support( 2 )  Lk = { 2 E C,  I W-Support( 2 ) 2 wminsup); 18. end 19. Answer=  3.3 Algorithm for generating fuzzy association rules with weighted items u k  ?k  In this section, the weighted concept is used in the fuzzy version of the Apriori data-mining algorithm to discover interesting association rules from numerical values. An algorithm for mining weighted fuzzy association rules has the following inputs and outputs.

The problem of mining fuzzy association rules can be decomposed into the following three steps: 1. Map crisp values and fuzzy terms of each categorical  attribute into consecutive integers; 2. Use the extended Apriori Algorithm, FWAL, to  discover frequent itemvectors where a frequent itemvector has at least minimum weighted support; From the frequent itemvectors, generate all association rules that have at least minimum weighted confidence;  3.

The subroutines are outlined as follows:  Mapping (D): To begin with, the set of the transactions must be accepted and transformed to the fuzzy membership grade, with the range from 0 to 1 for each attribute of each fuzzy concept, which is done in the Mapping procedure.

FWAL (Lk.1): Generate the candidate set Ck from Lk./. The framework of FWAL is similar to the Apriori Algorithm, except that two regions belonging to the same attribute cannot simultaneously exist in an itemset in C,.



IV. DEMONSTRATIONS  This section gives a case study of the adult data selected by a census of the United States in 1990 (Table 1 in section 1 )  to illustrate how the mining user-driven fuzzy association rules technique works to deal with different discovery tasks.

8 Data Source and systems We selected 10000 transaction records as our testing  data set. In our example data, six attributes, i.e., income, education level, sex, age, marital status and relationship with others in family, are taken into account.

8 Weighted Items There are two sets of weighted items for the six  attributes given by two users in the following table (Table 2).

Edu- Marital Relatio I Sex I Age I Status I n-shio I level Income I 0.9 I 0.7 1 0.5 I 0.3 I 0.2 I 0.1 I 1  0.2 I 0.3 I 0.5 I 0.7 I 0.9 User ~ I 0.1 I Table 2: The weights given by different users  8 Process and Results To facilitate users, we designed an interactive system  shown in the figure 2. User can select the weight values from 0 to 1 according their experience or intuition. ?0? means the attribute will be neglected and ? I ?  means the most interesting attribute for the user (shown in Figure 2) .

Mining bunon Weight Inputs area  Figure 2: User Interface  A performance study is carried out for the two algorithms, unweighted mining fuzzy association rules algorithms proposed in [4], and mining weighted fuzzy association rules algorithm, FWAL, introduced in this paper. We found that different rules could be discovered according to the two set of weights input by user 1 and user 2 (in Table 2) .  These results are presented in Figure 3, in which Figure (a) shows the percentage structure of each attribute in rules discovered by unweighted algorithm; (b) the percentage structure of each attribute in the discovered rules using the FWAL algoril hm.

I (Ib)  Figure 3: Visual Generalization Results     In the result, the number of rules having attributes with heavy weights is much more than the number of rules having attributes with light weights. Obviously, we use the algorithm to obtain the interesting rules from the user?s point of view.



V. CONCLUSION  In this paper, the FWAL algorithm is proposed to discover fuzzy association rules based on the users? intuitive. We derived a new algorithm with which uninteresting large itemsets are pruned during the mining process, and which enables us to generate the interesting large itemsets with fewer passes and higher speed.

In the future, we will attempt to use the algorithm in financial data analysis, such as stock movement prediction. In the previous mining association rules methods, market daily trading quotations should be restructured in a distinct way that is similar to supermarket transaction records only based on one of the three attributes, share-turnover, share-price-change or share- volume.

In fact, when an expert forecasts moving trend of stock, he or she uses three kinds of information for individual share performance. They are ?share-price-change?, ?share- volume? and ?share-turnover?. No matter how we based on turnover or share price change to transfer the quotations of the most active shares into transaction panel, we fail to integrate the information to forecast the stock movement. The method of mining weighted fuzzy association rules can help us to solve the problem.

[31  [41

VI. REFERENCES R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski, and A. Swami. Mining association rules between sets of items in large databases. In SIGMOD, pages 207-216, Washington D.C., May 1993.

R. Agrawal, and R. Srikant. Fast algorithms for mining association rules in large databases. In 20th lntemutional Conference on Very Large Databases, Santiago, Chile Sept. 1994.

R. Srikant and R. Agrawal. Mining quantitative association rules in large relational tables. The I996 ACM SIGMOD lntemational Conference on Management of Datu, Monreal, Canada, June 1996, pages 1-12.

Chan Man Kuok, Ada Fu, and Man Hon Wong. Mining fuzzy association rules in databases. In SIGMOD Record, Volume 27, Number 1, pages 41-46, March 1998.

Tzeng-Pei Hong, Chan-Sheng Kuo and Sheng-Chai Chi, A Fuzzy Data Mining algorithm for Quantitative Values, The Third lntemutional Conference on Knowledge-Bused lnrelligent Information Engineering Sysiems, 3 1 Aug-1* Sept 1999, Adelaide, Australia.

[6] C.H. Cai. Ada W.C. Fu, C.H. Cheng and W.W. Kwong.

Mining association rules with Weighted Items. In Databuse Engineering and Applicutions Syttipposium, Proceedings IDEAS?PR Internaticmul, pages 68-77, 1998.

[71 C.C. Agganval, P.S. Yu. Data mining techniques for associations, clustering and classification. In Third Pucific- Asia Conjerence. PAKDD-99, Beijing, China, April 1999.

U.M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Symth, Overview of data mining and knowledge discovery, In Knowledge Discovery and Datu Mining. AAAlpress, P1-36, 1996.

[9] Weining Zhang, Mining Fuzzy Quantitative Association Rules, In Pruceeding of the I I?? IEEE Intemarionul Conference on TOO~S with Arti$ciul Intelligence, Pages 99- 102, 1999.

[IO] Keith C. C. Chan and Wai-Ho Au, Mining Fuzzy Association Rules, In Proceeding of the 6? lnfemutionul Conference on ltnformution and Knciwledge Munugemetit, Pages 209-2 15, 1997.

