On Some Fuzzy Extensions of Association Rules

Abstract This paper discusses the semantics of two fuzzy exten- sions of the classical concept of an association rule.

Both extensions are based on the aggregation of sufficiently close data into hzzy sets, by means of user-defined fuzzy partitions of the domains, thus leading to fizzy generalized association rules. The first approach is based on fuzzy cardinalities whereas the second one relies on gradual rules. The issue related to the evaluation of the validity of such rules is discussed and the principles of two discovery algorithms are outlined.

1. Introduction During the last years, the number and volume of data- bases have tremendously increased and the need for extracting some "condensed" information has received attention. The related research area, called knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) or data mining, aims at the discovery of useful information from large collections of data. The discovered knowledge can be rules describing properties of data, frequently occurring patterns, clusterings of the objects in the database, etc. Among the recent works, a great deal of attention has been paid to the discovery of a specific type of rules called association rules [ 13. Association rules are of the type "when the properties A and B are satisfied in the data, then property C is also satisfied".

Let us give a simple formalization of the problem [2] .

Definition 1. Given a schema R = {A,, ..., A,} of attri- butes with domain (0, I}, and a relation r over R, an association rule about r is an expression of the form: X a B, where X E R and B E R \ X. The intuitive meaning of the rule is that if a row of the matrix r has a I in each column of X, then the row tends to have a 1 also in column B. This semantics is captured by the measures of fiequency and confidence. Given W s R, we denote by sup(W, r) the frequency of W in r: the fraction of rows that have a 1 in each column of W.

The frequency of the rule X 3 B in r is defined to be  sup(X U {B), r) and the confidence of the rule is sup(X U {B}, r)/sup(X, r).

In the discovery of association rules, the task is to find all rules X B such that the frequency of the rule is at least a given threshold o and the confidence of the rule is at least another threshold 8. In other words, one wants to obtain rules that are sufficiently frequent and valid. Many works related to the discovery of association rules aim at optimizing the process (see for instance [3,4, 561).

However, another line of research consists in investi- gating the extent to which it is possible to generalize the notion of an association rule in order to capture a richer range of properties. As already stated by R. Yager [7], the use of fizzy logic seems particularly interesting in the context of knowledge discovery inasmuch as it allows to express properties about the current content of a database as statements of the natural language, thus providing knowledge that can be easily understood by nonexperts.

in this paper, we describe two fuzzy extensions of the notion of an association rule. First, in Section 2, the principles underlying these fuzzy extensions are defined, and we point out the semantic characteristics of the corresponding fuzzy properties. The issue related to the discovery of such fuzzy association rules is dealt with in Sections 3 and 4.

2. Two Fuzzy Extensions of Association Rules The starting point is to aggregate sufficiently close data into fuzzy sets, on the basis of fuzzy partitions which are meaningful for a user. Another key idea is to view fuzzy sets as a way for describing the different possible labellings that can be made by a user for borderline data.

Each partition is ordered, and a fuzzy set, say A,, can only overlap with its predecessor Ai-, and its successor Ai,] (when they exist). Moreover, for each partition, we assume: Vu, A,(u) = 1. Thus, for a given U in  Page: 1104  mailto:bosc@enssat.fr mailto:pivert@enSsat.fr   an attribute domain, it either fully belongs to a fuzzy set Ai, or partially belongs to two successive fuzzy sets, the sum of its two membership degrees being 1.

lt is worth noticing that the principle consisting in: i)rewriting the data by means of a more general vocabulary, and ii) trying to discover properties in the rewrited database, has also been advocated in a "nonfuzzy context". For instance, in [SI, the authors use a hierarchy of (Boolean) concepts in order to "rewrite" a relation so as to discover different types of rules (see also [9, IO]). Nevertheless, the fact of using linguistic labels (i.e., fuzzy sets), more flexikde, to rewrite the data allows to discover more robust rules.

The key point, with a fuzzy partition, is that the borderline data are taken into account in each of the two classes, which decreases the sensitivity to the boundaries.

2.1 Notations Let R be a (nonfuzzy) relation involving attributes 4 23, C, ... We assume that the user is interested in possible association rules involving a given subset of attributes. We only consider the projection of R on this subset, and for notational simplicity, we use a 3 element subset of attributes, say A, B and C, in the following, which is sufficiently general for discussing the main issues.

Let (3, b,, ck) denote a tuple of R restricted to attri- butes A, 3 and C. Let Dm D, Dc be the atlribute domains. We assume that each domain is equipped with a fuzzy partition (A,, Al, ..., A d ,  (B,, 132, ..., Bnb), (C, ,  C2, ..., C,) respectively.

2.2. Extended Association Rules Based on Fuzzy  This approach corresponds to a straightfclrward extension of the usual definition of an association rule.

Its principle is the following: the validity of the nile (4 A,) 3 (a, B,) depends on the number of tuples which are A, on the one hand and on the number of tuples which are A, and B, on the other hand.

Cardinalities  For instance, using scalar cardinalities [113 , the validity of the rule (A, A,) 3 (B, 9,) can be defined as:  which is nothing but a straightforward extension of the usual definition of the confidence.

Remark 1. As in the usual (nonfuzzy) case, the term "rule" may be considered improper inasmuch as a pro- perty modeled this way is not based on an implication.

It is worth noticing that such a property does not model any constraint on the %values, and as such, it does not induce any canonical notion of exception.

Remark 2. In accordance with the linguistic nature of such an extended association rule, it is also possible to interpret the notion of validity in a flexible way, which corresponds to introduce some tolerance and consider that a rule can be seen as perfectly valid, even though the ratio (confidence) above is strictly less than 1. The association rule obtained is then a fuzzy quantified proposition of the form "most of the tuples of R that are A, are also B,".

The general principle described above has been advocated by Yager [7], and more recently by Kacprzyk 1121. In this type of approach, a degree of validity for an extended association rule is computed as the degree of membership of a scalar relative cardinality to a fuzzy quantifier. An alternative solution is to compute the degree of validity by means of an ordered weighted average (OWA) modeling the fuzzy quantifier, but the principle is basically the same.

The use of scalar cardinality, which amounts to the addition of membership degrees, counts a collection of several elements with small membership grades whose sum is 1 ,  as equivalent to one element with full membership for instance; this might be debatable or even misleading from a user point of view. In [ 131, it is rather suggested to use fuzzy cardinalities. This is also the choice that we make here, and the corresponding approach is detailed in section 3.

2.3. Extended Association Rules Based on Gradual  A statement of the form (A, A,) -+f (B, B,) stating that tuples that rewrite A, on 4 also rewrite B, on B can also be interpreted in the context of gradual rules [ 141 in order to express a constraint on the %value for each tuple in the database. The extended association rule then means: "for any tuple t, the more t.A is A,, the more t.B is BSI', i.e:  Rules  where 3f denotes a fuzzy implication.

Remark. There exists a connection between this notion of an extended association rule and that of an extended functional dependency. Such a rule is actually  0-7803-7078-3/0V$l0~00 (C)u)ol IEEE Page: 1105    equivalent to a functional dependency where a change of granularity has been applied to the domains [ 151.

In this case especially, it makes sense to introduce some tolerance by replacing the underlying universal quantifier - interpreted as a minimum - with a fizzy one such as "most of'. It can be indeed desirable to limit the effect of noise - and of exceptions in general - by neglecting (at least partly) the "bad" tuples, i.e., the tuples t such that the truth degree of p4(t.A) + pBJt.%) is very low. Let us also notice that the effect of an exception upon the overall validity of the rule depends strongly on the implication used. It is parti- cularly drastic if the implication is such that a 3 0 = 0, as it is the case with Rescher-Gaines implication (a b = 1 if b L a, 0 otherwise), Gadel implication (a 3 b = 1 if a 2 b, b otherwise) and Goguen implication (a 3 b = 1 if a 2 b, b/a otherwise). An algorithm aiming at discovering extended association rules based on Rescher-Gaines implication is described in section 4.

3. Discovery of Extended Association Rules Based on Fuzzy Cardinalities  3.1. The Aggregation Procedure From R (restricted to A, B, 6), we build a new relation $, (for "R summarized") in a two main steps procedure which is now described. The idea is to perform a kind of information compression.

3.1.1. The Labelling Step For each tuple (ai b, ck) we replace it by one or several tuples of fuzzy sets (A,, B,, C,) subject to the constraint:  Thus (a; bj ck) may be replaced by one tuple (A, B, C,) if all the three degrees of membership are equal to 1, or by several (up to 23 = 8) in case one or several of the element(s) in the tuple belong to two fuuy sets.

For instance, if Ar(ai) = 1, B,(bj) = 0.8, B,+,(bj) = 0.2, c+l(ck) = 0.6, ct(ck) = 0.4, we give birth to the tuples:  (A, 0.8/Bs 0.6/Ct-r)  (A, O.2/Bs+1 0.6/C,.1) (A, O.2/Bs+1 0.4/Ct)  (A, 0.8/BS O.4/Ct)  where we keep track of the membership degrees (A, stands for UA,). This corresponds to all the possible "readings" of the tuple (a;, bj, ck) in terms of the vocabulary provided by the fuzzy partitions.

In a data mining context, it is not necessary to store the summarized relation %,. The only additional data that have to be stored are the hzzy cardinalities, whose computation is described in the following subsection.

3.1.2. Fusion Step and Computation of Fuzzy  We want to know how many tuples from R are A,, are B,, are C,, are A, and B,, ..., are A, and B, and C,, and this, for all the fuzzy labels. In order to have a more accurate representation of the relation, fuzzy cardinalities are used instead of scalar ones. It is then necessary to compute the different cardinalities related to each linguistic label and to the diverse conjunctive combinations of these labels.

Cardinalities  All the tuples of the form (x/A, y/B, dC,) which are identical with respect to the three labels A,, B, and C,, are fused into one tuple (A, B, C,) of q,. At the same time, we compute the cardinalities FAr, FB,, Fc,, F&Bs,  FArC,, FBsc,,  FA$,c,) is a hzzy set defined on the integers {0, 1, ...} which represents the fuzzy number of tuples which are somewhat A, (resp. B,, C,, A, and B,, A, and C,, B, and C,, A, and B, and C,) and which are fused into the considered tuple (for all the combinations of labels appearing in at least one tuple  FB,Ct, FA$& where FA, (resp. FB,, FC,, FA,B,,  of$,).

Each cardinality is computed in an incremental way (see [ 131). It is of the form:  O/O + ... + O/n-1 + l/n + hl/(n+l) + ... + hk/(n+k) + O/(n+k+l) + ...

with 1 > hl 1 ... 2 hk > &+I = 0 and n 2 0, k 1 0. Let us recall that this expression represents a cardinality that possibly equals n to degree 1 and possibly equals (n+k) to degree h.k (see, e.g., [ 161).

Let us notice that the maximum number of tuples that can be obtained in $, is na * nb * nc, i.e. the product of the numbers of labels appearing in the considered partitions. Thus, the "summarized" relation can be significantly smaller than the original relation R for large relations.

3.2. Computing the Validity of Rules In this approach, we assume that the user gives the at- tributes 4 !E or C that he/she wants to appear in the discovered rules. The objective is then to find all the rules of the form "most of the tuples of R that are A, are also B,". The number FG, of tuples of R which are  0-7803-7078-3/0l/!$l0.00 (C)U)ol lEEE. Page: 1106    A, and B,, as well as the number FAr of tuples which are A,, have been computed in the preceding step. The frequency of the rule, denoted by FRA,Bs, is a relative cardinality that corresponds to the fuzzy proportion of tuples in R which are A, and B,. It is obtained by changing FAr*, = 1/0 + ... + l/n + ... + hi(n+i) + ... into FRheS = I/(n/K) + ... + &/((n+i)/K) + .,. where K lis the number of tuples in R. Conceming the degree of validity of the rule, several approaches can be thought of, for instance:  - by analogy with the nonfizzy case and with the ap- proach based on scalar cardinality of fuzzy sets, it is possible to compute the quotient p = FqB, / Fh (see [ 171). This quotient corresponds to the confidence of the rule. The validity of the rule can then be defmled as the necessity of the fuzzy event "most of' relativdy to the possibility distribution p. It is equal to:  minu, support(p)max(C4nost(u), 1 - P(U)) which is nothing but the inclusion degree of p in the quantifier "most of'. This validity evaluates the extent to which the fuzzy proportion p is close to 1 (in the sense of the fuzzy quantifier). However, this quotient of two hzzy numbers can lead to a too imprecise result. An alternative solution is to use a "constrained" division in order to get a more accurate result [13].

This issue would necessitate a more detailed discu.ssion that cannot be included here.

- to evaluate the extent (in terms of a necessity de,gee) to which FAal is close to (i.e., not much smaller .than) FA,.

Now let us say a few words about the complexity of the process. The discovery process involves: i) one ex- haustive scan of the relation, ii) the computation of the fuzzy cardinalities for all the combinations of Labels appearing in at least one tuple of the summarized relation, iii) the computation of the validity degrees associated to all the possible rules. The main problem relates to the second point. For instance, with three attributes, each attribute being associated with a hzzy partition including five labels, the maximum number of tizzy cardinalities to be computed is equal to 215.

This is still reasonable, but obviously, an increase in the number of attributes (and labels) results in a combinatorial growth that cannot be neglected. Thus, the design of optimization techniques is a matter of great importance that should be dealt with in future works. An alternative solution would be to build a matrix of membership degrees (one row corresponding to a tuple in the original relation) and to look for  frequent combinations of labels by means of an algorithm including pruning criteria (as it is done in the nonfuzzy case) before evaluating the possible rules associated to each frequent set of labels. Then, it would not be necessary to compute all the fuzzy cardinalities, but only some of them. Such a technique is proposed in [ 181 for the discovery of rules based on scalar cardinalities.

4. Discovery of Extended Association Rules Based on Gradual Rules  4.1. Principle Here, the objective is the extraction of graded rules of the form:  which are based on a fuzzy implication Zf. More generally, the left part of the rule can be composed of a conjonction of pairs (x  X,) where x denotes an attribute and Xi is a linguistic label belonging to the fuzzy partition defined on the domain of X  An algorithm aimed at discovering such extended association rules based on Rescher-Gaines implication (nongraded in this case) has been proposed in [19]. In this case, the validity of the rule above is equal to:  where a a R G  b = 1 if b L a, 0 otherwise. The algorithm is just outlined here, for the sake of brevity.

The extraction algorithm is based on an iteration over tuples t of the relation R involved. It defines a minimal set S of rules which are valid on R (i.e., whose truth value is 1). Contrary to the approach based on cardinalities, it does not involve a preliminary labelling step (the different satisfaction degrees related to a given tuple are computed at the time this tuple is accessed).

Roughly, the algorithm starts from an empty set S, and the tuples t of relation R are successively processed.

The invariant of the loop is: "from S, it is possible to obtain any rule which is valid on already processed tuples". The progression consists in computing the set S, made of rules which are valid for {t), and to merge S and S, to obtain the new set S,. The algorithm obtained has a linear complexity with respect to the number of tuples.

0-7803-7078-3/Ol/$l0.00 (C)zoOl IEEE. Page: 1107    The main advantage of using both Rescher-Gaines implication and the universal quantifier is that the cardinality of the set of rules remains limited (a rule is discarded as soon as it is violated by a tuple). In the case of a multivalued implication, there is no such notion of violation, unless a satisfaction threshold attached to the (validity degrees of the) rules is used.

The situation is even worse when a fuzzy quantifier is used instead of the universal one, because then, a threshold cannot be applied to the rules before the scan of the relation is complete. As a matter of fact, no rule can be discarded before all the tuples have been accessed, unless it is possible to find some heuristics allowing to conclude that the truth degree of a proposition such as "Q X B are A" (where Q denotes a fuzzy quantifier, X denotes a set of tuples, and A and B denote fuzzy predicates) cannot be greater than a given threshold as soon as a sufficient number of "sufficiently bad" tuples have been accessed. This question should be studied in future works.

Let us also notice that, as for the rules based on cardinalities, an altemative solution would be to build a matrix of satisfaction degrees (one row for each tuple) and to compute first the frequent set of labels as it is done in the nonfuzzy case, but this would necessitate to: i) introduce a threshold on the cardinalities attached to the antecedent parts of the rules, ii) find some efficient pruning criteria analogous to those used in a nonfuzzy context.

4.2. Informativeness of the Rules A difficulty stems from the definition of an implica- tion, which is true even if the antecedent is false. In other words, a rule can be valid only because no tuple of the relation fulfills its condition. Two criteria seem particularly important to evaluate the informativeness of a rule.

The first one concerns the amount of tuples which support this rule, i.e., the tuples which more or less fulfill the condition part of this rule. Rules which are supported by only a very small amount of tuples can be considered as rules modeling exceptional or unusual situations.

' The second criterion concems the level of support as- sociated to a given rule. Actually, the number of tuples which support each rule is not a sufficient information.

Indeed, a rule can be supported by a large amount of tuples, but their membership degrees to the condition part of this rule can be rather low, which means that there is no (ypicaf tuple for this rule in the database.

In conclusion, the informativeness of a rule can be measured by both the number of tuples which support the rule, and their degree of support. This twofold information can be encoded by means of: i) a fuzzy cardinality, or ii) a histogram representing the number of tuples included in each a-cut of the condition part of the rule. Then, an expert can use this histogram (or the corresponding fuzzy cardinality) to determine the interest of each of the produced rules. This can be done as an interactive post-processing added to the mining algorithm. Further studies of the notion of informativeness could lead to an automated processing.

The selection of interesting rules could then be included in the mining algorithm itself.

5. Conclusion In this paper, two hzzy extensions of the notion of an association rule have been investigated. Both are based on the use of fuzzy partitions, meaninghl for the user, defined on the attribute domains.

The first approach corresponds to a straightforward extension of the usual definition: the validity of a rule depends on the (fuzzy) number of tuples which support its antecedent part on the one hand, and on the (fuzzy) number of tuples which support both its parts on the other hand. The general form of such an extended as- sociation rule is a fuzzy quantified statement of the form "most of the tuples which are A are also B". An algorithm including two steps is described: the first step performs a kind of information compression and computes the fuzzy cardinalities corresponding to the different combinations of fuzzy labels. The second step uses these cardinalities in order to evaluate the validity of the different possible rules involving the considered attributes. Two definitions of the validity are suggested.

In the second approach, an extended association rule is based on a fuzzy implication and its result may be either truelfalse, or in [0, I]. The semantics of such rules allows to represent gradual properties of the form "the more X is A, the more Y is B". In other words, they allow to express constraints on the values taken by the attribute in the conclusion part of the rule, depending on the values taken by the attributes in the antecedent part. The principle of a discovery algorithm is outlined, in the special case where the implication used is Rescher-Gaines' one.

Future works should address the issue of designing efficient algorithms for the discovery of rules based on multivalued implications. It would also be of interest to study the extent to which the usual techniques  0-7803-7U78-3/0U$10.00 (C)U)ol IEEE. Page: 1108    (illustrated for instance by the Apriori algorithm [3]) can be adapted in order to discover hzzy association rules such as those described here.

6. References Press, 1988.

[I61 D. Dubois and H. Prade, ?Fuzzy cardinality and the modeling of imprecise quantification?, Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 16, 1985, pp 199-230.

D. Dubois and H. Prade, Possibility Theory, Plenum [I71  R. Agrawal. T. Imielinski, and A. Swami, ? Mining as- [I81 G. Chen, Q. Wei, and E. Kerre, ?Fuzzy data mining: sociation rules between sets of items in large Discovery of fitzzy generalized association rules?, databases?, Proc. ACM SIGMOD?93, 1993, pp 207- Recent Issues on Fuzzy Databases, G .  Bordogna and 216. G. Pasi, eds., Physica-Verlag, 2000, pp 45-66.

H. Mannila, ?Methods and problems in data mining?, P. Bosc, L. LiCtard, 0. Pivert, ?Extended functional Proc. ICDT?97, vol. 1 186 of LNCS, Springer-Verlag. dependencies as a basis for linguistic summaries?.

1997. pp 41-55. Proc. PKDD?98, 1998, pp 255-263.

R. Agrawal, H. Mannila, R. Srikant, H. Toivonen, and A.1. Verkamo, ?Fast discovery of association rules?, Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data NIining, AAA1 Press, 1996, pp 307-328.

H. Mannila and H. Toivonen, ?Levelwise search and borders of theories in knowledge discovery?, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 1(3), 1997, pp 241- 258.

R. Ng, L.V. Lakshmanan, J. Han, and A. Pang, ?Exploratory mining and pruning optimization of constrained association rules?, Proc. ACM  N. Pasquier, Y. Bastide, R. Taouil, and L. Lakhal, ?Eficient mining of association rules using closed itemset lattices?, Information Systems, 24( l), 1999, pp  R.R. Yager, ?Database discovery using fuzzy sets?, Int.

J.  oflntefligent Syst., 11(9), 1996, pp 691-712.

1. Han, Y. Cai, and N. Cercone, ?Knowledge dis?covery in databases: An attribute-oriented approach?, Proc.

18th VLDB Conference, 1992, pp 547-559.

J. Han and Y. Fu, ?Discovery of multiple-level asso- ciation rules tiom large databases?, Proc. VLDB?95,  R. Srikant and R. Agrawal, ?Mining generalixd as- sociation rules?, Proc. VLDB?95, 1995, pp 407-4.19.

A. De Luca and S. Termini, ?Definition of non-proba- bilistic entropy in the setting of fuzzy set theory?, Information Control. 20, 1972, pp 30 1-3 12.

J .  Kacprzyk, ?Fuzzy logic for linguistic summarization of databases?. Proc. FUZZ-IEEE ?99, 1999, pp 8 13- 818.

D. Dubois and H. Prade, ?Fuzzy sets in data summaries - Outline of a new approach?, Proc.

D. Dubois and H. Prade, ?What are fuzzy rules and how to use them?, Furzy Sets and Systems, 84(2),  P. Bosc, 0. Pivert, and L. Ughetto, ?Database mining for the discovery of extended functional dependencies?, Proc. NAFIPS ?99, 1999, pp 580-584.

[I91  SlGMOD?98, 1998, pp 13-24.

25-46.

1995, pp 420-43 1.

IPMU?OO, 2000, pp 1035-1040.

1996, pp 169- 186.

