Log summarizing agent for web access data using data mining techniques

Abstract We can get useful information from the WWW (World Wide Web) and the users increase every year. The avail- able data is growing explosively, so, the techniques for analysis and discovery of useful information are impor- tant. The information providers and web manager make an effort to construct the effective web site. If providers and administrators can determine users? browsing par- terns from web access logs, they would be able to use the patterns as one index to construct an effective site.

However, it is difficult to extract users? browsing pat- terns manually because the web access log is huge.

Therefore we adopt data mining technique to this prob- lem and design the log summarizing agent. This agent can automatically get proftable information from largc amounts of web access logs.

1. Introduction  We can get useful information from the WWW (World Wide Web) and the users increase every year. The avail- able data i s  growing explosively, so, the techniques for analysis and discovery of useful information are impor- tant. The information providers and web manager make an effort to construct the effective web site. If providers and administrators can determinc users? browsing pat- terns from web access logs, they could use the patterns as one index to cnnstruct an effective site. However, i t is difficult to extract users? browsing patterns manually because the web access log is huge. Therefore we adopt data mining technique to this problem and design the log summarizing agent. This agent can automatically get profitable information from large amounts of web access logs. The data mining is to cxtract patterns from large amounts of data. It is useful for extracting item patterns of customers in the supermarket store. For ex- ample, the person buying beer buys cheese, too. It also have success to domains such as a marketing strategy, manufacture, and medical treatment.

We deal with the web mining domain. This is one of  the applications for data mining techniques. Basically, there are two domains in the web mining[S]: web con- tent mining and web usage mining. The former is to ex- tract knowledge from the content of Web sites, whereas the latter is the web log mining and extracting interest- ing patterns from web access logs.

In this paper, section 2 explains our appcoach to web access logs mining, section 3 shows how to analize web access logs, section 4 describes Log Analysis System, section 5 provides some exprimental results and finally section concludes this paper.

2. Approach for web access log min- ing  In this paper, we design of log summerizing agent. This agent extracts browsing patterns and it  is classified by user access domain in web access logs. If web adminis- trators can get the browsing pattern, they would be able to contruct the effetive site.

The purpuse of access to the web site is difference amoung the visitors. For example of the unversity site, the purpose of the student is to know about curriculums, in contrast, the purpose of the developer is to know about new technologies. Therefore, we categorize users by access domain such as ?ac? domain (education) and ?CO? domain (enterprise). In order to extract the access patterns, we use Apriori alogrithml I J[2][31[4][6]. Apri- ori alogrithm is one of extract association rule tecnique in data mining. The algorithm can get some relations between items in transaction database.

The alogorithm is as follows.

1. Input : Database D, Lf iransaciions; minimum support threshold iniii-sup  2. Output : L, frequent itemets in D.

3. Method:  0-7803-7078-3/0u$l0.00 (C)zoOl =E. Page: 2642  mailto:imc.sut.ac.jp   (a) Gnerate of candidate itemsets : Scan for D,  (b) Gnerate of frequent itemsets : Prune candi-  (c) Repeat (a) and (b) until candidate itemsets are  and extract relations between items.

date item sets by min-sup rate.

empty.

Then, rule is extracted from large itemsets that are can- didates of rule sets. And, minimum support rate is fre- quency of transaction, contidence are sufficient condi- tion in association rule.

Figure 1. Analysis uieb access logs 3 Analysis of web access log  In this section, we discuss data formulation of web ac- cess logs and analysis of web access logs.

Web access logs consist of user?s 1P address, access date and the required page shown in the following:  sutnproxy.ed.noda.sut.ac.jp (16/Nov/1999:2O24:01 +o9001 ?GET /minil- ogo.jpg H?ITP/1.0? MO 9921  This means that the page is requested from sut- nproxy.ed.noda.sut.ac.jp and the access date is 20:24:01 November 16 and the protocol is HTTPl .O.

The Figure I explains how to analysis web access logs.

How to anlysis is as follows.

1. The transaction database is constructed by the web  2. It?s database is classified by each user?s access do-  access logs in term the user specified.

main.

3. Conbinatioin of relation among pages is extracted by using Apriori algorithm.

As a result, output that is browsing patterns shows as following.

(/A.html) -+ (/B.html )A(/C.himl) (suppon38, confidence 60%)  This browsing pattern means that the rate of 3% user browse A.html also browse B.html at the same time.

Then, the rate of confidence shows 60%.

4.1  The system architecutre shows Figure 2.

Framework of Log Analysis System  By using  Figure 2. System architecutre of 10.9 analysis system  this user interface, Web administrators can recognize users? browsing patterns. By data mining engine, user?s browsing patterns can be extracted from web access logs. One of data mining adopt Apriori alogrithm. On the other hand, web log database is created from web access logs. Its database automatically update. Log checker is frequent monitoring web logs.

4.2 User interface  User interface is the purpose that web administrators can easily browse web access logs. The function that browses web logs in real time, displays user?s browsing pattems by visualization.

4. Design of Log Analysis System 4.2.1 Web Log Browser  We desgin of Log Analysis Sysrein. This system consists of data mining engine, user interface, log database, log summerizing agent.

As following Figure 3, by using Web Log Browser, web admnistrators can easily browse web access logs u p  Page: 2643  http://sutnproxy.ed.noda.sut.ac.jp http://nproxy.ed.noda.sut.ac.jp   dated. Then they can recognize users' browsing patters that reflect uscr's access domain such as "ac" doiriain (education), "CO" domain (enkrprisc). Log dataksc is reflected WCIJ logs. Its nttrihutc arc rtsrr.'~ I!' rrd- clrevs,arce.rs d i i l c .  page ,$wn iiwr's rtyur.rt.

option  Hronrbp  4.2.2 Browsing patterns by HTML format  Association rules that are extracted from web access logs using the data mining techniquc. They are browsed by H'IML..(Hypcr 'I'ext Mark up Language) format. [ t shows as following Figure. 4. How to create this Ibrrnai shows as following.

How to create HTMI., fornial  1. User interfacc gets rule from data mining cnginc.

2. 11 makes HTM1. format to display pattcms( 1 by nuking tags. such as <html>.

3. It displays jxtttenis by HTMf, fmiiat.

4.2.3 visualization of user's browsing pattern us- ing dataming technique  Following Fi.qurc. 5 shows visualization of' uscr brows- ing pattcnis. This visualization can show brows- ing patterns from wch access lops by each uscr do- main. This visualizalion represents tree structure. It's browsing support tool. Wk adopt this visualization technique[7][0]. R y  using data mining technieque, it is easy fbr ltrc user to recognize the user browsing pat- tern. Itern Mup[X]can discriminate frccpen& of item hy the node of height and color. 'This visulization can be generated as following.

I .  By data rriiriing cnginc generates association I U ~ C S , Item Mop create> Srequent ilemscts.

3. After making rules, parameters of thebe itcmsets scnd to IientMnp.

3. 11 displays itcmsets by iitdcs of the height and the color.

,-..-.-.. .

1 . . .. . I" .. *  ltrrn  4.3 Log summerizing agent  We dcsigned agent to cxtrifct users' browsing patterns from large rtmounts of web access logs. This agent named it Log snrnieri~irig ngenr. This agent consists of h g  monitoring ugiwr. IA),? cltrsstficcitioii agent. Log unalysis ugenr. 1;ollowing (I;igurc. 6) show the frame- work of these agcnts.

Following shows this iigenr's input, output and methcxl.

Log summerizing agent  1 . Input :Hrqidertfrifi.r,m user; IVeh lox; tiitre constrain  2. Output : Browsitr~q pcittern  0-7803-7078-3/0l/$10.00 (C)urOl IEEE. Page: 2644    I F I  Figure 6. Framework of Log summerazing agent  3. Method:  (a) Log summerizing agent get requent from user.

(b) This agent creates web log database with the period specified by the user. (Log monitoring agent)  (c) This agent classifies web log database toward (b) by users? access domain. (Log classifica- tion agent)  (d) This agent extracts access patterns by using data mining techniques.(Log analysis agent)  (e) This agnet outputs access pattern.

The agent can create web log database from large amounts of web logs with the period specified by the user. This can create database classified by the user do- main from this database, and extract access patterns re- flecting the user domain.

43.1 Log monitoring agent  Log monitoring agent checks web access logs and cre- ates web log database by a month. This agent creates web log database from web access logs, and manages it.

For example, if the user would request to extract brows- ing patterns, this agent could extract browsing patterns reflecting the user domain with  the user specified. Following shows this agent?s input and output.

Log monitoring agent  1. Input : Request from user; web access logs;  2. Output : Web log database  users.

3. Method:  Always carries out.

(a) Check web access logs anytime.

(b) Creating web log database by every month.

(c) Manage this database from web access logs  by every month.

Carry out by users? request  (d) Check web access logs that the user specified.

(e) Creating databse from web access logs.

(f) Request analysis to Log classification agent.

4.3.2 Log classification agent  Log classilfication agent start operation from Log mon- itoring agent?s request This agent has a role that create web log database classified by the user do- main.Following shows this agent?s input and output.

Log classification agent  1 .  Input : Request froin Log monitoring agent; Database from Web logs  2. Output : Class4j.i web log databse by the user do- main.

3. Method :  Parsing the user domain from web log database that Log nionitoring agent created.

Be classified databa5e by the user domain.

Output is database classified by the user do- main.

4 3 3  Log analysis agent  Log analysis agent has a role discoery of the user brows- ing patterns from web log database hy L.#g class?fica- tion agent created. This agent can analysis correla- tion among frequent pages, extract user browsing pat- terns reflecting one user domain. Following shows this agent?s input and output.

Log analysis agent  I .  Input : Request from Log classi.ficution agent,  2 .  Output : User?s hrowsing patterns  3. Method:  Databse be classified by the user domain  (a) Making transaction database by user?s do-  (b) Extract user?s browsing patterns by using  (c) Discovery of user?s browsing patterns.

mian.

dataming techniques.

0-7803-7078-3/0l/$10~00 (C)zoOl EEE. Page: 2645    5. Experiment  In this expcriincnt I. wc anaiyx web ifcccss logs as foi- lowing ttrhlr 1.

Following (Figilrc 7) shows nunibcr of accosses that arc classified by cach uhers' clclmain in ihc cxperiment pc- riod. We experiinctit 1\40 topics as folluwinp.

Experiment topics  1 shows speed of' largc amounts of weh log datahahe that is classi ficd by muniraring rgenr and c.lrrss&-cItion ugenr. This is purpose o f  showing agent's pertbrmancc.

2 shows uscr's intcrcsting patterns trom web log databue hy log ctnizlysi.r ugent.

5.1 Speed analysis of database that is clas- sified  Following (Figure. 8)  shows a result to analysis s p e d of cla..sify log daiabase from web access logs by Log monitoring agent and Log classilication agcnt.

'Tokykyn.

-.- ' Weh sire is infnnnalion Media Ccstrr. Science [Tnivercity of http://K~u..inw.soi.~~~.jp/  As a result, Log monitoring agent had about I minute to create web log datahasc from about 40,000 web access logs . Since I.,og iiionitoring agent scarchs whole web access logs and create it, it  would have about 1 mint~te.

On the other hand, Log classification agent had about 8 second t o  classify web log datahse by user's domain.

5.2 Analysis of user's browsing patterns  Following (Figure Y) shows number of frequent iterriscts that are classificd by cach users' domain. It gets 303  frequent itemsets by uhc'r's "nc" domain. (support 5Yc) As a result, it  scents to haw many access patterns in this domdin. Next, 11 shows exariiples of itecCSS pattems by c;di user's domain U following.

0 "ac" (education) domain As following, the uc. domain extracts interesting patterns from web access Jogs.

t/Ciuide/ahsirac:1.htmi) * ( i  )/\(/nat.i.htmi)njlctnilen fs.htnrlKsuppon 3 .OS~,.roo('lclr.m~9~.~~~)  0-7803-7078-3/0U$10.00 (C)2001 IEEE. Page: 2646    This pattem shows that the user accesses to pa&e(/Cuidr/absrract.htnil~ that related to a paper also accesses main page (?/navi.html?. ?/?. ?1contents.htnil?) at the same time. As a result, it seems to have relation between user?s domain and the access page. The ac domain gets many access pattems that related to a paper or event from web log database.

0 ?CO? (enterprise) domain As following, interesting patterns could be ex- tracted from web access logs.

(/Guide/abstract.htnil) -f (1 )A(/navi.htnil)A(/conten ts.html)(suppon 3.0%.confidmnce 92.0%)  (KI-Coursdi t . ht i d )  - (1 )A(/navi. htnil ) (support 44,.confidence 80%)  This pattern is that the user accesses the page (AT- Courcelit.htm1) that related to IT (Information Tech- nology) also accesses main pa&e(?/navi.htnil?) at the same time. As it shows this pattern, this domain had many patterns that related to the enterprise technology.

0 ?go ? (Government) domain This domain shows the browsing pattem access a page such as 1 /Pa~r/Report/Jconf.h~(suppon 34E)J .

6. Evaluation  As a result shows that the spped of classifying web log database by monitoring agent and classification agent.

Number of web access logs has 400,000. It takes about 1 minute to classify web log database. But, it is difficult to classify thousands of web access logs in the real time.

Therefore, we need to take into account improvement of speed to classify database. On the other hand, rela- tion among user?s domains could show difference from user?s browsing patterns. But, user?s browsing patterns are enormous. Therefore we encounter difiiculties when evaluation user?s browsing patterns.So, we need to con- sider access patterns are given to evaluation measure.

7. Conclusion  So far we have outlined the log summarizing agent that derives users? access patterns from a web access log.

We apply data mining technique to Web access summa- rizing. By using it, It showed interesting users? access pattems in users?each domain. Therfore Log S U M ~ I C T Z - zng agenr presents comprehensible and profitable infor- mation for the wcb administrator. By using infromation, they could use the patterns as one index to construct an effective site.

