Fuzzy Clustering for Categorical Multivariate Data

Abstract This paper proposes a new fuzzy clustering algorithm for categorical multivariate data. The conventional fuzzy clustering algorithms form fuzzy clusters so as to minimize the total distance from cluster centers to data points. However, they cannot be applied to the caSe where only cmcurrence relations among individ- uals and categories are given and the criterion to ob- tain clusters is not available. The proposed method en- ables us to handle that kind of data set by maximizing the degree of aggregation among clusters. The cluster- ing results by the proposed method show similarity to those of Correspondence Analysis or Hayashi?s Quan- tification Method Qpe III. Numerical examples show the usefulness of our method.

1. Introduction  We have been facing an explosive increase in the amount of information or data being stored in the database electrically. In response to the increase of the data storage, importance of extracting useful infor- mation, which is even implicit, potential or previously unlarown, from the database is getting up-and-coming.

The extracted information can be put to use in the ar- eas such as decision support, prediction, forecasting and estimation. Data Mining [1][2] which is also known as Knowledge Discovery from Database (KDD) is this kind of paradigm. It encompasses a number of different technical approaches. Most of them devote themselves to unearth association rules which represent association relationships among different attributes. They find out such rules according to similarity or correlation among data.

There exists a classical technique called Conespon- dence Analysis [3] or Hayashi?s Quantification method type III 141 which analyzes data according to correla- tion. It is one of the multivariate analysis techniques  and can be seen as one of the Data Mining approaches.

It deals with categorical multivariate data. The categori- cal multivariate data set is provided in the form of cross- classification table, contingency table or cooccurrence matrix. Each individual is described by a set of quali- tative variables with several categories. The categorical variables are defined by several quantifications of qual- itative data: binary indicator, frequency or scaled vari- able. The Correspondence Analysis quantifies the multi categorical data so as to maximize correlation among data. This technique provides us with useful knowledge from the data set and makes it possible to visualize var- ious criteria of principal component analysis. We can employ the Correspondence Analysis as a way of di- mension reduction.

Cluster analysis is a technique which discovers the sub- structure of a data set by dividing it into several clus- ters. It is also known as one of the Data Mining ap- proaches. There have been many researches for cluster analysis. Fuzzy clustering is an extension of the cluster analysis, which represents the affiliation of data points to clusters by memberships. Introducing fuzziness to clustering gives us the flexible representations of sub- structures of the data set. Fuzzy c-Means [51, Fuzzy c- Lines [6], Fuzzy c-varieties [7] and Fuzzy c-Regression Models [8] are varieties of the fuzzy clustering algo- rithms. They have different shapes of cluster centers, prototypes of clusters. Most of them conduct clustering in accordance with similarity or dissimilarity derived from distances from cluster centers to data points. They employ Euclidian, Mahalanobis or Manhattan distance as the metric. Few fuzzy clustering approaches, how- ever, exisf which can realize fuzzy clustering where the data vectors are not available and only the similarity or correlation among items is given.

This paper proposes a new fuzzy clustering algorithm when a categorical multivariate data set is given. By the virtue of its capability of handling categorical multivari- ate data, the proposed method can conduct not only the cluster analysis but also data analysis similar to the Cor-  0-7803-7078-3/0u$l0.00 (C)u)Ol EEE. Page: 2154  http://ie-osakafu-u.ac.jp   respondence Analysis. Yamakawa et al. has proposed a hybridization of the fuzzy clustering and the Conespon- dence Analysis [9]. Their proposed method implement two different data analysis techniques simultaneously and can obtain local relationships among data and scat- ter diagrams. Though our proposed method also focuses on the same kind of data set, it conducts only fuzzy clus- tering. Therefore, our method essentially differs from Yamakawa?s method. And another thing, Inoue et al.

has already proposed a fuzzy clustering algorithm that can also handle with categorical multivariate data 1101.

However, as their algorithm form the clusters one after another, the volume of the cluster gradually decmses in turn. Moreover, in the process of assigning data points to clusters, calculation of eigen vectors is needed, which is computationally demanding.

Our proposed algorithm is effectuated by maximizing a simple objective function. The objective function rep- resents the degree of aggregation of each cluster. The solution algorithm for the objective function is based on iterative procedure through necessary conditions for local minima. We can obtain clusters for the overall data set at a time by using the propose method. In the objective function, we introduce entropy maximization as a regularization proposed by Miyamoto et al. [ 111 to obtain fuzzy clusters. Afkr the fuzzy clustering, we are supposed to obtain memberships for individuals and categories each and all.

Looking into obtained clusters mixed up with individ- uals and categories, the similar result of data analysis to the Correspondence Analysis can be &rived Since our proposed method can easily provide fuzzy clusters by solving simple algebraic equations that are far easier than the eigen value problems and doesn?t require the calculation of cluster centers, it provides us with useful way to analyze categorical multivariate data Numerid examples show the usefulness of our method.

2. Fuzzy Clustering for Categorical Multivariate Data (FCCM)  2.1. Categorical Multivariate Data  Let us consider a categorical multivariate data set M individuals described by a set of qualitative variables &j with N categories. In many cases, each category con- sists of some few subcategories. They, however, are not taken into consideration here. The quahtative variables can be responses to some questionnaires or COOCCW- fence relations among individuals and categories. The  categorical variables are defined by several quantifica- tions, e.g., binary indicator, frequency or scaled vari- able. The categorical multivariate data set is often given in the form of a table. We show an example of the table in Table 1.

Table 1 .  an ezample of categorical multivari- ate data set  In the table, the rows are the individuals and the columns are the categories. This kind of table is called crossclassification table, contingency table or cooccur- rence matrix in a general way.

The conventional technique handling the data set in Ta- ble l, i.e., the Correspondence Analysis, intends to dis- cover relations between individuals and categories. It quantifies the individuals and the categories by solving an eigen value problem. After the quantification, we can plot the individuals and the categories on one or two di- mensional space. Then, they are divided in some groups in accordance with the coordinates and characteristics of the data set are detected. The analysis of the cate- gorical multivariate data set is commonly conducted in this manner in the Correspondence Analysis. The divi- sion of the data set after the quantification is done by the analysts observing the data plots. Therefore, the Corre- spondencx Analysis is not a clustering technique but a quantification method. Well-known fuzzy clustering al- gorithms [51-[8]. however, can not handle the data set l i e  in Table 1 because of the clustering criteria they employ. They form clusters according to distances from cluster centers to data points. It is impossible to calcu- late those distances with respect to the data set in Table 1. In this paper, we propose a new fuzzy clustering al- gorithm which is able to handle the data set in Table 1. We call it FCCM, Fuzzy Clustering for Categorical Multivariate Data.

2.2. Degree of Aggregation  Firstly, we define two different memberships for the proposed method. One is for the individuals, the other is  0-7803-7@78-3/0l/$10.00 (C)U)ol IEEE. Page: 2155    for the categories. The definitions of two memberships are shown as follows:  c XU& = 1, U& E [O, 11, i = 1 , .  . . , M ,  (1) c=1  N  c w c j = l ,  WcjEIO,l], c = l , . - .  lC, (2) j =I  where uCi is the membership of the i-th individual for the c-th cluster and wcj is that of the j-th category for the c-th cluster. C denotes the number of clusters.

Though it seems that U& and wcj have the same con- straints since the memberships sum to one, they are dif- ferent actually. For U&, the total amount of member- ships of the i-th individual to the clusters has to be one.

On the other hand, (2) indicates the total membership of the c-th cluster to the categories should be one.

Secondly, we give a definition of the clustering criterion of the FCCM to obtain fuzzy clusters. It should be pro- vided so as to p u p  the individuals and the categories which have high correlations each other. In this sense, we regard the following degree of aggregation as the clustering criterion of the FCCM.

M N uciwcjdij c = 1, . * , c. (3)  i=l j=1  The degree of aggregation for each cluster is the to- tal amount of products of qualitative variables dij and memberships for individuals and categories, ue and wcj. We maximix the degree of aggregation in (3) to fonn fuzzy clusters by assigning memberships to indi- viduals and categories.

Furthermore, if we define the total amount of member- ships wcj of the j-th category to the clusters as one, in such a way as in (4). we are unable to obtain proper clusters.

c C w c j = 1 ,  W ~ ~ E [ O , I ] ,  ~ = I , * * . , N .  (4) j=l  The degree of aggregation will be maximized by allo- cating individuals and categories to only one cluster un- der the constraints provided in (4). That is why we em- Ploy (2).

2.3. Objective Function  The FCCM can be driven by optimization of an objec- tive function to maximize the degree of aggregation. We  use Lagrange's method of indeterminate multiplier to derive the objective function for the FCCM. The objec- tive function can be written as follows:  C M N  c=l i=l c=l j=1 M I C  \  +CA?( xu. - 1)  where Ai and 'yc are Lagrangian multipliers respectively.

The second and third terms in (5)  represent entropy maximization as a regularization which was introduced in Fuzzy c-Means by Miyamoto et al. [l 11 for the first time. It enables us to obtain fuzzy clusters. Tu and T,,, are the weighting parameters which specify the degree of fuzziness. The remaining terms describe the con- srraints of memberships, i.e., (1) and (2), respectively.

From the necessary conditions for the optimality of the objective function L, i.e., aL/aUe = 0 and L3L/aWcj = 0, we have the following equations.

N  j=1 C N U d  =  ~  c=l j=l  M  The optimization algorithm is based on Picard iteration through necessary conditions for local minima of the objective function. Therefore, the proposed algorithm can be written as follows:  The FCCM Algorithm  Step I: Set values of parameters C, Tu, Tw and E .

Initialize memberships U& randomly.

Step 2: Update membership wcj using (7).

0-7803-7078-3/0v$l0.00 (C)zoOl IEEE. Page: 2156    Step 3: Update memberships uCi using (6).

Step 4: If max IuzEW - U$""\ < e,  then stop.

Otherwise, return to Step 2.

3. Numerical Example  3.1. Literature Retrieval Data Set  In numerical example, we apply our proposed method to literature retrieval data set used in Cl01 and [121. We also apply the Correspondence Analysis to the data set and compare it with the proposed method. The data set is shown in Table 2. The rows represent the literatures and the columns are the key words. The data set shows the cOOccurrence relations among the literatures and the key words. Each entry denotes the number of appear- ances of the key word in the corresponding literature.

For example, the key word 5 appears twice in the liter- ature 4. The retrieval of literatures would be done in a system as to the cOOccuTfence relations. For instance, the literatures 6 7  and 8 might be retrieved if the key word 10 is entered into the retrieval system accordmg to Table 2. However, the literature 9 should be retrieved in focusing the attention on the coowmnce relations to other key words, i.e., key words 11 and 12.

Table 3. menbershzps of literatures  Table 4 .  memberships of key words I Kev word 11 Cluster 1 I Cluster 2 1  3.2. Numerical Results  We used the following values of parameters for the FCCM.

The number of clsuters C: 2 The degree of fuzziness Tu: 0.1 The degree of fuzziness T,: 1.5 Stopping condition of the FCCM E: O.OOO1  The results are shown in Table 3 and Table 4. In Ta- ble 3 and Table 4, we underlined larger memberships of literatures and key words. we assume that literatures and key words are more likely to belong to the cluster to which they have larger memberships. From Table 3, we can see that l i t e r e s  are divided into { 1,2,3,4,5} and {6,7,8,9}. On the one hand, key words are partitioned into {1,2,3,4,5,6,7, 8) and (9, 10,11,12}. These re- sults are reasonable in accordance with Table 2.

Figure 1 shows the result of the Correspondence Analy- sis applied to Table 2 and represents the scatter diagram of literatures and key words after quantification. The  values corresponding to the first and second eigen val- ues were plotted on the diagram. The horizontal axis corresponds to the first eigen value and the vertical axis does the second one. In Figure 1 , 0  and indicate lit- eratures and key words respectively. We can divide lit- e r a m  and key words into two groups according to the observation of Figure 1. One is literatures (1, 2,3,4,5} and key words {12,3,4,5,6,7,8} and the other is liter- atures {6,7,8,9} and key words {10,11,12}. Only the key word 9 belongs to neither group. The two groups are circled in Figure 1. Comparing the result of the Cor- respondence Analysis with that of the proposed method, we can observe that the similar results are obtained ex- cept for the key word 9.

4. Conclusions  In this paper, we proposed a new fuzzy clustering al- gorithm, the FCCM, for categorical multivariate data to which the conventional fuzzy clustering algorithms could not be applied. The FCCM was applied to the l i t en"  retrieval data set which was a kind of categor-  0-7803-7078-3/0U$l0.00 (C)zoOl IEEE. Page: 2157    Table 2. literature retrieval data set  0.3  0.2  0.1   -0.1  -0.2  -0.3  -a4  -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4  Fagure 1. the result of the Correspondence Analysis  i d  multivariate data set in the numerical example. The Correspondence Analysis was also applied to the data set and compared with the FCCM. The FCCM showed the similar result to that of the Correspondence Analy- sis. While the Correspondence Analysis requires solv- ing eigen value problem which is computationally de- manding, the FCCM needs simple algebraic calcula- tions. Therefore, we can conclude that the FCCM is not only a fuzzy clustering algorithm handling categm- i d  multivariate data but also a simple alternative of the Correspondent Analysis.

Besides, if we modify the definition of memberships in (2), we can apply our proposed method to the case where only similarities among data are given. In that case, we redefine the constraint (2) as in (8).

M c w c j = l ,  WcjE(O,l] ,  c = l , * * -  ,C, (8) j=l  In (8), wcj is not for categories but individuals. This modification leads to the similar result of Hayashi?s Quantification Method ?Qpe IV [4], which also handles the same kind of similaritiy data set.

