Voltage Harmonics Generated by 3-Level Converters  Using PWM Natural Sampling

Abstract- This paper presents a detailed analysis on how the independent choice of the branch carrier phase shift angles in 3-level three-phase converters using PWM natural sampling can offer some extra degrees of freedom to establish rules to optimize the line voltage harmonic content. The study developed in this paper is only valid for converters that can be considered as an association of independent 2-level cells, which are the floating capacitors and the H-bridges topologies. This paper shows how, in order to minimize the harmonic distortion, the choice of the modulation technique depends on the modulation index. For low values of the modulation index, the so-called three-phase modulation achieves the best results, while for high values (greater than 0.9) the so-called single- phase modulation reaches better results.



I. INTRODUCTION  Multilevel converters are arising as a new type of power converters for high power and medium voltage applications.

This is due to the fact that the series connection of the switching devices allows working with a higher DC voltage while the maximum voltage of the devices is bounded by the converter topology. By means of special control techniques, these converters synthesize a sinusoidal voltage from the different available voltage levels. In this way, known problems related to switching operation such as machine over-voltages, EM1 emissions, etc. are considerably reduced.

Although there are several modulation strategies for multilevel converters, they can be basically organized in two groups: scalar and vector techniques. Vector techniques achieve a better converter control and results, but their implementation is more complex. On the other hand, scalar techniques control each phase independently and obtain good but not optimal results. Their easy implementation has led to a broad industrial spread.

The PWM natural sampling for three-phase converters has some degrees of freedom respect to the phase shift angles between the lag carriers. In 2-level converters, these degrees of freedom have been deeply studied and their optimal phase shift angles respect to the voltage harmonic content have been established [ 11. In multilevel converters, the greater number of degrees of freedom has been also studied and different optimal operating conditions have been proposed [2][3]. With regard to the phase shift angle between leg carriers in multilevel converters, some authors have adopted the same solution established in 2-level converters [3]. The paper presented here analyses the different possibilities these  degrees of fieedom offer in the choice of an appropriate modulation that minimizes the voltage harmonic content generated by 3-level converters. It also shows that the commonly adopted solution for multilevel converters is not always the best choice in 3-level converters depending on the value of the modulation index. The conclusion of this analysis is that the type of modulation to be used can be determined by the modulation index value of the electrical drive operating condition.

11. VOLTAGE HARMONICS IN 2 LEVEL CONVERTERS  The PWM natural sampling process consists in the comparison of a modulating sinusoidal wave with a high frequency triangular carrier. The resulting phase voltage with respect medium point of the DC link voltage has a voltage harmonic spectrum whose analytical expression is given by the following equation [ 11:  where  p M = Modulation index.

V = DC link voltage.

II+  i = Group index.

j q = Carrier phase shift.

B Jo , J ,  = First kind Bessel functions.

The first term gives the amplitude of the fundamental voltage, the second one gives the amplitude of the harmonics at the carrier frequency and its multiples, and the third one gives the amplitude of the harmonics in the sidebands around the each multiple of the carrier frequency.

As it is pointed out in [1][2], the amplitude of every harmonic depends on the modulation index, and it is independent of the frequency index mf = ~ / I I +  and of the  = Phase U, v or w.

= Frequency of the modulating wave.

= Frequency of the carrier wave.

= Sideband harmonic index from each group.

= Modulating wave phase shift.

0-7803-7067-8/01/$10.00 02001 IEEE 1561    modulating and carrier angles. Figure 1 shows the value per unity of the main harmonics as a function of the modulation index.

An analysis of the three-phase line voltage requires knowing every harmonic angle. Table I shows these angles as a function of the modulating (e )  and carrier (q) angles.

As it is shown in Fig. 1, the most important harmonic for any modulation index is the central-placed of the first group.

Therefore, by means of using techniques that cancels this dominant harmonic a lower harmonic distortion is achieved.

According to the table I, it is required the phase shift angle between the three carriers to be zero, that is, the well known single-phase modulation has to be used [l]. With this modulation, central-placed harmonics from the odd groups are also cancelled, and the other line voltage harmonics are balanced.

Depending on the choice of the phase shift angles between carriers, the correspondent harmonics of each line voltage can have different values. Then, in order to evaluate the harmonic distortion of the three-line voltages together, the factor THDv is defined and calculated as follows:  where, Vp,k = Amplitude of k-th harmonic of the x-y line voltage.

&/2 = Amplitude of the fundamental of the line voltage for M =  1.

Fig. 2 shows THDv calculations results for different phase shift angles between carriers (made by MATLAB). Dots represent the maximum and minimum values that can be obtained for any phase shift angles combination. As it can be observed, the single-phase modulation gets the minimum THDv for any modulation index, while the three-phase modulation (120" phase shift between carriers) achieves the maximum values [l]. Hence single-phase modulation is the chosen technique in 2 level converters.

TABLE I.

MAIN HARMONICS IN OF THE 2 LEVEL PHASE VOLTAGE  angle  GrOUD 1 rrd I -0 nf-2 I 180+2B-p  3.nf--2 Group 3  Modlation indsx  Fig. I .  Value @.U) of the main harmonics in the 2-level leg.

":y,, (c , Pu* , CaJ , , , , I maxxlrnurn e. minimum  o 0 1  0 2  03 0 4  0 5  06 0 7  o e  o s  I  Modlahm hdax  Fig. 2. THDv vs. A4 for different phase shift angles between carters  111. SCALAR MODULATION OF 3 LEVEL CONVERTER Among the different main multilevel topologies, neutral  point clamped, floating capacitors, and H-bridges, the last two are the only ones that can be considered an association of independent 2-level cells. Because of it, the mathematical study developed in this paper is only valid for this kind of converters. In [2], the PWM synthesis of the N-level floating capacitors converter is deeply analyzed, and most of the conclusions that are obtained are also valid for the H-bridge converter. In this converter, leg cells are series-connected and controlled with the same modulating wave in order to achieve the highest value of the addition of the voltages.

Besides, it is demonstrated the existence of an opt' I imum phase shift angle A q  between carriers of the same leg that permits entire harmonics groups to be cancelled, except for the multiples of N-1 . The expression of A q  is given by  In the 3-level converter, this optimum phase shift angle is 180" and with it the odd groups are cancelled. The harmonic spectrum of the difference voltage between a phase voltage and the DC-link medium point can be obtained by the following equation, similarly to (1):     where the DC-link voltage is 2V and h is the group index of a phase voltage that corresponds to the 2h-th group of the 2- level phase voltage [2].

The values (pa.) of the main phase voltage harmonics of a 3-level converter with respect to the maximum phase voltage V, are presented in Fig. 3 for any modulation index.

These phase leg voltages can be expressed as a function of their harmonics:  Group  m  V,  = V,sin(ka k=l  Hnrmonlc Multlpller Factors, Kk Harmonlc Number uv Line I vw Llne I wu Llne 2.1flf-5 Zsin(60 + pa - 9") I 2sin(60+qc -9)8) I 2 ~ i n ( - 1 2 0 + 9 ~ - 9 ~ )  - V, = Vksin(km +  k=l  - V,, = x V k s i n ( k a  + a w , k )  (7)  k =l  where,  Vk = Amplitude of the k-th harmonic in the phase voltage (same amplitude in every phase).

G , ~  = Angle of the k-th harmonic of the phase x (Table I).

Line voltage harmonics can be calculated from the harmonics of the corresponding phase voltages. For instance, V,, line voltage is given by:  - V,, = C V k [ s i n ( k a  +au,k)-sin(kunt+a;,)]  k = l  (9)  By means of a simple trigonometric transformation the following expression can be obtained:  ce  V,, = V,Kksin(ka +auv,k) k=l  where Kk is a multiplier factor the value of which depends on the phase shift between the harmonics of each phase voltage.

TABLE n MAIN HARMONICS IN THE F I R S T  2 GROUPS  OF THE 3 LEVEL PHASE VOLTAGE I Harmonic I Harmonic I  I  As the modulating wave angles are 0", 120" and 240?, the angle of each phase voltage harmonic depends only on the phase shift angles between carriers, (Table 11). The obtained multiplier factors for each line voltages are shown in Table 111.

In order to either cancel or reduce the value of the most important harmonic in Fig. 3, an analysis of the multiplier factors in table I1 has been done. The main conclusions of this analysis are:  It is not possible to cancel together both greatest harmonics 2mf *l, but one of them can be completely cancelled. Harmonic 2mf-1 is cancelled when the phase shift angles between carriers are chosen to be 120" (three-phase modulation), as it is shown in Fig. 4. On the other hand, 60" phase shift angles between carriers cancel harmonic 2mf+l.

Phase shift angles between carriers that are not multiple of 60" produce different THD (Total Harmonic Distortion) for each line voltage.

The single-phase modulation cancels harmonics 2mf +3, as it is shown in Fig. 5 .

0 4  , I , , . , , , ,  I .

. I  . .  . .  I . ,  , . .  , , , , . , ,  , I  , . . . , ,  o 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.7 0.8 O.Q i Moblation index  Fig. 3. Values (P.u.) of main harmonics in 3-level phase voltage  TABLE rn HARMONIC MULTIPLIER FACTORS FOR EACH LINE VOLTAGE   -     - W d o n  I& M= 1 -,  Fig. 4. Line voltages and harmonic spectrum for the 3-level converter with Three-phase Modulation  As a conclusion of this analysis, it can be said that it seems there is not specific modulation that clearly minimizes the THDv for any modulation index. Figure 6 shows the THDv value for different phase shift angles between carriers, together with the maximum and minimum values that can be obtained. This figure reveals that due to the cancellation of one of the main harmonics for 60"-multiple phase shift angles, this kind of modulations are optimum for low values of the modulation index. For high values of M, harmonics 2mf*3 are the most important and then single-phase modulation is now the optimum one. For values of M between 0.5 and 0.8 the minimum THDv values are obtained for 9O0-multiple phase shift angles, but it has the disadvantage of producing different THD values for each line voltage.

Fig. 7 shows the THDv calculation results obtained for any phase shift angle between carriers and @ O S .  As it can be observed, only some combinations of 6O0-multiple phase shift angles produce the smallest THDy values. The greatest problem of the voltage harmonics is that they generate current harmonics in the load. Due to the fact that most loads that are connected to the converters are inductive, the  Fig. 5.  Line voltages and harmonic spectrum for the 3-level converter with  magnitude of each current harmonic, and hence the importance of its corresponding voltage harmonic, decays proportionally to its index. This fact is taken into account by introducing the following parameter THD]:  Single-Phase Modulation  Fig. 8 shows the THD, value for different combinattons of phase shift angles and any modulation index. Maximum and minimum achievable values are also presented.

As it can be deduced from Fig 7, from l W 0  to lW0.9 only the three-phase modulation achieve the minimum value of THDI, The modulation with angles 0", 60", 120?, which had the same THDv as the three-phase modulation, produces now a higher value of THDI because it cancels the harmonic with the smallest index of the two main harmonics. For M values greater than 0.9, the single-phase modulation again achieve the minimum value of THDI. As a conclusion, three-phase modulation should be used in electrical drives working with variable speed, while single-phase modulation should be     chosen for rectifiers with sinusoidal absorption ( M  values close to unity).

0.25  Y) ,..

0.2 - g E 5 0.15  0.1  0.05

IV. CONCLUSIONS  -  -  -  -  - dots: maximum & minimum  0.5 -  3 0.4 - f 0.3 -  - - U  0.2 -  0.1  \,  dots: maximum & minimum  O Y ?  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? I 0 0.1 0.2 03 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1  ModAation index  Fig. 6. THDv of line voltages for 3-level converters for different phase shift angles.

v- -  wu carrier shift angle 0 0  v-U carrier shin angle  Fig. 7. THDv of line voltages for W 0 . 5  for any phase shift angle.

0?35 5 0.3 i. 1  This paper presents a detailed analysis of the degrees of freedom that exist in the choice of the phase shift angles between leg carriers in a 3-level converter. A general method is proposed that permits specific harmonics to be cancelled.

Simulations results show the existence of different operating ranges in which a particular modulation has to be chosen to minimize the total harmonic content. In those converters that work always with high values of the modulation index, like the rectifiers, the use of the single-phase modulation achieves best results. However, in order to obtain the minimum THDl value in applications such as electrical drives, the modulation technique will depend on the operating condition. In this way, for modulation index values below 0.9 the three-phase modulation should be used, while above 0.9 single-phase modulation should be chosen.

In particular, for modulation index values close to 0.6, the three-phase modulation produces a THDl that is 30% lower than the one generated by the single-phase modulation. In addition, present modulation digital techniques (EPROM, FPGA, etc.) allow an easy implementation of the technique proposed in this paper.

