

4.1 Introduction and Background  Commodity traders have a saying ?you grade it and we?ll trade it.? The IEEE- Standards Association (IEEE-SA) has recognized the need to grade and quantify greenhouse gas emission reduction credits from initiatives and projects implemented throughout the electricity industry, end users and associated processes. The electricity industry is a major contributor (about one third) to global CO2 emissions. Therefore it makes good sense for the industry to develop and implement technology options to achieve cost effective reductions. It also makes sense for the industry to develop the standard rules for quantifying emission reduction credits from such initiatives. If the industry does not, others will, and the industry may not like the result.

4.1.1 Emissions Trading The potential options to reduce emissions available to participants in different  countries and companies vary greatly in magnitude and cost.

An effective tool or mechanism to achieve cost effective global reduction targets is the  concept of emissions trading or transfers among participants. A simple and clear description of how an international emissions trading scheme for greenhouse gases would work is given in Ref. 1. Essentially this involves treating emission allowances and emission reduction credit units like any other commodity in the marketplace. Arrangements would then be made for them to be traded on international exchanges. The marketplace would set the value of emission credit units. These would be bought and sold by countries and companies to facilitate meeting reduction targets at lowest cost.

For this to work, just like any other commodity, there must be internationally accepted standards or a ?common currency? for the measurement, quantification and certification of emissions credit units. Imagine the confusion today in the market trading of electricity, if we did not have ?common currency? standards for measuring and quantifying units of electrical energy.

The worldwide growth in interest in emissions trading and emissions exchanges is quite staggering, as a few hours spent surfing the intemet will prove. Ref. 2 gives a good summary of the status of domestic, regional and international emissions trading initiatives.

4.2 The IEEE Standard Proiect In August 2001, the IEEE Standards Board approved a project to develop a ?Standard  for the Quantification of Emission Credits for Electrical Industry Processes?. The project is sponsored by the IEEE Energy Development & Power Generation Committee and will be developed by the Working Group on Implementing Technology to Limit Climate Change. The presenter is secretary and acting chair of this working group. The approved scope and purpose of the Standard project are as follows.

4.2.1 Scope The Standard is intended to cover the measurement and quantification of CO2 (or  equivalent) reductions for emissions credits in the electricity supply and demand industry, as brought about by technology applications, innovations and improvements. It will cover ?cradle to grave? project life-cycles in all aspects of the industry. This includes fuel chain and processing, energy conversion systems (generation); emission control systems (pre and post combustion); delivery systems (transmission and distribution); and end uses (demand side  management and conservation).

0-7803-7322-7/02/$17.00 (c) 2002 IEEE  4. DEVELOPING A STANDARD FOR CO2 EMISSION CREDITS Jim McConnach, Secretary and Acting Chair IEEE Working Group on Implementing Technology to Limit Climate Change, Ontario, Canada.

4.2.2 Purpose The purpose of the Standard is to establish an internationally accepted basis for  measuring, evaluating and quantifying the eligible, real, measurable, verifiable, and unique reduction in CO2 emissions attributable to a specific technology project for use in emissions trading systems. The Standard will help provide an answer to the generic question: ?How can one country or jurisdiction to an emissions trade be assured and satisfied that it is getting real and true value for a purchased emission credit from another country or jurisdiction??  4.2.3 Schedule The project approval is open until the end of 2005. However a preliminary schedule  has been developed which targets the fall of 2003 for a final draft of the Standard to go for balloting. This is ambitious for an international standard of this complexity and magnitude, but fits well with the timing of developments in regional and international emission trading programs.

4.2.4 Participation All IEEE standards development projects are open to everyone for participation and to  keep informed. Openness is one of the five imperative principles of the standards process.

However to facilitate a fast tracking of such a complex project it is proposed to form an initial core task force to develop a strawman document for consideration by the broader audience of the working group. The initial task force project roster will aim for good representation across the industry and across the world. The task force membership is expected to grow as the project develops.

Anyone interested in joining the Working Group or participating in the project to research and develop material and/or review drafts, please contact Jim McConnach at jsmccomrach@iee.org. Please note you do not have to be an IEEE member to join and you can enter and leave the process at any time. Much of the work can be done over the intemet via e- mail. However there will be a need for occasional meetings to debate and resolve key issues.

Task force members are expected to fund their own time and expenses.

4.3 Issues  There are a number of key issues which will need full and open debate for resolution in developing such a complex and politically charged international standard. A few of these are listed below:  > Universality: This issue concerns not only the scope of the project, but aspects such as vested interests in existing domestic trading programs  > Standardization and Certification: These are generally separate activities, but certification of credits will be an inherent part of quality assurance.

> Methodology: This is likely to consume much debate, both in terms of the approach to assessments and the issue of measured versus estimated quantities.

These and other complex issues will need to be thoroughly debated to obtain international consensus.

4.4 Conclusions  0-7803-7322-7/02/$17.00 (c) 2002 IEEE     To facilitate international emissions trading of greenhouse gases, there is a need for a universally accepted standard for the quantification and certification of CO2 emission credit units. This will enable them to be traded just like any other commodity. The IEEE Standards Association have approved a project for the development of such a Standard. This is a complex and ambitious task and much help will be needed from the industry and others to bring it to a timely and successful completion.

4.5 References  1. ?Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading: A Country and Company - Eye View? Submission by USA to UNFCC COP6  2. ?Meeting the Kyoto Protocol Commitments: Summary - Domestic Emissions Trading Schemes?; January 2001 by Henrik Hasselknippe and Geir Hoibye, Energy & Environment Confederation of Norwegian Business and Industry. Submission to UNFCC COP6.

Key Web-sites for Further Study UN Framework Convention on Climate Change www.unfccc.de Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change www.ipcc.ch International Emissions Trading Association www.ieta.org (Has links to National Trading Schemes and International Agency Sites) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change www.ipcc.ch The Science & Environmental Policy Project www.sepp.org  Iim McConnach is Principle Consultant, Castle Hill Engineering Services. After a 36 year career in the electricity supply industry in the private and public sectors, he is now an independent consultant offering training and special services to the industry.

He obtained a first class degree in Electrical Engineering from St Andrews University, Scotland in 1964. He apprenticed and worked for a UK manufacturer, involved in the design, development and selling of specialized power transmission equipment. This led to five years in international consulting in the design and planning of utility and industrial supply systems in developing countries.

In 1977, Jim McConnach joined Ontario Hydro in Toronto, Canada to work on a wide range of projects. This included strategies, plans, regulatory approvals and management of special projects for T&D; fossil, nuclear and hydroelectric generation; energy efficiency; and system operations. He retired from Ontario Hydro in 2000.

He is a registered Professional Engineer in Ontario, a Fellow of the IEE, UK, and a Senior Member of the IEEE. He is secretary and acting chair of the IEEE Working Group on Implementing Technology to Limit Climate Change.

