Mining Association Rules of Quantitative Movement Pattern

Abstract: In this paper, we present a new form of association rules to deal with quantitative attributes in time series databases. This kind of rules named as Association Rules of Quantitative Movement Pattern (AR-QMP) can represent relations of movement patterns about quantitative attributes. We first analyze the necessity of new association rules. Secondly, we design a model to describe the movement pattern and present implementation strategies based on this model. In the end, we propose further work to discover predictive association rules aboul movement patterns.

Keywords: Association rules, association rules of quantitative movement pattern, AR-QMP, quantitative attribute  1 Introduction Since the problem of mining association rules was introduced in [I], a large amount of work has been done to finc relations among attributes in various directions. The original application of association rules is market basket analysis using transaction databases from supermarkets and departmental stores. R. Srikant and R. Agrawal named them as ?Boolean Association Rules?, for the domains of attributes are restricted to boolean domains. Srikant and Agrawal [3] proposed ?Quantitative Association Rules?? to mine association rules from quantitative and categorica attributes. To quantitative attributes R. J. Miller and Y. Yang [4] presented a new definition of association rules.

They suggested to cluster quantitative attributes and then to generate rules according to the distances among clusters. Those explorations can help users to find relations among quantitative attributes. Despite these efforts, there is an important form of association rules which are useful but can not be discovered with the existing association rule -mining framework.

For example the following rules are more interesting to people: The rate of exchange of some stock rises 15%, then its closing price may rise 10%.

The netprojit of a commodity will improve 5% to 10% if its discount is set to 5%.

In radiation experiments of patients, the number of leukocytes will improve 2% in jive days caused by adding 10% dose of a medicament.

Unfortunately, current association rules mining over quantitative attributes cannot discover this type of rules. If a quantitative attribute varies time, its change may affect other attributes? movement like these rules given above.

Sometimes we care for quantitative rules much more than qualitative ones. While those existing methods focus on mining associations among attributes in the relational databases, and they cannot discover relations among movement pattern of quantitative attributes.

Moreover, rules mined by various methods should be available under some time restraint. So dding time restraint to association rules will improve applicability and reflect objectivity of real life.

To deal with these shortcomings, we present a new form of rules, association rules of quantitative movement pattern abbreviated as AR-QMP, which inchde the following features comparing to classical association rules.

Consider relations among varying trends of quantitative attributes Consider available periods of time over rules  0-7Y03-7010-4/01/$10.0002001 1EEE.

We design a movement pattern model, over which AR-QMP can be discovered. By using this model we transform time series databases into changing ratio databases, and then apply extended classical mining methods to find new knowledge.

In this paper, we research the problem of mining AR-QMP. We present a formal statement of the movement pattern model in section 2. In section 3, we propose the implementation of AR-QMP. An experiment report is listed in section 4. Further work and conclusions are given in the end.

2 Model statement Let S=<Pl, Pz, .. ., Pj, . . ., Pk, , ..> be a quantitative sequence ordered by time. Pj is the value of the jth element. We need to get changing ratio of each Pj over S. Using variable Tgap to represent the length of a sliding window, each calculated element and its comparing object are in a sliding window simultaneously.

Definition 2.1 Let T,,=N, MBi is the maximum from Ti-N+l to Ti i.e., MBi = MAX Pi; MAi is the maximum fiom i -N<j<i  Ti to i.e., MA,. = MAX pi ; mbi is the minimum fiom T~-N+I  to T" i.e., mbi = MIN Pi ; mai is the minimum i< j<i+N i -N< j<i  from Ti to T i+~- I ,  i.e., mai = MIN Pj .

Definition 2.2 Let T,,=N,  is j< i+N  6MBi is the ratio of Pi compared to MBi, and DMB, is time distance between Pi and the nearest MBi to Pi if  having several MBi, i.e., 4 -MBi  6MBi = ___ , D M B ~  MBi -Tj(lfs : j = MAX(k I Pk = MBi));  SMAf is the ratio of Pi compared to MA;, and DMBi is time distance between Pi and the nearest MAi to Pi if  having several MAi, i.e.,  SMA, =- &MAi , DMAi =q -Ti& : j = MIN(k I Pk = M 4 ) ) ; MAi  6,; is the ratio of Pi compared to mbi, and Dh, is time distance between Pi and the nearest mbi to Pi if  having several mbi, i.e., 4 - mbi  'mbt = 7 , Ddi=T-Tj ( i f f :  j = M A x ( k I P '  =mbi));  6,, is the ratio of Pi compared to mai, and Dm, is time distance between Pi and the nearest mi to Pi if  having several mab i.e., 9 - 'mi 6 nuli =- , Dmi =Ti -Tj@ : j = MIN(k I Pk =mi)).

Because 6 and D is closely related, we put them into a unit. Thus four kinds of units can be achieved, which  are < SMBi , DMBi >, < 2iMi , Dmi >, < a d i ,  Dmb, > and < Smai , Dmi >. We denote them as a i, fi i, ;Y i and i, which  are available in the sliding window Tgap. We can transform the original sequence S into four ratio sequences composedof a i ,  Pi ,  ~ i a n d  X i .

Definition 2.3 Let T,,=N, define  mi     8=< B1, 8 ,  ,...,Si ,... Bb...>. wherdi= < S M A i ,  DMAi >.

Quantitative attributes varying  with time  P=< YI, ~ 2 ,  .,., r j ,  ..., rk....,, whereri= < S m b i ,  Dmb, >.

Changins Quantitative Data Boolean Ratio Association Discrete ? Association  Rules Rules  A = < J l ,  A 2 ,  .., J j  ,..., Ab. . .> ,  wherdi=<8m,,i,Dm,i>.

Sequences a , j, ?d and J, are achieved by computing a data set of a quantitative attribute. If more than one attribute need to be processed, we set attributes as base attributes or attached attributes. To base attributes, we process them respectively as usual. To attached attributes, they compare with the values occurring with the maximum or minimum of a base attribute in the same record. That is to say, a base attribute determines a comparing point and time distance.

Definition 2.3 The question of association rules of quantitative movement pattern is to discover associations among sequences 0 ,  B ,  r or A, which are acquired from some quantitative sequences. This type of association rules is abbreviated as AR-QMP.

According to these descriptions, we give a definition to AR-QMP.

3 MiningAR-QMP In order to mine AR-QMP, first we need calculate the maximum or minimum changing ratio on quantitative attributes in a user-specified time window. Secondly we should handle ?Quantitative Association Rules? on ratio sequences. Considering these ratios are numeric and continuous, they need to be divided into several classes, and each class is mapped to a boolean domain. Ultimately the question is viewed as a ?Boolean Association Rules?. We decompose the AR-QMP question into three sub-questions as shown in figure 1.

I 1 I I I I  Figure 1 AR-QMP decomposition  We solve the problem of discovering AR-QMP in five steps: Step 1. Data sorting.The database is sorted, with sequencsid as the major key and time as the minor key. The  sequence-id may be transaction-id, or other identifier-id, such as stock-id in stock market data set, customer-id in sales data set.

Step2. Time processing. Some elements of a sequence occur at interval time, but they are continuous. For instance, the stock market in China doesn?t open in Saturday and Sunday. The time difference between data on Friday and data on next Monday is 3, but we consider the time distance is 1 not 3. Thus under some condition, we can?t use true time difference to denote the time distance. So we propose two strategies to pre-process time.

Map time into a series of integer started from zero. The smallest time in the series database is mapped into zero, other time is mapped into difference between it and the smallest time.

Use record index in the database to replace occurring time, starting from zero.

In the other steps, we can get time distance by using the difference between two-mapped time, while not considering they are true time or record index.

Step 3. Data changing ratio calculating.According to user-specified parameters, i.e., sliding window Jap base attributes, attached attributes, changing type (a ,, B i, 'd i or 1 i ), we achieve the maximum or minimum changing ratios over base attributes and attached attributes in the scope of a sliding window. And time distance is recorded also. This step converts the original time series database into a database of quantitative movement ratios.

For instance to achieve the a sequence, supposing the sliding window is Tgap, attribute I is a base attribute, the naive idea is:  1) Scan the first Tgap, find the maximum MBI on I. Then the ratio is got by using the formula of tiMB, .

2) Move backward an element, repeat step 1) in the new window scope till reaching the end of database.

Obviously its efficiency is very slow. A fast method is given as follows, which records each potential maximum  element during scanning elements in the sliding window. We use a queue to store potential maximum elements.

The queue has some features listed as follows.

Each potential maximum is a wave-top, which value is larger than its previous and next elements, When moving the window backward, the verge points are processed as potential maximum elements whether they are or not.

The elements in the queue are descended-order from the point of value view, and ascended-order from the point of time view.

The improving method is described as follows.

1 )  Scan the first Tap, and insert potential maximum elements nto the queue by a descending order. When  inserting a new element into the queue, its back elements will be removed from the queue. That is to say, each new inserted element will be set to the tail of the queue, for its back elements cannot be maximum values.

For example, the current queue is <15,12.4,8.3,5>, the element which will be inserted is 9. After inserting, the queue is <15,12.4,9>.

2) Compute the changing ratio between the tail of Tgap and the head of the queue. Moreover, calculate the time distance between the two elements.

3) Move the window backward an element, and insert the new tail element of Tgap into the queue.

4) Judge the head element of the queue whether is still in Tgap. If it has left the sliding window scope, we need  compare its next element in the database with the second head in the queue. Supposing its next element in the database is A, the second head in the queue is B. If A is larger than B, then A will replace the head's old value.

Else B will be the new head in the queue.

For example, the current queue is <15,12.4,8.3,5>. After moving the sliding window, 15 is not in the new window scope. In the database, if the next element value after 15 is 13.8, the queue is <13.8,12.4,8.3,5>. But if the next element value after 15 is 12, the queue is <12.4,8.3,5>.

5) Repeat step 1) to 4) till reaching at the end of database.

Step 4. Data discreting. To continuous attributes, we cannot apply mining algorithms to discover association rules directly. We need to divide the range of the-quantitative values into intervals and then map each <attribute, interval> pair to a boolean attribute.

For example, attribute X is divided into three intervals, [XI, X2), [X,, X3) and [X3, &] a. If X,? [X,, X3), then attribute X-1 is set to 0, attribute X-2 is set to 1, and attribute X-3 is set to 0.

Some articles have discussed this task 13], We can select some classical clustering methods, such as Kmeans, BIRCH [517 [61, which can help us to divide continuous values satisfactorily.

Step 5. Mining rules with extended Apriori algorithrn.The elements in sequences a , B , '6 or h have time distance. After transforming them into a boolean database, we can consider a boolean item as <boolean-attritube, time distance> pair. The extended Apriori algorithm can be applied on the transformed database.

These modifications list as follows.

When we join Lk.1 with Lk-, to generate candidate set C, the joint conditions are that the first k-2 items are same and the time distances of two pair are equal also.

In counting each candidate of C, on the transformed database, we increase the count of a candidate if and only if all items and time distance of this candidate appearing in a record.

According to our requirements in discovering association rules, the user -specified minimum support and confidence must be smaller than mining classical association rules. But in reality, these rules with time restraint have a wide application.

Parameter Description Number of Record Number of Stock Size of Data set  Data Set 1 Data Set 2 107374 214963  141 277 12.7 M 25.4 M  In section 3 we propose AR-QMP, which is discovered over changing-ratios sequences and represent relations among quantitative movement patterns. In the step of getting changing ratios, we can see:  Each changing-ratio closely relates with time. On different time points in the database, a quantitative attribute has a relevant changing value.

The disperse changing-ratios of an attribute get together, which can reflect its movement trend at a whole.

Further work discovering prediction AR-QMP  Based on this, we present a shifting joint method to find predictive association rules. After calculating sequences U , 6 ,  'd or X of several attributes, we connect them with shifting while not according to the original record indexes. Next applying extended Apriori on the new database to get predictive rules.

We use stock market data to verify our proposal. Set the Tgap is 60, calculate 'd of exchanging rate and 1 of close price, set both attributes to be base attributes. Then we connect the first data of Y to the seventh data of A , shown in the figure 2.

Applying the extended Apriori algorithm, we get such rules as follows: Change-B-Min:<[ 1 5 %,2 5 %), 3> 3 Close-A-Min: <[ 1 0%, 1 5 %), 5,7> This rule can be interpreted as: if the three-days improving ratio of exchanging rate is between 15% and 25%,  (sup : 5 5 % , Conf: 8 0 %)  seven days later the five-days improving ratio of close price is between 10% and 15%.

Step Calculation changing ratio  Data cluster Transformation to boolean  database Generation rules   Runnin time s Calculation chan in ratio  Data cluster  Running time (s) 159 Transformation to boolean  database 979 Generation rules 1958    Such rules are predictive, and now we are checking up their exactness and practicability in the histow data from the stock.

No. Close A Min No.

...

... ... I I  Figure 2. Shifting Connection  6 Conclusion and remarks In this paper, we present more useful rules, association rules for Quantitative Movement Pattern. These rules can present relatives among quantitative movement trends of attributes. Mining association rules for QMP is a computationally intensive problem, which requires much more search efforts compared to the traditional association rule mining. In order to find such rules easily, we propose a mGdel to transform series database into ratio database. On this model, we can apply our time-constraint method. We are modifying the computing model to mine prediction rules. This work will be verified in the near future.

