Mining Cases in the Optimization of GSM Network  Wding, La in

Abstract: Optimization is becoming increasingly When the engineers do the optimization, they important to both operators and venders of GSM begin with data from OMC (Operation and network. When the engineers do the optimization, they Maintenance Center), and analyze them with their begin with data from OMC (Operation and knowledge and experience till they have found the Maintenance Center), and analyze them with their reasons causing the low guideline. Data in OMC knowledge and experience till they have found the record the status of the network. But the amount of the reasons causing the low guideline. But the amount of data is very vast, and there exist some information the data is very vast, and there exist some information even the experienced engineers do not know yet. So even the experienced engineers do not know yet So how to make the best of the data and obtain more how to make the best of the data and obtain more information of the network became an interesting information of the network became an interesting investigation.

investigation. In this thesis, we dejined the purpose of KDD in the optimization as cases. The algorithms to jind the cases are described in detail. And the future  1.2 KDD Overview work is also given.

Key Words: GSM KDD, CBR  I .Introduction  KDD (Knowledge Discovery from Database) is the process of identifying valid, novel, potentially useful, and ultimately understandable structure in data.

It is a powerful new technology with great potential to help people get more important knowledge fiom their data repository. Data mining tools scour databases for hidden patterns, finding predictive information that * Optimization Of GSM network experts may miss because it lies outside their  From the description, we know that KDD is the very technique to find potential knowledge in the data  In recent years, mobile telecommunication has expectations pi.

grown with surprising speed, and the network has become la%er and larger. In the first Period, People mostly focus on the network planning, and f r o m o ~ c .

optimization was not an important thing. But now, how to efficiently use the current network becomes the care of operators and vendors. Operators hope to dig the potential of current network and try their best to decrease investment. Vendors (Such as Ericsson, Nokia, Motorola) must provide better post support for competition accordingly [I]. GSM is the widely used system in the whole world. Optimization of GSM network is the main point of this thesis.

0-7803-70 10-4/0 l/$10.000200 1 IEEE.

In fact, KDD has been used in the telecommunication network before, for example, to see [3]. In this domain, KDD has been mostly used to find the relationship among alarm sequence, and the association rules was the most concerned model. But to find the knowledge for optimization of GSM network, what kind of knowledge should be considered? It is not the association rule, but the case.

http://silenta263.net   1.3 Case in the optimization of  GSM network  When the engineers do the optimization to GSM network, they often use experience from past work.

CBR (case based reasoning) technology can be used to model their way of thinking. CBR is based on a memory-centered cognitive model [4]. The basic idea is that past experiences can be remembered and adapted to guide solving problem. In CBR, rather than creating a solution from scratch, cases similar to the current problem are retrieved from memory. The best match is selected and adapted to fit the current case based on the differences and similarities between the two cases.

In CBR system, knowledge is represented with cases, so the target of KDD for the optimization should be the cases. In the optimization, case means that when something is wrong, which guidelines are abnormal, and what degree these guidelines result in the error? And it should be noted that every optimization task is for some cells. For example, when the Call Drop Rate is high, there are simultaneously three abnormal guidelines: 1. The quality of Up-Link is bad. 2.The interference in the Up-Link is high.

3.The quality of Down-Link is good. The simplest case is to just list all the problems and reasons as follow:  Cuse I: .

. . .  .

problem: .. Call Dro  reason3: Qual-Down  .In the simple representation, all the reasons react on the problem in the same degree, but it is not true.

So we use several levels to denote the degrees, the less the number of level, the stronger the relation of this reason.

~   On the other hand, most guideline is continuous data, and it can?t be decided to ??wong? or ?correct? simply. It is normal or abnormal and the degree must be judged through fuzzy logic [6] .  Its abnormal degree obtained through fuzzy logic is named by ?degree?.

So the value and its subjection must be recorded in the case.

Only the degree is not adequate. Look at that the Qual-Up is abnormal when the value is too ?low?, though the Interf-Down is abnormal when the value is too ?high?. So the flag must be introduced into each reason.

The final case is as follow:  2. Denotations  For the convenience of description, a set of denotation is defined.

In the domain of optimization for GSM network, the problems concerned is finite, for example, Call Drop Rate High, TCH (Traffic Channel) Congestion Rate ?. High, and so on. Formally, let  P = (p, , p z  . . . p , }  be the problems. For each problem, there is a function to judge it. Let  F = (fi, f,... f,} be the functions in which  f ,  (1 S i I n )  is the judge function of p i ,  where n  is the number of problems.

The result of functions will be ?correct? or  ?wrong?, and represented by R =-@, yj, in which    C means correct, and W means wrong.

For each cell, there may be different number of  problems. Let S = isij 1 be the status matrix coming from P . When problem q(1 l i  5 n )  exists in  cell, , then S,  = 1, else S, = 0.

When try to solve problems, there are many  reasons to be considered. Let R = {rl, r, .-er,} be  the reasons, where m is the number of reasons. For each cell, all the reasons should be judged. Let  G = {g, , g ,  g,, } be the functions and  task to fmd problems of each cell can be described as follows:  Input : p, F  Output: s The algorithm1 is to go through P of each cell  once, and record the problems.

A Ig orithml :  i =I While ( i I cellnumber)  j = 1  While ( j  I n ) g j ( l I i - < m )  is the judge function of ri . Let  CS = (CSij be the reasons of cells. When reason,  is correct in celli, CS, = 1 else CS, = 0.

represented by  The purpose of KDD is case, which can be  cAsE={rk,rk+l , . . . r , } ~ ( P , , P , + 1 , . . . P , } ,  where  t is the number of problem in this case, and s is the number of reason causing the problems. k and 1 are both integer.

3.AlgoriQhm for Mining Cases  Because the number of problems is finite and will not be large, we focus on finding the reasons. Notice that we can regard the case as some special association rule, so we design the basic algorithm referring to classic algorithm to find association rules and adapt it to find cases.

3.1 Finding problems of each cell  First of all, which cells has problems must be found. Maybe there is one problem in a cell. Also maybe there is more than one problem in a cell. The  i f (  f j ( p j  o f  cell j)= C )  else  s.. =o Y j ++  i t t  3.2 Finding reasons  Only the reasons of the cell with problems should be found. The task to find problems of each cell can be described as follows:  Input : P, F ,  S  Output: cs  A lg  orithm2 :  i =l while ( i  I number of cell)  if ( there are at least one problem in celli )  j =I  While( j I m)     if ( g j ( p j  of cell,)= C )  cs, =1  cs, = o else  j ++ i ++  3.3 Clustering to decrease the  reason list  It often happens that once some reason exists, several other reasons also exist, because not all relations of the reasons have been known yet. So using clustering to find these relations can decrease the reason list and make the result clearer and more useful.

Traditional clustering method is to define a distance function, and for each item, find which items are clearest to it [5]. The key idea can be seen as ?from little to more?. It will go through database for several times equal to the number of final subsets.

Considering that in most situations going through database will take much time, this method is time expensive.

To decrease the spent time, a new algorithm is proposed. Generally, the reasons and the problems of one cell are recorded in one row, that is to say, one row corresponds all records of one cell. Following description will use cell and row by the same meaning.

The algorithm?s key idea is to suppose all the items in the first cell belong to the same subset, and use the later rows to validate it. It can go through the database only once.

In algorighm3, the idea of ?suppose and prove? is used. The result of this algorithm is a non-crossing  subsets list named ? s -List ?, in which each subset include one or more reasons, and each reason only  belongs to one subset. The subset in S-List was  expressed by ?? Subset ? plus its serial number.

?? tmpSubSet ?? and ?? NewSubSet ? both represent  temporary subset which maybe dropped or added into  S - List. First of all, suppose that all the reason1 in  the row 1 exists altogether and put them into Subset,  Then go to following row and prove all the former subsets. When some reasons of one subset are in the new row and others are not in, divide this subset into two subsets.

A Ig ovithm3 :  i =I j =I  While( j I m )  { D O ( p u t  Rj  into Subset,)  DO (put Subset, into S- List )  j++ While ( i  I number of cells with problems ) { i++;  j =l;  While ( j I number of problems incell, )  { DO (put pi into NewSubSet )  j ++; k-1;  Khile ( k  I Subsets number in S - List )  { j = 1 ;  While ( j lproblem number in  NewSubSet )  { if(  SubSet, existsin cell, )  DO ( Remove the problem from NewSubSet )     else DO ( Remove the problem  from Subset, )  DO (Add the problem into  tmpSubSet  if ( number of problems in Subset, = 0 )   DO(Remove Subset, )  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 0  if ( number of problems in tmpSubSet > 0 )  in the first of each row represent that the reasons of the corresponding cell has been considered:  1. (rl , rz r3 ) /*Initialization*/  r3exist simultaneously in the second row  but rl does not exist*/  3. No change happens because the cell, has  no problem  4. (5  )Y (rz 3 r3 ), (?4 Y ?5 ) DO ( Add tmpSubSet into S - List )  if ( number of problems in NewSubSet > 0 )  DO (Add NewSubSet into S -List )   3.4 An example  For an instance, look at follow table:  2 1  I 1  I 1  l o  I o  I 1  l o  l o  obtained.

Through algorithm2,  cs = {{?I 3 ?ziY3}, (?7. 9 ?3),  { >Y {rl 3 ?4 Y ?5 1, (?2 9 ?3 9 ?4 >I is obtained.

Now see the process of algorighm3, the number  3.5 Extract cases  After above algorithms, S, CS, S - List  have already been known. Now the cases can be extracted from them through algorithm4.

A lg orithm4 :  i =1 While( i <number of c e l l s  )  if ( the very problems of cell, is not already in all CASE ) DO (Add problems in to  j =1  while ( j  <number of reasons in  NewCase )  cell, )  if ( a l l  the reasons in  the subset which reason (j) belongs t o  a re  not i n NewCase )     DO (Add reason, i n t o  NewCase ) j ++  i ++  4. Conclusion and future  network  How to mine cases in the optimization of GSM network is showed in this paper. The four algorithms concerned are listed.

The finished experiment indicated that these methods are able to help people find the cases exist among vast data from OMC and use these cases in the optimization.

Currently work is ongoing to develop a Knowledge-Mining module in the 10s (Intelligent Optimization System for GSM network) that is being developed. 10s is mainly based on concept of expert system. But its knowledge comes from real expert until now. When the mining module is integrated, 10s will be more useful and easer to upgrade.

There are still some problems remained: 1.Currently the F is defined in advance. But in  practice it will cause more overload to user and imprecise. It is needed to decide it by some way.

2.Now the cases are all ?positive?, whereas the ?negative? cases will also be in demand.

3.Current algorithm has not considered the ?dimensionality?. But there do exist dimensionality.

For instance, when the handover success rate is considered, there will be many values, since there are many adjacent cells of one cell.

These problems are being researched and will be solved soon.

Reference  [2] P.S.Bradley, Usama M.Fayyad, 0.L.Mangasarian: ?Mathematical Programming for Data Mining: Formulations and Challenges?, January 1998,  [3] K.Hatonen,M.Klemettinen: H.Mannila, P.Ronkainen, H.Toivonen: Knowledge Discovery from Telecommunication Network Alarm Databases, The 12th International Conference on Data Engineering(ICDE?96), New Orleans, Louisiana, Februarymarch 1996  [4] Li D.Xu: Case-Based Reasoning, IEEE potentials, the magazine for up-and-coming engineers,  [5 ]  George H. John: Enhancements to the Data Mining Process, March 1997, pp8-18  [6] Yager, R.R., and Zadeh, L. A.: ?An Introduction to Fuzzy Logic: Applications in Intelligent Systems?, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991.

