KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY FROM DISTRIBUTED CLINICAL DATA  SOURCES: THE ERA FOR INTERNET-BASED EPIDEMIOLOGY

Abstract-A methodology and the operational framework for knowledge discovery from distributed and heterogeneous clinical data sources are presented. The methodology follows a multi-phase process for the integration, homogenization and intelligent processing of the distributed and heterogeneous data. Its realization is based on the coupling of multi- disciplinary technologies ranging from, CORBA-based seamless access to distributed data, to semantic data homogenization Operations, and to advanced DTDlXML operations. These operations, coupled with advanced and effective data representation models forms a framework in which effective knowledge discovery (KDD) operations are performed. The fundamental contribution of our work is the incorporation and customization of Association Rule Mining (ARM) operations on top of appropriately generated XML documents. Based on the argument that, future databases will use XML-like structures in order to store and retrieve data then, our work presents a promising direction towards internet-based epidemiology as realized by the respective knowledge-discovery from distributed clinical data sources operations.

Keywords - Telemedicine, epidemiology, knowledge discovery, association rules, distributed databases  INTRODUCTION  Epidemiology refers to the study of the distribution and determinants of health-related states or events in specified populations, and the application of this study to control of health problems. The key-objective of epidemiological studies is to analyze clinical data collected fiom different geographical locations. The ultimate goal is health prevention, and health prevention is highly dependent on information transfer. The convergence of computing and communications will allow for greater efficiency and accuracy in conducting epidemiological and public health research projects. In this context, some of the key-features that determine the hture of epidemiological methodologies include: data collection j o m  distributed and heterogeneous information, immediate access to summary data, and increased communication between researchers and between researchers and participants.

With the current explosion of data, the problem of how to combine distributed and heterogeneous (D&H) information sources becomes more and more critical.

Besides collecting enormous amount of data it is very important to consider the general need of semantic integration and knowledge discovery from these sources.

The main differences here, and consequently the grand challenges with respect to single, static and homogeneous information sources, is the raising need for integrating  multiple knowledge representations (e.g., domain ontologies and data-models).

If the distributed nature of data has a more-or-less clear definition, heterogeneity is a more complex concept. Take as an example the Integrated Electronic Health Care Record (I-EHCR) environment 161, [8], [lo]. The real issue here is not only how to access specific information systems that maintain EHCR segments but also, how to identify and index the essential information in them. A promising approach to this integration problem is to gain control of the organization's information resources at a meta-data level, while allowing autonomy of individual systems at the data instance level. However, achieving integration at the semantic level is a challenging problem mainly because the logic, knowledge, and data structures used in various systems are complex and often incompatible [ 121. A realistic solution should hide heterogeneity at the top level, while making the individual sources of information appear to end users as a large collection of objects that behave uniformly  In this paper we present our work towards knowledge- discovery form D&H clinical data sources. In particular, we tackle the problem of inducing interesting associations between data items stored in remote clinical information systems. With the appropriate customization, the discovered knowledge may reflect potential health-indicators. The test- bed environment of our approach is the HYGEIAnet: The Integrated Health Care Network of Crete [9], [13]. One of the basic healthcare services offered within the HYGEIAnet network is the access to patients' clinical information stored in autonomous (legacy) clinical information systems.

131.

METHODOLOGY  To tackle the problem of mining H&D data sources a multi-phase data integration procedure should be followed.

A rational approach should cfficiently confront and cope with: (i) efficient access to structured and distributed data sources; (ii) reliable homogenization and integration of heterogeneous data; with a dedicated domain ontology and respective ontological operations playing an important role; (iii) effective and reliable dala processing operations (e.g., traditional statistical analysis, data mining, etc); and (iv) presentation of results (e.g., visualization operations).

Fig. 1, shows our view cin the general architecture for knowledge-discovery in an environment of distributed and heterogeneous data sources. The access operations lying between the autonomous clinical information systems and  0-7803-721 1-5/01/$17.00 0 2001 IEEE 3638    the mediator are already in place and operational within the integrated health Telematic network of the Crete region. Our work expands the architecture by adding: (a) the semantic indexing operations, (b) the DTD/XML generation and parsing operations, (c) the object-oriented data representation schemas and operations, and (d) the adaptation of KDD operations, as realized by a special devised Associations Rule Mining (ARM) algorithm that operates on top of XML documents.

Data Access and Integration  The Patient Clinical Data Directory- PCDD [lo] is an implementation of the I-EHCR in the Crete region. Via PCDD the various systems forms a federation of autonomous, distributed and heterogeneous clinical information systems. What PCDD offers, is a meta-data abstraction of the distributed data sources and of the respective data items. In other words, it provides the necessary information about 'where to search for'.

The semantic mapping of the pointers (i.e., URL links kept by PCDD) to the respective patients' clinical data is realized via specially devised wrappers (or, gateways) for the various clinical information systems in the federation.

The underlying systems' communication is based on a CORBA infrastiucture, and respective IDL interfaces [5 ] .

a ii  Fig. 1. General architecture of an integrated environment for Knowledge Discovery from Distributed Data Sources  Unifbrm Data Representation Semantic Homogenization  While CORBA makes it possible for developers to independently contribute to a library of components across platforms and languages, it offers little or no help with the knowledge-level task of ensuring that particular components actually can work together. The inclusion of semantics would provide what is currently missing from IDLs: information about the meaning of a component, and information about what the component will accomplish [7].

This is a task to be accomplished by: (a) the introduction and utilization of a domain data-model, and (b) the incorporation of respective domain. ontology.

Clinical data-model. To this end we have adopted a standard IDL interface that copes with the access to clinical data sources operations namely, the COAS- Clinical Object Access Service interface [4]. The basic service offered by COAS is a hierarchical organization of clinical information.

Medical ontology. The success of an infomiation brokering service that access and retrieve distributed data stores depends heavily on its ability to cope with the heterogeneous nature of the stored data, making the incorporation of a domain specific ontology more than a prerequisite. Towards this goal, we have developed a service for the storage and retrieval of common and universally accepted names and codes of medical tenns- the Common Clinical Term Reference service (CCTR). The service exploits and utilizes terms and relations from the UMLS- Unified Medical Language System [14], and from the International Codingfor Diseases (ICD) standards.

Having accessed and uniformly organized the distributed clinical data, the problem is how to represent them. The XML standardized infrastructure [15] serves this need. Towards this end, we have developed and implemented a COAS-compliant DTD grammar in order to automate the generation of XML documents the content of which corresponds to the remotely accessed and retrieved clinical data.

Information processing takes place exclusivelv on top of the XML documents. For this purpose a special XML parser was devised. The parser, (i) reads (parse) the XML document, (ii) identifies composite/atomic observations and their corresponding values, and (iii) constructs tree-like structures for storing and retrieving XML documents. Each tree corresponds to a specific composite observation, starting from the root of the tree (e.g., ObsNAME: "SYSTOLICPRESSURE1l * ValueObsNAME: 112011 ,  for clinical examinations and symptoms). We argue that future databases will use XML-like structures in order to store and retrieve data. Using these structures it is easy to develop and implement appropriately customized knowledge-discovery operations on top of XML documents.

MINING DISTRIBUTED AND HETEROGENEOUS CLINICA DATA SOURCES  We may now proceed on the specifics of knowledge- discovery processes. In particular, we are interested on the discovery of interesting associations (i.e., association rules) between the recorded patients' clinical data items. Under  . -  3639    suitable assumptions these associations may be linked with indicative epidemiological and health-indicators.

Association Rule Mining  Association Rule Mining (ARM) is among the most advanced and interesting methods introduced by machine learning and data mining research [l], [2], [ll].  The definition of an ARM problem has as follows: Let I = {i,, i2, . . . , i,} be a set of literals, called items. Let D be a set of transactions, where each transaction T is a set of items such that T c I. We say that a transaction T contains X, a set of some items in I, if X c T .An association rule is an implication of the form X Y , where X c I, Y c  I, and X n Y = 0. The rule X Y holds in the transaction set D with confidence c if c% of transactions in D that contain X also contains Y .  The rule X Y has support s in the transaction set D ifs% of transactions in D contains X uY.

Given a set of transactions D, the ARM problem is to discover (identify and form) the associations that exhibit support and confidence values higher that the user specified minimum support- minsup, and minimum confidence- minconf levels, respectively. Note that the exploration for association rules does not confined by the representation of D; being a plane ascii file or, a relational database. h o u r case, we rely on the tree-like data structures that correspond to respective XML-documents.

ARM in the CIinical Domain  The clinical validity, as well as the reliability of ARM operations in a distributed clinical information systems environment demands some assumptions and conventions: - Each fransacfion corresponds to a specific patient  encounter (i.e., identifiable visits of patients in a healthcare unit of the federation). Each encounter is uniquely identified by reference to four attributes, namely, 'Patient-Id', 'Information-System', 'Visit-Id', and 'Date' Note that clinical-data are recalled anonymously and retrieved in a secure-manner (services offered by the respective PCDD security-server).

- Each item is represented by the triplet: <Atomic-Observation, Value, Interval> where, 'Atomic-Observation' represents a clinical observation (e.g., 'cholesterol?; 'Value', the value recorded for a specific atomic observation (e.g., '251: as a value for 'cholesterol?; and 'Interval', the interval in which 'Value' belongs (e.g., [120-2001 = 'Normal'). In the medical domain most of the items are numeric. In order to discover associations between items we have to transform these numeric values into nominal ones (i.e., intervals), at least for the association rule discovery procedures that cope only with nominal attributes. These intervals may come from expert medical advice and/ or form established and universally accepted clinical protocols and guidelines.

Discovery of Interesting Associlitions  The ARM techniques that we have implemented rely on the principles of the Apriori algorithm [I], [2]. Taking advantage of the employed dynamic tree-like data structures we have added some extra featwes to these algorithms. With these revisions our ARM algorithm, called ApriorXML, is enhanced with object-oriented search operations able to work on top of XML-structured data and respective representation formalisms.

One of the fundamental operations of Apriori-like algorithms is the generation of large itemsets. This is achieved by making multiple scans on the input data. The AprioriXML algorithm follows a similar but more economic operation. After each scan, it prunes the parts of the tree- branches that are not needed in the next scans. So, the database is successively reduced with a consequent reduction into the needed computational space and time (see table I).

RESULTS  A full scenario for the activation of the presented ARM- KDD operations includes the following steps: (i) the user, via the patient clinical data directory service, posts a specific query. For example helshe may be interested for all patients' encounters (present in the federation) with pre-specified values for clinical findings; for laboratory results; and for recorded diagnoses values, (ii) the respective autonomous clinical information systems are accessed and the details of patients' encounters that match the pre-specified values are retrieved and recalled, (iii) the DTD/XML generation operations are activated and the respective query-specific XML document is generated. (iv) the generated XML is parsed and semantically homogenized, and the respective tree-like structures are generated, (v) the KDD/ARM operations (as realized by the: AprioriXML algorithm) are activated in order to discover and form interesting associations.

The Data: Patients Visits and Transactions  In order to make transparent and easy to inspect the involved operations we rely on a small database of ten- (1 0) patients' visits (from a total of about 200), recorded in two remote healthcare centers of Crete. The posted query was (in natural language): "access and retrieve all hematological examinations for all recordedpatient visits".

The numeric-valued observations were passed through a discretisation routine, and all values are grouped into three intervals reflecting the 'IOW' , the 'normal', and the 'high' status of the specific lab-exams' measurements.

Table I shows a subset of thle selected transactions. In the same table, the resulted database, after the pruning operation is activated, is shown (a reduction of 55% in size is achieved after the Td scan).

