Mining Fuzzy Similar Association Rules from Quantitative Data

Abstract  Data mining of association rules'fiom items in transaction databases has been studied extensively in recent years. In order to discover more practical rules, domain knowledge such as taxonomies of items [9] and similarity among items [ I ] ]  have been considered to produce generalized association rules and similar association rules respectively. Howevec these algorithms deal with only transactions with binary values whereas transactions with quantitative values are more commonly seen in real-world applications. This paper thus proposes a new data-mining algorithm for extracting fizzy knowledge j?om transactions stored as quantitative values. The proposed algorithm integrates fizzy set concepts and the apriori mining algorithm to find f i q  similar association rules in given transaction data sets where similarity relations are assumed among database items. The rules discovered here thus promote coarser granularity of association rules and exhibit quantitative regularity under similarity relations.

1. Introduction  Data mining, also known as knowledge discovery in databases, means a process of nontrivial extraction of implicit, previously unknown and potential useful information from databases [SI. It has been recognized as a new area for database research and received considerable interests in recent years. The kinds of knowledge discovered in databases come in many forms, including association rules, classification rules, clustering rules, sequential patterns, and prediction, among others. It is most commonly seen in applications to induce association rules from transaction data.

The problem of mining association rules was introduced in [ll]. Let I={i,, i2, ..., i,J be a set of literals, called items. Given a set of transactions D, where each transaction Tis a set of items such that TcI ,  0-7803-7461-4/02/$17.00 0 2002 IEEE 190  Tzung-Pei Hong Department of Electrical Engineering  National University of Kaohsiung Kaohsiung, Taiwan, R. 0. C.

E-mail: tphong@nuk.edu. tw  an association rule is an expression X a Y  where Xc I, Y c I ,  and XnY=#. An example of such a rule is that 90% of customers buy hamburgers also buy Coke. The 90% here is called the confidence of the rule, which means that 90% of transaction that contains X also contains Y. The support of the rule is the percentage of transactions that contain both X and Y. The problem of mining association rules is to find all rules that satisfy a user-specified minimum support and minimum confidence.

However, direct application of association rule algorithm on transaction data might produce oversized amount of unwanted rules, not to mention the excessive amount of computation effort wasted. Hence, characteristics of transaction data, domain knowledge and the objective of application should be considered in the mining process. For example, domain knowledge such as taxonomies of items [9] and similarity among items [ I l l  has been considered to produce generalized association rules and similar association rules respectively.

Recently, the fizzy set theory [14] has been used more and more tkequently in intelligent systems because of its simplicity and similarity to human reasoning [7].

Several fuzzy learning algorithms for inducing rules from given sets of data have been designed and used to good effect with specific domains [2][4][6]. Strategies based on decision trees were proposed in [3][12].

Hong et al. also proposed a fuzzy mining algorithm for managing quantitative data [5 ] .  However, domain knowledge of items was not considered in their approach. In fact, items in real-world applications may possess some kinds of similarities. Mining fuzzy similar association rules may thus lead to the discovery of more general and important knowledge from data.

In this paper, we focus on designing a sophisticated data-mining algorithm capable of dealing with mining fuzzy similar association rules from quantitative data.

The proposed algorithm integrates fuzzy set concepts and the apriori mining algorithm to find fuzzy similar  mailto:tphong@nuk.edu   association rules by modifying the apriori mining algorithm.

I J K L M N  The rest of our paper is organized on follows. The concept of similar association rules is reviewed in section 2.

The proposed fuzzy similar association rules and its mining algorithm are described in section 3. A simple example is given in section 4. Conclusion and proposal of fhture work are given in section 5 .

I J K L M N  1 0.4 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.8 0.4 1 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.4 0.7 0.4 1 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.4 1 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.4 0.4 1 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 1  2. Review of similar association rules  A B C D E F  A. Similarity relation  1 0.4 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.4 0.4 1 0.4 0.4 ' 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 1 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.4 1 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.4 1 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.6 1  The concept of a similarity relation is essentially a generalization of the concept of an equivalence relation [13]. It is usefhl for describing how similar two elements from the same domain are, as the name implies. For a given domain Z, a similarity relation S is a mapping of every pair of elements in the domain onto the unit interval [0, 11. More specifically:  Definition 1: A similarity relation, S, in domain Z is a binary relation in Z, such that for any a, b, c E Z, (1) S (a, a) = 1, (2) S (a, b) = S (b, a), (3) S (a, c) 2 max [min (S (a, b), S ( b , c ) ) ]  for all b E Z.

Examde 1: Assuming that a similarity relation S on the domain A is shown in Figure 1. The domain of A consists of six elements: A, B, C, D, E, F. The grade of membership ps (A, D) is 0.8, meaning that the similarity between the domain elements A and D is the degree of 0.8.

/A B C D E F  B. Similar association rules  3. The fuzzy similar association rule algorithm  This section describes the proposed data mining algorithm based on the apriori algorithm [l] to discover fuzzy similar association rules fiom quantitative data. A fuzzy similar association rule is an implication of the form (X=F,)( Y=F2)+Z=F3), where X,  L Z E Z and X ,  I: Z are subsets of different equivalence classes, induced by a similarity level value a. And FI, F2, F3 are fuzzy sets representing linguistic terms. The rule     (X=Fl)(Y=Fz)+Z=F3) holds in the transaction set D with confidence C if C% of transaction in D that supports (X=FJ(Y=Fz) also supports (Z=F3). -The rule (X=F1)(Y=Fz)+Z=F3) has support S if S% of transaction in D SUPPOIQ (X4'1) U(Y=Fz) U(Z=Fj).

The problem of mining fuzzy similar association rules can be stated as follows. Given a set of transactions D and a set of similarity relations on the transaction items, the problem of mining fuzzy similar association rules is to find all fuzzy similar association rules that have support, confidence and similarity greater than user-specified minimum support (called min-sup), minimum confidence (called min-conj), and minimum similarity (called min-a).

Notation: I ={il, i2...iJ: a set of literals representing items D =(TI, Tz, ... TJ: a set of quantitative transactions I;. : the j-th transaction, I ~j s n SA : a similarity relation defined on a set of items  n:: : partition of SA with respect to a similarity level a A AI: : equivalence class in n;; that contains item  h,: : the number of fuzzy regions for equivalence class  A = {ip, ... id  i k  ?A={ip .. i d  4: : the I-th fuzzy region of AI:  va. : the quantitative value of AI: in l j F i  : the f iuzy set converted from v ; ~  Ilk  f J t  ,, : the membership value of Ti in region count;,, : the summation of f;,,, j=1 to n max -count,: : the maximum count value among  countl:,, , 1=1 to hl: max -RI: : the tiuzy region of AI: with  max - countl: C, : the set of candidate EC (equivalence class) sets with r  L, : the set of large EC sets with r equivalence classes equivalence classes  The proposed mining algorithm first determines the partitions and equivalence classes for each similarity relation according to the user-specified minimum similarity level value min-a. It then uses membership functions to transform each quantitative value into a fuzzy set in linguistic terms. The algorithm then calculates the scalar  cardinalities of all linguistic terms in the transaction data.

In turns, the algorithm calculates the largest k-EC sets that have supports greater than min-sup. It then generates fuzzy similar association rules from the largest k-EC sets that have confidence greater than min-con$ Detailvof the proposed mining algorithm are described below.

The fuzzy similar association rule a l g o r i h INPUT: A set of transactions, D={Tl, T ,  ..., TJ, a set of  similarity relations, SA, S, ... on item sets A, B, ... etc, a set of membership functions, min-a, min-sup, min-con-  OUTPUT: A set of fuzzy similar association rules.

STEP 1 : For each given similarity relation SA, calculate the  partitionn:: and its equivalence classes A,?, i k d ,  where UA is the least a value in SA greater than or equal to min-a.

STEP 2: For each transaction l j ,  group the items belonging to the same equivalence class into a set. The amount for each set, v;& , is the s u m  of item amounts in the set.

STEP3: Transform the quantitative value v;& of each transaction I;. into a fuzzy set F];, represented  given membership functions.

STEP 4: Count the scalar cardinality of each fuzzy region  n  in each transaction. count:, = f;, j=1  STEP 5: Find the maximum cardinality  rnax -countl: = MAX(countl:,) . Let rnax -count; be the region with max -count; for item A#: , which will be used to represent the fuzzy characteristic of equivalence class AI: in later mining processes.

I=1  STEP 6: Check whether the value max -count: of a  region max - RI: is larger than or equal to the predefined min-sup. If the count of a region max- RI: is equal to or greater than min-sup, put it in the large 1-EC LI.

STEP 7: Set ~ 1 ,  where r is the number of equivalence class sets kept in the current equivalence class sets.

It first joins L, and L, assuming that r-I EC's in the two  STEP 8: Generate the candidate set Cr+I fiom L,.

EC sets are the same and the other one is Merent.

It then keeps in Cr+, the EC sets, which have all their sub-EC sets of r sets existing in L,.

STEP 9: To each newly formed candidate r+l itemset s with items (s,, sz, ... s,+J (a) Calculate the fuzzy value of s in each  transaction T/  as f j ,  = f / s ,  A f j S 2  A ... A f j s ,  3 where f j s l  is the membership value of T/  in region s,. If the minimum operator is used for the  intersection, then f j s  = Min fjSl .

r  j=l  (b) Count the scalar cardinality of s in the transaction as follow:  three units of A, four units of B, and seven units of K. In addition, we assume that there are two similarity relations defined on two sets of items. One set of items contains A, B, ... F and its similarity relation is given in Figure 1. The other set of items contains I, J, ... N and its similarity relation is given in Figure 2. Also the fuzzy membership functions are assumed to be the same for all the items and are shown in Figure 3. In this example, amounts are transformed into three fuzzy regions: Low, Middle and High. Thus, each item amount generates three fuzzy membership values according to the predefined membership functions. The min-sup is set as 2, the min-conf is set as 0.7, and the min-a is set as 0.8.

TABLE 1. A simple quantitative transaction database  count, = Cfjs i=l  (c) If count, is larger than or equal to the predefined min-sup, puts in L;+,  STEP 10: IfL;+, is null, then do the next step; otherwise, set ?=e1 and go to STEP8  STEP 1 1 : Establish the fuzzy similar association rules for all large q-itemset s containing items (SI, SZ, ..., sq) q 2 2, as follows.

(a) Construct all possible fuzzy similar  s ,A ... As,_,As,+,A ... As, + s, , w=l to q.

association rules:  (b) Calculate the confidence values of all fuzzy similar association rules using the formula:  2 f j s j=l  j=l  STEP 12: Output the rules with confidence values larger than or equal to the predefined min-con,  After STEP 12, the rules discovered can act as the meta-knowledge for the given transactions.

4. An example  Itl this section, we describe an example to demonstrate the proposed fuzzy similar association rule algorithm. This is a simple example to show how the proposed algorithm can be used to discover fuzzy similar association rules fiom the quantitative transaction database shown in the Table 1. The data set includes 5 transactions.

Each transaction in table1 has a transaction ID and a set of items with quantities, represented as (item name, item amount). For example, the first transaction contains  Exarm.de 3: Given the quantitative transaction database in Tablel, the similarity relations in figure1 and figure2, the fuzzy membership functions in figure3, and the min-a =0.8, min-sup=2, min-conf = 0.7, the proposed fuzzy similar association rule algorithm finds the following two rules:  (1) (CuF=Low) a (K=Middle), with confidence 0.91 (2 )  (K=Middle) a (CuF=Low), with confidence0.91.

They can be interpreted as:  (1) IF a customer purchases low quantity of product C or F, then he will purchase a middle quantity of product K, with a confidence factor of 0.91.

(2) IF a customer purchases middle quantity of product K, then he will purchase a low quantity of product C or F, with a confidence factor of 0.91.

These two rules can be regarded as meta-knowledge about the given transaction database.

5. Conslusion  In this work, we will introduce a new type of association rule, called fuzzy similar association rule, and present a fuzzy data mining algorithm to discover this type of rules fiom transaction databases with quantitative values.

The proposed rule is a kind of fuzzy rule in the sense that : (1) similarity relations are permitted on transaction items, and (2) quantitative values are represented as linguistic terms (fuzzy sets). Specifjmg similarities among items allows more flexible representation of association rules.

http://Exarm.de   Fuzzy set representation of quantitative values provides coarser granularity of association rule, therefore forming fewer numbers of rules. The rules thus miningout exhibit quantitative regularity under similarity relations and can be used to provide suggestions under appropriate supervisions.

Although the proposed method works well in data mining for quantitative values, it is just a beginning.

More work needs to be done on this topic. Our method assumes the similarity relations and membership functions are known in advance. In [6][10], we proposed some learning methods to automatically derive similarity relations and membership functions. We will therefore attempt to dynamically adjust these relations and functions in the proposed fuzzy data-mining algorithm to avoid the bottle neck of knowledge acquisition.

Membership value  Item amount  Figure 3. The membership functions used in this example  6. Reference  R. Agrawal, T. Imielinksi and A. Swami, ?Mining association rules between sets of items in large database?, Proc. of the ACM SIGMOD Conference on Management of Data, 1993,207-216.

L. M.de Campos and S. Moral, ?Learning rules for a fuzzy inference model?, Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol.

P. Clark and T. Niblett, ?The CN2 induction algorithm?, Machine Learning, vol. 3, 1989,  A.Gonzalez, ?A learning methodology in uncertain and imprecise environments?, Intemational Journal of intelligent Systems, vol. 10, 1995,57-371.

T. P. Hong, C.S Kuo, and S.C Chi, ?Mining association rules from quantitative data?, Intelligent Data Analysis, vol. 3, 1999,363-376.

T. P. Hong and J. B. Chen, ?Processing individual fuzzy attributes for fuzzy rule induction?, Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol. 112, No.l,2000, 127-140.

A. Kandel, Fuzzy Expert Systmes, CRC Press, Boca  G Piategsky-Shapiro, ?Discovery, analysis and presentation of strong rules?, Knowledge Discovery in Databases. W I T  mess, 1991,229-248.

59,1993,247-257.

261-283.

Raton, 1992,8-19.

Association Rules?, Proc. of the VLDB conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 1995.

S.L. Wang,. J.S Tsai,. T.P Hong, ?Discovering Functional Dependencies from Similarity-based Fuzzy Relational Databases?, International Journal of Intelligent Data Analysis, Vol. 5 ,  No.2, 2001,  S.L. Wang,. C.Y Kuo, T.P Hong,. ?Mining Similar Association Rules from Transaction Databases?, proceedings of the 5? Intemational Conference on Knowledge-based Intelligent Information Engineering Systems, September 2001, Osaka, Japan, 486-489.

C. H. Wang, J. F. Liu, T. P. Hong and S. S. Tseng, ?A fuzzy inductive learning strategy for modular rules?, Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol. 103, No. 1, 1999,  L.A. Zadeh, ?Similarity relations and fuzzy orderings?, Inform Sci., vol. 3, no.1, 1971, 177-200.

L.A. Zadeh, ?Fuzzy sets?, Information and Control, vol. 8, no.3, 1965,338-353.

131-149.

91-105.

