THE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF PERSONALIZED  LEARNING NAVIGATION SYSTEM

Abstract: The paper iutrodum an adaptive mefhanism to the  Distance.Learniug System (DLS). ,The persodzed learning navigation system (PLNS) provides different learning resource acwrding to the different characters of the online sludier. The basis of the system is to analyze and mine the current user?s personalized data to get his knowledge Framework.. Acwrding to the whole knowledge space making the wmplementary action to the user knowledge framework and providing the dewrved learning resources to the user is the resllzation strategy of the system,  , Keywork Adaptive web sile; Personalized knowledge framework; Neuron network web log  1 Introduction  In recent years, network education has been promoted.

As the important supporting platform of network education, distance-learning system has been extremely expanded and the resource in it is extremely rich. Take the network education college of the Shanghai Jiao Tong University as an example, the resource of teacher?s real-time schoolteaching that the college records everyday reaches 1.8GB and there are also teacher?s ppt document and web courses.

Too many resources provided to students is not necessary  a good thing. Most of the students that receive the network education are in active service. The busy work and less study time are their common characters. They don?t have time and energy to search their needed resource among the resource sea.

In order to solve the contradiction between too many resources and too little time and to improve the students? learning efficiency, the paper proposes to estahlish the Personalized Learning Navigation System (PLNS). Based on the data mining technology PLNS analyzes each student?s knowledge framework and then according to this provides the student?s most necessary resources. PLNS acts as an electronic assistant to help student effectively study.

This paper is separated into six parts. The first part is the summarization. The second part mainly introduces the data source and the pretreatment of the data. The third part investigates the data mining technology implemented in the web log data that is an important data source. The fourth part is focused on the neuron network technology to get the  students? personalized knowledge frameworks. The fifth part provides student personalized learning resources according to his knowledge framework. The sixth part concludes the paper.

2 Summarization  The research and development of adaptive website has experienced a long time. The concept of adaptation is mainly for providing the website visitors needed resource such that they will be attracted to continually visit the site.

Different websites and researchers adopt different approaches to implement adaptation. Separated from the student, there are two adaptive approaches:  0 Content-based approach (Lang 1995) This approach focuses on the user?s visiting records in  the website and through that gets the user?s preferences and according to this provides the related resources. This approach is totally based on the content of resource  Collaborative filtering approach (Shardanand & Maes 1995)  0 This approach finds out that the other users who have the similar tendency with the current user and provides the current user with resources that the other users have visited.

This approach has grouped all the users in macro.

PLNS is essentially an adaptive website. It integrates these two methods to realize the adaptive character. This paper comprehensively analyzes the data from the distance learning system and the students? web logs to achieve the student?s personalized information. According t,o the information to restructure the student?s personalized learning environment is the purpose of the paper.

The system navigates student through a certain course.

There are all knowledge points of a certain come  and the association rules among them are kept in the database. The association rules among knowledge points are pxmise, subsequence and brother relations. In the resource library there are resource list related with the knowledge point. The library is stored with X M L  document style. The XML documents are appropriately separated according ?to the relation among the resources and the total number of the resources that can improve the processing ability. Using data mining technology to analyze the data in the database to get the personalized understanding level to the each knowledge points and according to the level and the  0-7803-7508-4/02/$17.00 GI2002 IEEE  mailto:ht-qu@sina.com    Homework user score information User information  Userid I hwkid score  personalized resources learning PLNS will present the personalized resources that should be further learned.

come from teachers? experiences and also can from the data mining result from the web logs. The personalized understanding level to each knowledge point is determined by many data. This should be comprehensively judged by special algorithm. These two points are the emphases of the paper.

3 Dataresources  The association rules among the knowledge points can.

The data resources that the system uses can be viewed as two parts, one comes from the function subsystem of the distance learning system such as the homework system, question &answer system and etc. These data records embody the personalized understanding level of certain knowledge points to some extent. For example, in the homework system the data table and the fields are as follows:  having visited pl and p (p2/pl) presents the probability of visiting p l  after having visited p2 the relative probability of p l  and p2 is the minimum of p @l/p2) and p (p2/pl). If the  4 The data mining method of web log  Web log data records a large mount of data. These data present important information including the .user?s aame, the visiting time and the web pages. This information is very important to the research of the adaptive web site at home and abroad.

The web log file is constituted of records with the following style:  Request time user IP server IP request  Homework information  resource &1-11-29 00:00:05 810.78.134.46 - 202.120.8.18$ EO  Each record detailedlv uresents the user?s reauest time.

GET 1-i- 200 HTMI-GET-APP  Knowledge point Homework information difficulty level  that is to say, the records [n the web log are seqiential and it suggests a sequence of the request resources. View a continuous request sequence of a certain user as a group and analyze the groups we can achieve relations among the records such as father relation and son relation. In the material [?I, assuming pl , p2 are two pages of a web site  Hwkid keywordid Difficulty  The other data part comes from the web log. Distance learning system is a large scale of website as the puppolting platform of distance education. The server web log records all the detail request information. Web administrator can customize the recorded information. According to the demand of the PLNS, we customize the following information:  ip ] User request time I User Request url information RegisterIP I RequestTme I ResourceURL  In the distance learning system, we record the user?s register time; register IP, user name and exit time. Register time and register IP are associative fields of web log data and the system data. So we can get what a certain user has requested when he has registered our distance learning system. We can get a user?s request sequence and through which we can get the rough learning time to a certain web page or certain learning resource. This part of data resource is very rich and together with the corresponding relative between resources in the resource library and knowledge points we can analyze the user?s grasping level.

Given that web log data includes many records which are useless to our system such as the picture and program request information, we should pretreat the web log first.

matching. It is effective in constructing a suffix tree in liner time and liner space and the reconstructing of it also in liner time and we can compress the large suffix tree. The frequent sequence searched by suffix tree doesn?t change the formal sequence of the web log. So according to the corresponding relation between the records of frequent sequence and the resources and the Corresponding relation between resources and the knowledge points we can get the associative rules among knowledge points.

A B  C D E D C F $ A A B C D E $ (sequence 1 ) The sequence is separated by ?$ ,  and subsequence  presents a certain user?s request sequence in a continuous period. Each character presents a request record in the web log.

The following is the suffix tree that presents sequence 1:      n  b B C D E D C F $ A A B C  D E  4 0 1 2 3 4 5 ? 6  7 8 9 1011 12 13 14 15  Picture 1.  ?  In the picture 1 the subsequence presented by X Y  in every line is started by X, and Y is the length of it. For example 5:3 presents the subsequence of DCF. The frequent rate of subsequence is determined by the number of it?s directly children. In the system we use the formula freq(subsequence)=num(subsequeuce)/to~(sequence) to calculate the frequent rate. Total() presents the total num of the request records of this process. The total!number of the above sequence is 14. The subsequence is frequent if freq(subsiquence)>=s,. and then we regard the frequent subsequence suggests the relationship among the resources.

The suffix tree algorithm is as the following: Input: the web log sequence separated by ?$ , Output: a suffix tree T, Algorithm:  T=an empty suffix tree; For I from 1 ton do  if memp U si )>M then  deficient, we compress the tree;  T=update(T,$);  .T=Compress(T); //if the memory is  endif //use s, to update the tree;  endfor output the tiee.

5 Implement multilayer neural network to mine the user?s knowledge frame  Neural network is constituted by a large number of neural cells and each of them. has ? a  certain weight.

According to the meaning or function of eacb neural cell we adjust the cell amount and its? weight to make the neural network infinitely approach the simulated function or system. The poor explanation ability has limited the application of neural network in the data-mining field. But the neural network has a high ability to receive polluted data and a high ability to group untrained data. Given all these merits, the system adopt neural network to analysis the users? knowledge frame.

BP neural network is also called error backward propagation network. The main feature of this land of neural network is through the comparison between sample data and output result to adjust the whole netwoIk and make it approach the sample. In the system, we union the neural network and the fuzzy logic to determine the users? grasping level of a certain knowledge points.

In the system, the input data to the neural network is the learning level to a certain resource related to a ~xrtain knowledge point and the output data presents the grasping level to a certain knowledge pint.  The process of the whole neural network is the numerically process of a certain knowledge point?s grasping level of a certain user.

R 4 n  maten  Picture 2.

In the system the data is rich in the distance learning system, for example in the homework subsystem each homework is related with the knowledge points and the difficulty level. This makes the difficulty level #of the homework I question j and test k come from the database directly. This not only adds the reliability of the system but also simplified the complication of the neural network and the system. In a strictly sense, in the picture 2 the BP network is only in the frame. That is to say the BP network in our system doesn?t include hidden layer, and the training process is also simple.

6 Personalized navigation system  We can get users? personalized knowledge frameworks by the above data analysis method. Thmugh comparing the whole course knowledge framework with the user?s personalized framework and user?s learning experience to recommend the deserving learning resource, we realize the personalized navigating function. The material [I1 dl:taiIed      introduces the index page synthesis algorithm-PageGather algorithm.

In our system, the recommendation of resources is cored by the knowledge p in ts  and at the same time and place great emphasis on the unlearning resources of certain users.

To a .certain knowledge point we limit the number of recommended resourced at 30(the maximum number). We onion the associative filter and the resource match as the method to reduce the resources above the total number of 30.

In the method, first we search for the 50 resources which have the most visit volume that other users have leamed and the current user has not learned yet and then we find the maximum 30 ones inside the 50 resources which include the most number of the knowledge points and then take these 30 resources as the recommended resources to the user. The picture 3 is the module structure diagram of the system.

7 Cnnclusion  The paper introduces the personalized learning navigation system based on data mining in the distance learning system in detail. The essence of PLNS is 'an adaptive web site and it functions as an intelligent electric assistant. The system is designed and implemented on the basis of the users.!data and it adopts the mutual and suitable algorithm which ' g u h t e e s  the effectiveness and reliability of the system. Data is the base of the system, but due to the own problem of distance learning system quantity and quality of the data that bas been collected and used should be improved. For example, in the navigation system the collected time span that students spending on a ceitain resource,is rough. The improvement of the quantity and quality of data is also an improvement to the system.

Another improvement of the system is the adoption of the prefetcb technology which will decrease the response time of the system and increase the efficiency of the.system.

