MINING ASSOCIATION RULE ORIENTED DATA CUBE AND ITS  APPLICATION

Abstract: The data warehouses oriented data mining is one of the hot  studies in data mining field, which can improve the mining efficiency, and simplify the mining process. At present some effective platforms for mining have been proposed, yet those are versatility and do not aim at the characteristic of particular mining task, and thns restrict the mining efficiency.

To the question of mining association rules, we presents a model of mining association rule oriented data cube through analyzing the character of mining association rule and OLAP in this paper. The model has been proved correctly and feasibly by analyzing the application example.

Keywords: Association rule; OLAP; Data cubes  1 Introduction  One of the emphasis in data mining field is the integration of OLAP with data mining resently, which is to process data mining based on OLAPR ?- 3* ?I. OLAP is a on-line analytical processing tool provided by data warehouses for the interactive analysis of multidimensional data of varied granularities[?], and it processes all kinds of analysis operations based on the data stored in data warehouses according to the users? question and hypothesis and returns the analytical result back to users in intuitionistic and comprehensible form. Its definition can be generalized as Fast Analysis of Shared Multidimensional Information, for short FASMIL3]. Data mining is the process to extract useful and implicit information or knowledge, which can be expressed as a concept, a rule, a pattern etc, from a large amount of original data and returned the result using visual tools. Its prominent character is the automatization of analysis process and the discovery of implicit knowledge.

Two models: OLAM (on-line analytical mining) and influence fieldf6? and several platforms for the integration of OLAP with data mining have been proposed. There are two main platforms in them: DBMiner17? which is developed by Data Mining Research Group led by Jiawei Han based on OLAP and MSMiner?? which is developed by Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DBMiner integrates data mining technologies such as  association rules, classification, prediction, and clustering with OLAP for mining amounts of data and outputs the result visually. MSMiner describes data sources, algorithms and steps of mining and the meta data of users with object- oriented technology, integrates these mining technologies; the decision tree, association rules, cluster analysis, neural network, and can add mining algorithms dynamically, then it has preferable expansibility and generalization. There are some other similar platforms such as SAS Company?s SAS Enterprise Miner, IBM?s Intelligent Miner, and Solution?s Clementine[?o1.

Owing to using various mining technologies, the above models conceal the chitacter of respective mining technology and thus affect the mining efficiency. DBMiner proposes the interactive mining methodc5?, which makes too much users? interference then restricts the mining process, and provides the data cubes by users, which cannot better embody the particular need of particular mining task and result in the lower efficiency. This motivates us to present a special mining method having less artificial factors based on OLAP.

We presents the model of mining association rule oriented data cube to the question of mining association rule based on the integration of OLAP with data mining in this paper, and it has proved correctly and feasibly by analyzing the application example.

2 Question analysis  The function of OLAP and data mining is different: OLAP is a data summarization tool and helpful to simplifying the data analysis[?, while the almost analysis is interactive, having too much interference of users, then the users? subjective restriction is taken into analysis and affects the final conclusion; Data mining can automatically find out the implicit knowledge in a large amount of data[?].

Then it is a process of no teaching, which cari result in the problem of blind searching and lower usefulness of result in the condition of huge data amounts. Besides, data mining covers both data description and data modeling, and not only can analyze the existing data in a data warehouse, but also can analyze the data at more detailed granularities than the summarized data provided in a data warehouse, and transactional, spatial, textual, and multimedia data that are  0-7803-7508-4/02/$17.00 02002 IEEE   mailto:sina.com    difficult to model with current multidimensional database technology[21. The above shows that OLAP may discover the superficiality, but data mining can find out the deepness.

Data mining and OLAP both can be used in the decision support system, and they are both analysis tools and have some relationship between them: OLAP is a tool provided by data warehouses, whose construction is a process of data integration, data cleaning, and data collection?], and the operations provided by OLAP, such as roll-up, drill-down, slice and dice etc, can choose the interesting data for users to deal with; The data preprocessing of data mining also needs to do data integration, data cleaning, and data collection, and needs to choose special data to process data mining owing to users? different interests.

The ab,ove shows that data mining can acquire the knowledge deeply and can be good used for decision support, but it has complicate data preprocessing; while OLAP can afford ready data and some functions, such as roH-up, drill-down etc., but it only can gain the superficial knowledge. Then if integrating them together, we should process data mining more efficiently for decision support.

3 Constructing model of mining association rule oriented data cube  3.1 Datacube  The multidimensional data model of OLAP views in the form of a data cube. The data cube, which allows data to be modeled and viewed in multiple dimensions, is defined by dimensions and facts: dimension is the angle with respect to which an organization wants to keep records, for example, we want to create a ?sales? data warehouse to keep records of a supermarket sales with respect to the transaction item, transaction time and so on, then according to the definition, we should create the dimensions such as item, time and so on in the data warehouse. Each dimension may have a table associated with it, called a dimension table, which further describes the attribute of dimension. A multidimensional data model is typically organized around a central theme, which is represented by a fact table. Facts are numerical measures. Think them as the quantities by which we want to analyze relationships between dimensions; examples of facts for a sales data warehouse include sales amount in money, number of units sold. The fact table contains the names of the facts or measures, as well as the keys to each of the related dimension tables[?].

3.2 Constructing data cube model  3.2.1 Constructing abstract model for mining association rule  The integration of OLAP with mining association rule is based on OLAP and data warehouse, its character is to use the multidimensional data model, which is existed as data  cube in OLAP[21, To process data mining based on OLAP, we should think about how to use data cube for mining.

Since data mining is to discover the implicit and useful knowledge, we can get the requirements of data mining: (1) the database storing amounts of data, which is the data source of mining; (2) the environment and form of storing data, which is the result of data cleaning, should be useful for data mining; (3) the data mining technology matching with the environment of data, which is the essential of data mining, is the most important part. The construction of mining association rule oriented data cube is to satisfy the former two conditions integrating the character of mining association rule, that is, to arrange and store the transaction data in a suitable form and environment which is data cube in this paper.

How to arrange and store is suitable? The first, mining association rule is to deal with the data in transaction database, which reflects the itemsets contained in every transaction for mining association rule, that is, the data should be set as measure and then the table stored the corresponding data can be indicated as the fact table. The second is to confirm the dimensions environment for the existing of the fact table. Considering the process of mining association rule, the environment should contain the keys of item and transaction at least. Only integrating them together we can accurately reflect the items of each transaction and the transaction related to each item, from which we need to construct the dimensions of item and transaction. The item dimension should embody the items contained in transaction and the relationships among their levels, then according to it, to construct corresponding dimension table; The transaction dimension is used for distinguishing the different transaction mainly, then only the corresponding key is given in the dimension table. The above is the basic configuration of dimensions. When need to mining association rule from other angles, such as the customer, we may add relatively dimension and expand the model easily.

The basic abstract model is constructed as follows figure 1.

Since the fact table being constituted by the keys of all dimension tables and measures, the fact table and dimensions have some relationship, then we should modify fact table after confirmation of the dimensions: the first is to add or modify the keys of all dimensions into the fact table to construct the relationship between the fact table and dimensions; The second is to ascertain the measures to express the information with respect to, in the model, which should be the corresponding relationship between transaction dimension and item dimension at least. For example, if having ?b? item in ?a? transaction, the value of its corresponding measure can be expressed by logicals ?l?, in contrast, if not ?b? in ?a?, the values of measure is ?0?.

Except for the logicals, the value of measure can also be expressed by the measure? of number of units sold, examples, if having n ?b? items in ?a? transaction, the value of measure can be expressed by ?n?, that is not ?O?, then the measure being used for expressing the mining association rule can be set as the number of units sold.

To summarize from the above, we point out the conditions of mining association rule oriented data cube, and construct the abstract model of mining association rule oriented data cube. In order to complete the model, we should confirm dimension tables.

3.2.2 Constructing dimension tables of model  The most popular data model for data warehouse contains dimension table and fact table.. Dimension table reflects the content contained in each dimension, especially the concept hierarchy contained in some dimensions. How to express the hierarchy? It is reflected through the dimension table.

dimension Item dimension  Fig. 1. The abstract model of mining association rule oriented data cube  According to the demand of structure, data model for data warehouse may exist in form of a star schema, a snow schema, or a fact constellation schema. Star schema is the most common model, whose character is that it includes a fact table having a large amount of data and' some redundancy and a group of dimension tables in which each dimension is represented by only one table and each table contains a set of attributes with the dimension tables displayed in a radial pattern around the fact table; The snowflake schema is a variant of the star schema model, the major difference between the snowflake model and star schema model is that the dimension tables of the snowflake model may be kept in normalized form to reduce redundancies. Such a table is easy to maintain and saves storage space. However, this saving of space is negligible in comparison to the typical magnitude of the fact table.

Furthermore, the snowflake structure can reduce the effectiveness of browsing since more joins will be needed to execute a query. Consequently, the system performance may be adversely impacted; Fact constellation schema may require multiple fact tables to share dimension tables.

Owing to being one fact table in this study, we choose a star schema or a snow schema. Moreover one of the key for mining association rule is efficiency, which is the main principle we choice between the two models. A snow schema needs more joins to execute a query and to process the operation of drill down or roll up among different levels during mining association rule, which may impact the system performance. Choosing the data redundancy for the efficiency, we use the star schema for the model. Then the model is as follows:  Transaction key Lowest item key  Unit price Number of unit  Profit  I Fact table  ...( Other dimension)  7 Transaction key Transaction dimension  (Tag all levels from 0 to n> Lowest item key Lowest item name 1-st concept hierarchy  1-st concept hierarchy name 2-nd concept hierarchy key 2-nd concept hierarchy name  N-th concept hierarchy key N-th concept hierarchy name unit  key  ...

Item dimension  Fig.2. The model of mining association rule oriented data cube  3.2.3 Mining numerical association rule  The above model is aiming at the boolean association rule which shows the relationships among discrete objects, but how can we do for the numerical association rule which views the association that involves numerical attributes?

The algorithm of mining association rule can not deal with this numerical data directly and should be discretized dynamically [*I. There are several different methods to process discretized: the one method is to part the ranges of quantitative attributes into intervals which are dynamic in that they may later be further combined during the mining process; The second one is to part the ranges of quantitative attributes into intervals with same or different width; Another one is the dynamic mining distance-based association ruleL2] and so on. How to dispose the data after discreteness? There are two methods can be thought about:  The first: put the data into the corresponding dimension and setup the values of sets as the next concept hierarchy. If there was not the corresponding dimension, we add it and setup the values of sets being the values of dimension, then the number of dimensions may be more. For example, we think about the influence of the customers' age to the trend of purchase, first part the ranges of age into intervals, and put them in customer dimension owing to being the attributes of customer; At the same theory, the annual salary should be put in the customer dimension too.

The second: Put the data into item dimension. We need to part the same attribute data into different sets in the different mining task, then it is not easy to match the different sets with the static value of dimension. And the more dimensions are, the lower efficiency is. Then we think       about decreasing the number of dimensions. We can put a numerical attribute into one dimension-item dimension as an item and set its partition as the next concept hierarchy.

Such as the examples in the first, the age, the annual salary should be put in the item dimension.

We choose the second method considering the efficiency.

3 3  Model analysis  The above describes the construction of data cube?s model for mining association rule, what characteristics has the model?

The first: maneuverability. In the model, we can mine association rule only by using two dimensions, whose tables can be acquired easily: The transaction dimension table only needs to contain the transaction key, by which can construct the relationship between the transaction dimension and the fact table. The item dimension table includes all the items involved in the transaction and the .hierarchy relationships among them. And the tables is existed generally and acquired easily by regulating simply according to need.

The second expansibility. It has two meanings: The first is the easy expansion of model. We only need to add a dimension or even add the relative attribute as an item into the item dimension when adding respect to some angle. By this way, we can realize the expansion of model simply and improve the efficiency of mining. The second is the expansion of data. We can use the different incremental updating process for data afforded directly by OLAP to realize the data expansion.

The third: Enhancing the efficiency. The first method is the using of aggregation: We can set a proper aggregation for measure in data cube, and the aggregation can be set as count, max, min etc. In this paper, the model of data cube is for mining association rule and the value of measure expresses whether the items respected to is in each transaction. From which, we can set the aggregation as the function of count to embody the number of item contained in each transaction and construct the index to the aggregation to decrease the number of comparisons and then advance the efficiency. For example, if we need to count the k-itemsets, then the transaction whose item number, that is aggregation, is less than k, can not be thought to increase the count of the k-itemsets, which reduces the number of comparison greatly and advances the efficiency largely. The second method to increase the efficiency is the operation of OLAP, for example, the operation roll up, drill down can be used for mining the multilevel association rule and slice, lice can be used in the updating of mining association rule.

j  4 Application instance  In this part, we analyze the application example of some supermarket to construct the model for mining association rule and decision support. The analysis is as follows:  The first is to ascertain the decisive analytical . requirements. The objective of mining association rule in  supermarket is to arrange the commodity, to analyze the market, to increase the number of sold, and to increase the profit etc.

The second is to confirm the facts. Since all the mining process depends on the sales of commodities, the data of sales in the database can be facts.

The third is to ascertain all the dimensions related with decision support. In this instance, corresponding to the item dimension in model is the commodity dimension, then we construct the commodity dimension and the transaction dimension first. Besides the two dimensions, we construct several other dimensions: the customer dimension to reflect the character of customer, such as different ranges of ages, salaries, which influence their purchase; the time dimension, the time character, such as season and festival, has great effect on the customers? purchase; and the sales promotion dimension, the area dimension etc.

The fourth is to construct the dimension table relative to all the dimensions. The commodity dimension has different concept hierarchies, which are helpful to the operation of OLAP and decision-makers to confirm the fields who respect to. In the instance, The commodities are parted into three levels: The first level is 20 sets of wares and the second level is the 228 kinds and the third is the 15169 commodities. Then we fix on the other dimension tables at the same theory. The final model is as follows figure 3:  The fifth is to modify the fact table after confirming all the dimension tables, which contains the adding of all dimension tables? key and confirms the measures that may be used and cannot be less than one. In the distance, we set the number of units sold as a measure owing to the above.

Thinking about the expansion of the model, we may add the unit price and profit etc. as measures too.

At last we confirm the aggregation according to the above.

According to the analysis, the model has been creteded by SQL Server 2000, in which, Enterprise Manager affords the database and Analysis Services constructs the data cube and OLAP tests and proves that the model is correct and feasible.

5 Conclusions  The integration of OLAF? with data mining is one of the hotspots in the field, but almost the studies think about the integration from the angle of general data mining, which conceals the character of respective mining task and affects the mining efficiency. Pointing to the condition, this paper studies the integration of OLAP with data mining from the angle of respective mining task-mining association rule?s character and presents the model of mining association rule oriented data cube. This paper not only thinks about the Boolean association rule, but also the numerical association rule, and presents the proper using aggregation of OLAP to improve the efficiency by the experience from relative     Transaction key Commodity key Customer key Date  databases oriented mining association rule. The construction process of the model has been analysed by the application example clearly and then the model has been proved correctly and feasibly.

