A Road Reduction Method using Multi-Criteria Fusion  M. E. El Najjar, Ph. FkmM

Abstract  To localize a vehicle on a map, a reliable road selection system is essential. For this purpose, this article presents a credibilist m d M t e r i a  association algorithm that performs data association between the infrastructure information (the map) and the noisy measurements of two sensors (DGPS, Odometer). The algorithm takes into account the inaccuracy, the uncertainty and the redundancy of the data. The multi-criteria fusion process is realized using Belief Theory and Dempster-Shafer?s rule. A local strategy is developed to allot believes to two criteria. Experimental results show that the credibilist roads around an estimated position are well selected.

Keyworcls : Map-Matching, Multi-Sensor Fusion, Belief Theory, Uncertainty Modeling, Vehicle Localizafion, GPS, GIs  1 Introduction  Advanced on-vehicle sensors, such as radar or video cameras, have made great advances in giving a vehicle some local representation of its situation with respect to the road and the other vehicles. However, these sensors are inherently limited by their range. For example, an obstacle detection system may fail because of a sharp bend. The use of an accurate digital map with DGPS receiver may be a solution to enable the provision of advance warning to drivers of features that are beyond current visibility. As a matter of fact, even if current commenially-available maps have a good coverage for many countries around the world, their accuracy and details will be improved in the next 510 years. Many studies have been carried out in this field as exemplified by (Rogers, 2000).

Any perceptive method, dedicated to a safety application, must provide judicious information in order to take a decision. This perception function is generally realized with a set of homogeneous or heterogeneous sensors. It provides the decision module an image of the observed environment. This representation cannot be perfect because it is built with data from inaccurate and uncertain information sources. Moreover, the representation of the environment is perhaps erroneous if the information source is degraded, or if it is subject to harmful external influences. In all these cases, the system has to consider, firstly, the inaccuracy and the uncertainty of the data and, secondly, the reliability of the sensors.

In this paper, we anticipate the potential performance of the global positioning systems by using a DGPS receiver and a precise map ?G6oroute? provided by the French National Institute of Geography (IGN). The relative precision of the IGN data-base is better than 5 meters and that of the DGPS is close to one meter (with more than 5 satellites in view and in an optimal configuration). Moreover, we use the ABS sensors to help the DGPS receiver when the satellite constellation is degraded (Bonnifait et al. 2001).

The goal of this research is to develop a robust method to localize the vehicle. We focus on the selection of the roads (also called Road Reduction Filter) by using a data fusion technique based on Belief Theory and a fuzzy information representation. To carry out this fusion process, many architectures are possible: centralized (global processing), decentralized (local processing), open-loop or closed-loop (i.e. the history of the trajectory of the vehicle is used or not). Usually, the choice of one architecture rather than another depends on precision, sensitivity to measurements degradation, computing complexity and load of communication. We propose a decentralized an open-loop architecture because it is a good response to the constraints of information conservation and reliable fusion. In Fig.1, x and y correspond to the position co-ordinates, Bis the heading of the vehicle, P,  is the co-variance matrix of the vector (xs,~)? ,  v is the speed and Si is the ilh segment of a road center-line.

Multi-sensor %Y,ef?m,V Road reduction Odometer Fusion G;al--J-Tk s LS,.. Segment Se1ectio si  Fig. 1. Architecture of the selection process.

In order to speed up the treatments (a map contains thousands of roads), we apply a first filter which selects the road segments that are located within a radius of 1OOmeters. The center of the circle is the estimate of the current position (x, y) of the car.

The paper is organized as follows. In section& an Extended Kalman Filter that fuses the DGPS and the odometer is described. Thanks to it, an estimation of the heading angle is computed with its associated variance.

The Road Reduction Method is presented in section 3.

The strategy proposed fuses two criteria using the Belief Theory. The last section is dedicated to analyze several experimental results.

2 Sensor Fusion of DGPS and Odometry  Consider a car l i e  vehicle. The mobile frame is chosen with its origin M attached to the center of the rear axle. The x-axis is aligned with the longitudinal axis of the  A time indextr, the vehicle position is represented by the ( ~ , y r )  Cartesian coordinates of M in a world h e .

The heading angle is denoted fir. If the road is perfectly planar and horizontal and if the motion is locally circular, the evolution model is expressed by:  Car.

k - k + l  +A,cos(%k +%) yk ' yk+ l  +Asin(ek (1) ek =e,+, +w 1 - x  where A is the length of the circular arc followed by M, w the elementary rotation of the mobile frame. These values are computed using the ABS measurements of the rear wheels. Let denote u=[A, Uy' andX=[x, y, e?.

Eq.  (1) can be rewritten as:  &+I = m, Uk) + aL When a DGPS position Y is available, a correction of  the odometric estimation is performed using an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF).

(3)  & and R are respectively the model noise and the measurement noise. The covariance matrix Qa of the DGPS measurement can be estimated in real time using the NMEA sentence "GST" provided by the Trimble AgGF'S132 receiver that we have used in the experiments.

Therefore, the noise is not stationary.

This architecture can be seen as a "loosely coupled fusion system". The heading ?I is not directly measured since the GPS is used as a position sensor. Nevertheless, by studying the state observability of the non linear system, one can check that the observability condition is verified when the speed of the car is non-zero.

The EKF has been tested on 4.5km long run (see Fig 2).

Fig. 2. Top view ofthe experimental run (in bold)  The behavior of the filter is characterized by the study of the x and y innovations (differences between the DGPS measurements and the predicted measurements). It can be seen on Fig.3 that the x innovation is zero mean.

Moreover, the autocorrelation corresponds to the one of a white noise. This indicates that the fdter is correctly tuned.

x innovation   200 300 400 500 600 700  Autocorrelation function I (6)  Fig. 3. x innovation of the EKF  Finally, thanks to the odometric model, the EKF estimates continuously the X vector even when the signal of the satellites is blocked by bridges, tunnels, buildings, etc.

3 Road Selection using Multi-Criteria Fusion  Map matching techniques vary from those using simple point data, integrated with optical gyro and velocity sensors (Iclm, 1996), to those using more complex mathematical techniques such as Kalman filters flanaka et al. 1990, Bktaille and Bonnifait 2000). Systems that use only geometric information utilize the "shape" of line segments (road center-lines) that define the road network (Bemstein et al. 1998, Taylor 2000).

The first step is to determine which road center-lines are candidates for the vehicle's location (see Fig 4).

Fig. 4. Candidates roads around the estimated position.

The problem ,is not simply a matter of finding the line segment nearest to the estimated position. This will often give an incorrect result. For example in figure4, the vehicle is on the highlighted road, hut this is not the nearest road line segment to the estimated position.

The method proposed fuses several criteria using the Belief Theory for the road selection process.

Belief Theory allows one to reason with uncertainty and suggests a way for combining uncertain data. This theory was introduced by Dempster (1968,1976) and mathematically formalized by Shafer in 1976 (Shafer 1976). It is the generalization of Bayes Theory in the treatment of the notion of uncertainty. It allows to take into account the uncertainty of partial knowledge.

Generally, this theory is used in a mnltisensor context to fuse heterogeneous information in order to obtain the best decision.

The basic entity is a set of all possible answers (also called hypotheses) to a specific question. This set is called the frame of discernment and is denoted 8. All the hypotheses must be exclusive and exhaustive and, each subset of the frame of discernment can be a possible answer to the question. The degree of belief of each hypothesis is represented by a real number in [O,l] called a mass function m(). It satisfies the following rules:  m(@) = 0 z m ( A ) = l  (4) Ace  A mass function is defined for all the different evidences. Each evidence A, for which m(A) # 0, is called a focal element. The mass notion is very near to the probabilistic mass notion, exception that it is not shared only on single hypotheses but it is possible to attribute a mass for an union of hypotheses: this is the main difference with Bayesian theory.

As the application is related to road safety, only geometrical criteria are used because they are not influenced by human errors. This means, for example, that a criterion such as the speed of the vehicle is in agreement with the speed limitation is not considered.

formulated as follows: The two criteria chosen in this article can he  1 - the vehicle location is close to a segment of the neighborhood;  2 -segments on which the vehicle can be located are those which have an angle close to the heading of the vehicle. This criterion depends on the estimated 3~ bound of the heading and the speed of the car.

The Belief Theory needs the affectation of elementary probabilistic masses delined on [O,l].

The mass assignment is computed on the defmition referential 2?

2e={ 0SI, ,H2 ,._. H.,Hj vH2,. . ., H ~ u H , u H w f i u  ... H. ) .

This distribution is a function of the knowledge about the source. The whole mass obtained is called ?basic mass assignment?. The sum of these masses is equal to 1. Each expert (or each source of information) defines a mass assignment according to its opinion about the situation.

The frame of discernment that we use is 0= (Yes, No, Perhaps) corresponding to the answer of the following question: is this segment the good one?

To build functions of mass assignment corresponding to 0, we propose to consider the inaccuracy of the various information sources (DGPS, Odometer and digital map)  and physical observations (for example, a car with a 40ds speed cannot be orthogonal to tbe direction of the segment). With this approach, information sources (also called criteria) are worked out from sensors.

The problem of mass assignment of each criterion can be tackled in a global or local way. The global strategy consists to consider together all the segments selected around an estimated position when affecting the masses.

The local strategy separately treats each segment with respect to the criterion considered.

3.1 Proximity criterion  The proximity criterion is based primarily on the measurement of the Euclidean distance between the estimated position and each segment taken in the road data base.

The estimated error of the position is quantified by an ellipse of 99% equi-probability produced by the EKF (drawn in dark gray in Fig. 6). The estimated position E is at the center of the ellipse.

To allot a mass to a candidate segment V B ] ,  we proceed in the following way. Let us note d the distance between the segment and point E.

Fig. 5. Case of a non credible segment.

Yes 4  dES? = BP) Fig. 6. Mass assignment of the proximity criterion  The point S? falls at the intersection between the segment [ E 8  and the ellipse. The distance dES?depends on the angle p which forms the segment ES?l in the ellipse c o d i n a t e s  system. In the zone d < dES?, with a fuzzy modeling obtained by a probability-possibility transformation pubois and F?rade (1993), Lassere (1997), Zadeh (1978, 1986)), the degree of membership is quantified. The first curve presented in Fig. 6 assigns a mass to the assumption Yes.

In complementing the mass of Yes, the mass to the assumption Perhaps is allotted. Then, the mass of Perhaps remains constant (equal one) for dES? c d < dES?+e, in order to consider the pmjection error and the errors on the co-ordinates of the segments of the data base. Finally the mass of assumption No, is a step function starting from the distanced = dES?ie.

In conclusion, the mass assignment of the proximity criterion depends on two variables: - the distance d between the center of the ellipse and the segment, - the angle fi  between the distance support and the major axis of the ellipse.

The problem becomes more complicated when considering the width of the road. We propose to model the road by a box centered on the segment, the length of which is equal to the one of the segment. The exact influence of the width of the road I is difficult to take into account in the computations of the criterion because I modifies the values of fi  and d .  To simplify, we have chosen the following strategy:  1) If the orthogonal projection of E exists inside segment [AB], d = dortho-I (Fig. 7a).

2 )  If the orthogonal projection of E does not exist inside segment [AB], d = min(dI,d2,d3) (Fig. 7b).

Fig. 7. Computation of the distance d with the road-box.

3.2 Angular criterion  In this section, a mass assignmnt function is proposed to express the fact that the most credible segments are those which have an angle close to the heading of the vehicle.

Figure 8 presents the fuzzy modeling of the absolute value of the difference between the heading of the vehicle and the heading of the candidate segment. In fact, This curve is an adaptive one according to two parameters:  1- the speed ofthe vehicle. The scalar value B fixes the anguiar limit tolerated at a given velocity Y. B(Y) = 904 kV,withk = (90-10)Nmax.

2- the standard deviation of the estimation error of the heading angle e ?  b-We,6+3ua,]. m represents the maximum belief which can be assigned to the hypothesis YES. Therefore, m varies according to CO :  6 m(ue)  = l--ue A  Fig. 8. Mass assignment of Yes for the adapted angular critaion  The Perhaps mass assignment is done by computing the complement of the mass of Yes. The mass of No starts from the limit angle tolerated for a given speed (B) and reaches one when the angle is equal to 90 degrees (Fig.6).

(a) (b) Fig. 9. Exemples of the mass assignment at a given  H velocity (a): ue = 0. @): U@ =-  3.3 Criteria Fusion  To obtain a better information from two different single sources S and S ,  a combination of their mass function can he performed according to the Demspter- Shafer tule:  If there are some conjunctions that are empty of focal elements, a step of re-normalization is necessary tn iidfil the rule m(+O. The coefficient of re-normalization is called ke and is defined as:  It represents the incoherence between the different sources. If we set Ke = k, we obtain the following normalized expression ofthe combination:  This combination rule is independent to the order in which evidences are combined when more than two evidences are involved.

AAer the combination step, several decision rules can be used to obtain the fmal result. It is then possible to adjust the wanted behavior for the decision step. If one wants to have an optimistic decision, the maximum of plausibilify has to be used and for a pessimistic decision one can use the maximum of belief:     Associated with each basic assignment m, the belief (Be/) and the plausibility (Po are defined by:  Bel(A)= z m ( B )  PI(A) = z m ( B )  (10) BCA  BnA+  The belief and plausibility are interrelated by the relationship:  PI(A) =l-BeI(z) (11) where denotes the complement ofA.

Many other decision rules exist in the Belief theory, especially for non-exhaustive kames of discernment.

More information about them can be found in (Fabiani 1996).

In the decision-making, the strategy adopted to keep segments among the candidates, is to keep the most credible segments according the law of ideal decision. The likelihood of a singleton assumption is characterized by two quantities (credibility and plausibility) which are calculated using the set of masses. These quantities respectively correspond to the minimal probability and the maximum probability of that assumption to be m e .

Consequently, a law of decision without ambiguity is where an assumption have a credibility higher than the plausibility of any other assumption (Kim 1990, a d e h 1978).

The conflict computed in the Dempster-Shafer fusion rule is large if the two criteria are in total confusion.

Therefore, we eliminate the segments which present an important conflict. Experimentally, we have taken a threshold equal to 0.5.

4 Experimental results  The algorithm works in real time conditions (with a frequency of 1Hz) under WIN NT/2000 (Pentium III 700 MHz). Fig.10 presents the DGPS receiver used (a Trimble AgGPS132).

Fig. 10. The experimental vehicle ?STRADA?.

The following figure presents a top view of an  experimental test performed in Compibgne. The map data- base are managed and interfaced by the software  Geoconcept?.

Fig. 11. Experimental situation on the ?IGN Gdoroute? data-base (The DGPS points are dotted).

10? Top view in the F m c h  Lamben c*ordh*ue systrm .. .

~  6.312 6.316 6.32  Fig. 12. Candidate segments extracted fromthe ?IGN Gtoroute? data-base by Matlab (The DGPS points are  dotted).

XIO?  To illustrate the road reduction method, we will discuss how it processes certain ambiguous situations. In the test shown on figure 11, the vehicle exits a motorway.

This situation is very ambiguous because the angles of three s e g m t s  (motorway, exit ramp, entrance ramp) are close to the car heading. Moreover, they have a common point very close to the estimated position (see Fig.13).

3100-  3150.

3200 .

3250 .

Y fm) 3300 .

3350 .

N  0 E  S  J , I , , , , , p50 2200 2150 21M 2050 2000 1950 1900 1850 18W  x (In) Fig. 13. The car eldting the motorway.

31501 / 32W  y (ml 32501   presented in this paper. The main problem is to develop judicious mass assignment functions.

Finally, future WO& will be dedicated to develop fusion techniques that use the selected segments if the situation is not ambiguous. This will improve the localization process.

/  6 References Bemstein D and Komhauser A. (1998). Map Matching for  persod navigation assistants. 77' Annua] meeting, The Transport Research Board, Jan 11-15, Washinton D.C.

BWlle D. et Bonnifait Ph., Road Maintenance Vehicles Location using DGPS, Map-Matching and Dead-Reckoning: Experimental Results of a Smoothed EKF. IAIN World Congress in association with the US ION annual meeting.

ssgmsnuare 111, , ,y , .y],  2250 2XO 2150 2100 Zm, XQI ($50 18W 1850 18M San Diezo, PP. 409-416, June 26-28 2000   3150 .

3200 .

3250 .

y ( m ~  .

3350 -  3400 .

3450 .

x I ~ I Fig. 14. The car in the exit ramp (a)  Bonnifait Pi.,  Boumn P., Crubille P., Meizel D. (2001). Data Fusion of Four ABS Sensors and GPS for an Enhanced Localidon of &-like Vehicles. IEEE ICRA 2001 23-25.

Sioul. pp. 1597-1602.

Dempster A.P. (1976). Upper and Lower Probabilities Induced by a Multivalued Mapping. Annals of Mathematical Siati~tim, w1.38.

Dempster A.P. (1968). A Generalization of Bayesian Inference.

Jouml of the Royal Siabstical Society, vo1.30, %ne B.

Dubois D. and Prade H. (1993). Fuzzy Sets and System Theory and Application. Mafhematim in science and engineering volume 144 Acndemic Presss Inc.

Fabiani P. (1996). Reprtsentation -que de I'Incertain et Smtigie de Prise d'lnformation pour un SysOme Autonome en Environnemenl Evolutif. PhD. Thesis Ecole Nationale Sqbieure de lilimnautique ei de I ' E s p e .

Kim H. and Swain P.H. (1990). A Method Of classification for Multisource Data in Remote Sensing Based on Interval- Valued Probabilities. Purdue University, West h f i p f f e ,  2250 22W 2150 2103 2050 2wo 1m 18W 1850 18W x 0"  Fig. 15. The car in the exit ramp @).

At the beginning, three segments are selected (those which are in bold in Fig.13). Two of them correspond to the motorway and one to the exit ramp. Logically, the entrance ramp (located on the opposite side of the road) is not selected, thanks to the angular criterion. Afterwards, the situation is still ambiguous (Fig. 14) until the difference between the car heading and the angles of the motorway segments becomes significant. Then, the system is able to assert that the car is on the exit ramp (FigW.

5 Conclusion  These experimental results show the aptitude of a multicriterion fusion technique using Belief Theory to treat ambiguous situations frequently met by localization systems using maps. Moreover, it can detect situations where there's no credible segment, which means that the position of the vehicle does not correspond to any road on the map.

This methodology can be considered like an excellent tool to improve the positioning reliability and it makes possible to quantify the ambiguousness of a situation.

Other criteria using, for example, the local shape of the vehicle trajectory can be easily fused with the ones  Indiana 47907, TR-EE 90- 48.

Kim J.S., Lee, J.H., Kang, T.H., Lee, W.Y. and Kim  Y.G.,(1996), Node based map matching algorithm for car navigation system. Proceedings of the 29* ISATA Symposium, Florence, Vol. IO,pp121-126.

Lasserre V., Mauris G.and Foulloy L. (1997). A simple probability-possibility transformation for measurement error representation: a truncated triangular transformation. Proc.

ofIFSAP7. Prague, Vol. 3, pp. 476-481.

Rogers S. (2000). Creating and Eval- Highly Accurate Maps with Probes Vehicles. IEEE Intelligent Transponarion Sysiems, Dearbom (MI)# USA. pp 125-130.

Shafer G. (1976) A. Mathematical Theory Of Evidence.

Princeion University Press, Princeton.

Tanaka J. Hirano K., itoh, T., Nobuta H. and Tsunoda S., (1990).

Navigation System with Map-Matching Method.

Proceedings of the SAE Inlernatiod Congnss and Exposition, pp 45-50.

Taylor, G. and G. Blewitt (2000). Road Reduction Filtering Using GPS, 3th AGILE Conference on Geographic Information Science pp 114-120. Helsinki, Finland, May 25- 27,2000.

Zadeh L.A., (1978). Probability Measures of Fuzzy Events.

Journal of Mathematical Annlysis and Applimtions 23 pp.

421-427.

Zadeh L.A., (1986). A Simple View of Dempster-Shafer Theoly of Evidence and its Implication for the Rule of Combination, The AIMagazhe.

