Knowledge Discovery in Oceanographic Databases: Issues of  Complications in Data Sources

Abstract: Data mining or knowledge discovery refers to a variety of techniques having the intent of uncovering useful patterns and associations irom large databases. We have been working with data mining techniques for a variety of oceanographic data and have encountered a number of troublesome issues relative to available data. We describe the steps preparatory to data mining and three data mining techniques that we have applied to spatio-temporal data. We include a detailed review of various sources of geospatial, oceanographic and meteorological data and associated issues inherent in their use in knowledge discovery. We also provide issues relevant to the difficulties in providing an overall integration of this heterogeneous data for knowledge discovery.

lntroduction  Data mining or knowledge discovery generally refers to a variety of techniques that have developed in the fields of databases, machine learning and pattern recognition. The intent is to uncover useful patterns and associations from large databases. There are specific characteristics of spatial and temporal data, such as found in GIS and multi-media data, that make knowledge discovery in this domain more complex than in mining ordinary data such as found in typical business sales applications. In this paper we review briefly some background of data mining and specifically spatial data mining. Then we focus an  some the issues that have arisen in OUT data mining research relative to spatial data characteristics that cause difficulties in data mining.

Data Mining Overview  The initial steps of data mining are concerned with preparation of data, including data cleaning intended to resolve errors and missing data and integration of data from multiple heterogeneous sources. Next are the steps needed to prepare for actual data mining including the selection of the specific data relevant to the task and the transformation of this data into a format required by the data mining approach. Finally specific data mining algorithms such as class description, association rules and classification clustering are applied.

The initial steps of the process are concemed with preparation of data, including data cleaning intended to resolve errors and missing data and integration of data from multiple heterogeneous sources. Next are the steps needed  to prepare for actual data mining. These include the selection of the specific data relevant to the task and the transformation of this data into a format required by the data mining approach. These steps are sometimes considered to be those in the development of a data warehouse, i.e., an organized format of data available for various data mining tools [ 11. There are a wide variety of specific knowledge discovery algorithms that have been developed [2]. These discover patterns that can then be evaluated based on some interestingness measure used to prune the huge number of available patterns.

Specific data mining algorithms can be considered as belonging to two categories , descriptive and predictive data mining. In the descriptive category are class description, association rules and classification. Class description can either provide a characterization or generalization of the data or comparisons between data classes to provide class discriminations. Association rules correspond to correlations among the data items and they are often expressed in rule form showing attribute-value conditions that commonly occur at the same time in? some set of data. An association rule of the form X + Y can be interpreted as meaning that the tuples in the database that satisfy the condition X also are ?likely? to satisfy Y, so that the ?likely? implies this is not a functional dependency in the formal database sense. Finally, a classification approach analyzes the training data (data whose class membership is known) and constructs a model for each class based on the features in the data. Commonly, the outputs generated are decision trees or sets of classification rules. These can be used both for the characterization of the classes of existing data and to allow the classification of data in the future, and so can also be considered predictive.

Predictive analysis is also a very developed area of data mining. One very common approach is clustering.

Clustering analysis identifies the collections of data objects that are similar to each other. The similarity metric is often a distance function given by experts or appropriate users. A good clustering method produces high quality clusters to yield low inter-cluster similarity and high intra-cluster similarity. Prediction techniques are used to predict possible missing data values or distributions of values of some attributes in a set of objects. First, one must find the set of attributes relevant to the attribute of interest and then predict a distribution of values based on the set of data similar to the selected objects. There are a large variety of techniques used, including regression analysis, correlation  0-7803-7 534-3/$10.0002002 IEEE 1264    analysis, genetic algorithms and neural networks to mention a few.

Finally, a particular case of predictive analysis is time- series analysis. This technique considers a large set of time-based data to discover regularities and interesting characteristics. One can search for similar sequences or subsequences, then mine sequential pattems, periodicities, trends and deviations.

There is now considerable interest in spatial data mining, but only recently have major research efforts been developed in this area. A major difference between data mining in ordinary relational databases and in spatial databases is that attributes of the neighbors of some object of interest may have an influence on the object and therefore have to be considered as well. The explicit location and extension of spatial objects define implicit relations of spatial neighborhood (such as topological, distance and direction relations), which are used by spatial data mining algorithms.

GlDB Data Mining  We are developing approaches for spatial data mining under the objective of developing ways of processing large amounts of spatia-temporal data especially of oceanographic and littoral regions and including meteorological information. Our goal is to integrate data mining techniques into the Geospatial lnformation Database (GIDB) system described below. The ultimate aim is to provide knowledge-enhanced information to decision tools that will be used by US Navy and Marine planners.

The GIDB includes an object-oriented data model, an object-oriented database management system (OODBMS) and various analysis tools. While the model provides the design of classes and hierarchies, the OODBMS provides an effective means of control and management of objects on disk such as locking, transaction control, etc. The OODBMS in use is Ozone, an open-source database management system. This has been  beneficial in several aspects. Among these, access to the source code allows customization and there are no costly commercial database licensing fees on deployment. Spatial and temporal analysis tools include query interaction, multimedia support and map symbology support. Users can query the database by area-of-interest, time-of-interest, distance and attribute.

For example, statistics and data plots can be generated to reflect wave height for a given span of time at an ocean sensor. Interfaces are implemented to afford compatibility with Archfo,  Oracle Si, Matlab, and others.

The object-oriented approach has been beneficial in dealing with complex spatial data, and it has also permitted integration of a variety of raster and vector data products in a common database. Some of the raster data include satellite and motion imagery, Compressed ARC Digitized Raster Graphics (CADRG), Controlled Image Base (CIB), jpeg and video. Vector data includes Vector Product Format (VPF) products from the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), Shape, real-time and in-situ sensor data and Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED).

The VPF data includes such NIMA products as Digital Nautical Chart (DNC), Vector Map (VMAP), Urban Vector Map (UVMAP), Digital Topographic Data Mission Specific Data Sets (DTOP MSDS), and Tactical Oceanographic Data (TOD).

The system includes a communications portal that enables users to obtain data from a variety of data providers distributed over the lntemet in addition to the GIDB. These providers include Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center (FNMOC), USGS, Digital EartmASA, and the Geography NetworWESRI. A significant FNMOC product is the Coupled OceadAtmosphere Mesoscale Prediction System (COAMPS) data. The atmospheric components of COAMPS are used operationally by the U S .  Navy for short-term numerical weather prediction for various regions around the world. Our communications gateway provides a convenient means for users to obtain COAMPS data and incorporate it with other vector and raster data in map form.

The gateway establishes a well-defined interface that brings together such heterogeneous data for a common geo- referenced presentation to the user. An illustration of the interface for a typical data request is shown in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. GIDB Interface  We have applied several data mining techniques to spatial data of interest to the Navy. These include association rules, attribute generalization and predictive modeling. The predictive modeling is a support vector regression approach using a COTS system. We built a predictive model of wave heights and frequency using data from the twenty years of data observations of sea conditions at the Field Research Facility in Duck, North Carolina USA. The objective was to provide advisory information to tactical Naval planners for amphibious operations.

The attribute-oriented induction approach produces a generalized representation by either attribute removal or attribute generalization. We applied this technique to sea bottom data from IO locations (such as areas in the Philippines, Mediterranean, Persian Gulf, etc.). Here the     intended application was to characterize various sea bottom areas for the planning of a mine deployment I hunting mission. The spatial data was queried to formulate the files from which the attribute generalization was done. The basic query was on bottom sediment classification as this was the major characteristic of interest to experts.

Finally an extension of association rule discovely applied to fuzzy spatial data is being developed [3]. Since the data we are interested in, as is typical of much spatial data [4], has uncertainty associated, we can model this using fuzzy sets [SI. As an example consider using a spatial database to provide assistance in the logistical planning for a military operation. Then we might wish to uncover some of the important relationships of the data attributes in each area to provide guidance in the mission planning. An example of a possible rule that might he discovered is of the form:  If C is a small c& and has good terrain nearby then there is a & nearby with 90% confidence.

Such a rule incorporates fuzzy information in the linguistic terms used such as ?small? and ?nearby.?  DATA  This section surveys different sources and types of geospatial, oceanographic and meteorological data and associated issues inherent in their use in knowledge discovery. Some data sources include the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), Naval Oceanographic Office (NAVO) and FRF. Our overview of these spatio- temporal data sources ?may be of use to research in data mining as some of these are sources not commonly known outside the DOD community. Such a diverse mix of data will be seen to present a number of troublesome issues for knowledge discovery.

A.  Vecror Doto ~ NIMA  The National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NlMA) is a major source of environmental data for the Department of Defense and the private sector. In the 1980?s NlMA began the process of transforming their paper mapping data to digital format with a new database specification, Vector Product Format (VPF). Generally, VPF separates data into thematic coverages, with each of these coverages containing thematically consistent data [ 6 ] .

A detailed listing of NIMAs digital data is available in [7]. Each product is designed to fill different needs.

Digital Nautical Chart (DNC) for example, is directed at marine navigation and GIS applications, and it contains significant features collected from harbor, approach, coastal and general charts. Digital Topographic Data (DTOP) is produced for specific geographic areas. DTOP consists of thematic layers from terrain analysis and topographic line maps. Themes include vegetation, transportation, surface materials, surface drainage, obstacles, surface configuration or slope, hydrography, boundaries, population, industry, physiography, utilities and data quality. Mission Specific  ~   Data Sets (MSDS) are produced by NlMA in preparation for specific military missions.

Tactical Terrain Data (TTD), consisting of DNC, DTOP and Digital Terrain Elevation Data (described below), is intended to provide data critical to planning and executing joint operations such as close air support missions, amphibious operations and land combat operations. TTD is supportive of applications that are to be used for terrain visualization, mobility planning, site and route selection, reconnaissance and communications planning, navigation and munitions guidance. TTD data density is generally consistent with similar portrayals on topographic line maps, terrain analysis products and hydrographic charts.

Interim Terrain Data (ITD) was designed to provide digital terrain analysis data for systems fielded before the production of Tactical Terrain Data. I t  consists of six thematic coverages or layers: vegetation, surface material, surface slope, surface drainage, obstacles and transportation. Features correspond to a 1 :SO,OOO scale map [7,81.

Vector Map (VMAP) is provided in Levels 0, I and 2, each increasing from small to large scale. Data coverages include boundaries, elevation, hydrography, industry, physiography, population, transportation, utilities, and vegetation. Urban Vector Map (WMAP)  provides specific vector-based geospatial data with city graphic content. The same coverages are provided as for VMAP. Detail is similar to NIMA city graphic and military city map products.

World Vector Shoreline (WVS) content includes shoreline, international boundaries, maritime boundaries and country labels. Five libraries provide data derive from 1 :250,000 to 1 :12,000,000 scale source.

Digital Feature Analysis Data (DFAD) is a source of digital feature data. DFAD feature data is assigned an identification code and is described in terms of height, composition, length and orientation. Data is stored in vector format with one record for each feature. Each record contains coded attributes and a coordinate string. DFAD is collected from photogrammetric as well as cartographic source material. DFAD Level 1 offers medium scale detail (1:250,000) and Level 2 offers higher scale (I:SO,OOO). The types of features included in DFAD include roads, railways, drainage, prominent buildings in urban areas, and prominent towers and power lines.

E.  Miscellaneous Data Repositories Data repositories and clearing houses hold spatial  environmental data in a centralized location or make the availability of data at different locations known to prospective users. One such repository is the Terrain Resource Repository (TRR). NIMA?s Terrain Modeling Project Office (TMPO) maintains the TRR. The TRR provides Internet access to various terrain data products available From the Department of Defense [9]. Users can access samples of many of NIMAs standard data products, along with software for viewing. The TRR also provides links to numerous web sites that are sources for environmental data. Among these are data sources    maintained by state agencies, the US. Geologic Survey, the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, the U S .  Census Bureau, the US.  Department of Transportation, the US. Department of Agriculture, the Bureau of Land Management, the Canadian Government, and the United Nations,  The Master Environmental Library (MEL) is another repository. The Defense Modeling Simulation Office (DMSO) maintains MEL. MEL indexes environmental data source location. Through MEL, users can locate and order environmental data online [ I O ] .

The Tactical Oceanography Wide Area Network (TOWAN) is also a potential data repository. The Naval Research Laboratory provides TOWAN as an online environmental data repository and server that allows Department of Defense personnel and their contractors to search for and retrieve environmental information.

TOWAN makes oceanographic databases available, including bathymetric, geoacoustics, ice and magnetics.

TOWAN is one of the nodes in MEL [ I  I].

The National Geospatial Data Clearinghouse (NGDC) aggregates numerous spatial data servers and provides a search interface. Search options include location, time period of content, full text and fielded search using country names or U S .  placenames. A custom search allows users to define parameters including map, temporal and server [121.

The National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration Server (NOAA) provides an on-line search by area-of-interest access to several databases. These databases include the NOAA Central Library, the Japan Science and Technology Corporation, the Foreign Data Library, the Office of Oceanographic and Atmospheric Research, the National Weather Service, and the National Snow and Ice Data Center 1131.

While centralized data repositories and clearinghouses make the existence of data known to prospective users, they do not necessarily provide a means to actually use the data once it is obtained. There are numerous data models in which spatial data are organized and many proprietary database formats. Whether the data is acquired from a resource provider such as NJMA, a repository or another producer, it entails learning another data model and data format and also means writing code to import into the user?s native format.

C. Oceanographic Dara The Naval oceanographic Office (NAVO) produces and  processes oceanograpbic data for the US Navy. Among the data produced by NAVO relevant to our study is bottom sediment data produced for mine warfare operations. This covers various locations worldwide and consists of polygons attributed with bottom sediment type (i.e., sand, coral, clay, gravel, silty sand, etc.).

Model Output  Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center (FNMOC) runs atmospheric predictive models [14].

Representative of the nature of the output is the Coupled OceadAtmosphere Mesoscale Prediction System (COAMPS) data. The atmospheric components of COAMPS are used operationally by the U.S. Navy for short-term numerical weather prediction for various regions around the world. COAMPS output includes data about expected precipitation, evaporation, winds, humidity, temperature, dew point depression, etc. Each parameter is given for various atmospheric levels, usually at 3-hour increments for a 72-hour period. This is griddcd data over specific areas of the earth, with some products providing worldwide coverage. The Air Force Weather Agency and the US Weather Service produce similar model output.

D. Observorional Dara -.Argus Sires There are twelve Argus Study Sites located at various  locations around the world that record and archive observations of sea and atmospheric conditions [ 151.

Sensors record changing waves, winds, tides and currents on approximately an hourly basis. lmagely makes possible the ascertainment of sand bar locations. The sensor data together with the imagery opens the door to analysis of factors influencing beach morphology. One such site is maintained at the army Corps of Engineers Field Research Facility (FRF) at Duck, NC. This is detailed data that can he a valued source for knowledge discovery.

DATA ISSUES  Data preparation is a crucial step to effective data mining. Data preparation in the spatial-temporal data context involves not only classic data ?cleaning? but also issues peculiar to the nature of spatial and temporal data.

The latter include resolution of coordinate systems, datum and scale for spatial data, and resolution of temporal synchronicity and granularity for temporal data. This section presents an overview of  these matters followed by issues encountered in data preparation in relation to specific data.

A. Spalio-Temporal Data issues By its very nature, spatial data exists in a coordinate  reference system that locates the data somewhere on the earth. Generally, the mathematical model of the earth used to calculate coordinates is called a datum. Spatial data preparation includes ensuring that all data are on the same datum. This is important because coordinates for a point on the earth?s surface calculated on one datum will not match the coordinates for the same point calculated on another datum. Many local datum have been developed over the years to satisfy mapping requirements for specific regions.

Examples of these are the North American Datum of 1927 (NAD27), the European Datum and the more obscure Afgooye Datum applicable to Somalia. The World Geodetic System 1984 (WGS84) has been developed to provide a unified world system for expressing geodetic data. WGS84 is the datum currently in use by the US Department of Defense, and NIMA products are based on     the WGS84. Public transformation parameters exist for conversion of coordinates from localized datum to WGS84  lust as it is important to ensure that all data is on the same horizontal datum, it is equally important to veiify that all vertical measurements are on the same vertical datum, when vertical measurements are important to the knowledge discovery task. Use of mean sea level (MSL) is common, but many others can also be found such as low water, mean lower low water, neap tide, or even as height above the ellipsoid, to name just a few. Most NlMA products express elevation in terms of MSL. Global positioning systems give height above the ellipsoid.

In  addition to datum issues, working with spatial data in knowledge discovery requires an understanding of the data?s coordinate reference system. Rules for measuring distance, for example, in one coordinate system may not hold true for another. Even more basic is the consideration that all data should be on the same coordinate system in order to simplify spatial analysis. The location of spatial data is often expressed with geodetic coordinates of latitude and longitude. These are based on an ellipsoid model of the earth. Latitude is the angle between the plane of the equator and a line perpendicular to the ellipsoid at a given point. Longitude is measured with respect to a prime meridian, positive to the east and negative to the west.

Knowledge discovery in spatial data often involves spatial nearness or distance relationships. Geodetic coordinates, however, are non-Cartesian and require a more coniplicated mathematical calculation, great circle path, to measure distance. [17]  Fig. 2 shows a screenshot from the GlDB application.

The map shows NIMA DNC with NAVO bottom sediment data for the Onslow Bay area near the coast of North Carolina. The data is shown overlaid on a CADRG, a raster map produced by NIMA. Any datum and coordinate system incompatibilities are resolved at the time the data are imported into the GIDB database.

Ll61.

Fig. 2. GlDB Screenshot Showing NEMA DNC with NAVO Bottom Sediments.

In addition to geodetic coordinates, the location of spatial data may also be expressed in projected coordinates.

Map projections are common in map making. They minimize some distortion while introducing others. Some common projections include the Mercator, the Transverse Mercator (TM), Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) and the Lambert Conformal Conic (LCC). The Mercator is often used in navigation, the TM in quadrangle maps, the UTM in large-scale military maps, and the LCC in maps with predominantly east-west expanse [ 171. Some projections may make analysis of spatial relationships easier while other may introduce spatial distortions. Those that preserve area may help with analysis of spatial extent, while those that preserve scale and direction may help with analysis of nearness. Data preparation may involve conversion of all coordinates to a single projection or conversion to geodetic,.according to the needs of the user.

Fig. 3 shows the same area as figure 2 with the additional overlay of gridded and contoured weather data from FNMOC. The wind barbs show model output wind data and the contour lines illustrate predicted temperatures..

The GlDB application allows the user to query these vector features in order to determine wind and temperature attribute values. The same holds true for any vector surface  Fig. 3. GIDB Screenshot Showing the Additional Overlay of Weather Data from FNMOC.

Much digital spatial data, especially that from NIMA, is derived from digitized paper maps. Addressing map-scale and especially map-scale differences among such data is also an important step of the data preparation phase of mining spatial data. Large-scale (such as 1 :20,000) spatial data will likely yield more feature-rich detail. Small-scale (such as 1:2,000,000) data may not. Among the questions that need to be answered are whether the data has sufficient detail to yield results. Small-scale data may also contain abstract representations of significant features or omit them entirely [IS]. A map of a winding river at one scale may be represented as a nearly straight line at another and completely omitted at yet another. Whether the corresponding digital spatial data is an accurate representation of reality or an abstraction may strongly affect the results of the knowledge discovely process.

Combining data from multiple scales can also impact spatial reasoning operations.

Temporal data present similar issues involving temporal synchronicity and granularity. Consider, for example, temporal atmospheric data consisting of measurements of winds, atmospheric pressure, rainfall, etc., each measured by different sensors that record events at various time intervals. Some measure each hour, some every six minutes, some once per day, some once every month, etc.

Depending on the needs of the user, data preparation may require some combination of interpolation and binning in order to relate all atmospheric events to precise time intervals.

B. Data Source Issues 1) NIMA data Most vector data distributed by NIMA is in Vector  Product Format (VPF). A VPF database is made up of libraries that aggregate data by scale. Libraries are organized into coverages of thematically consistent data that share a single coordinate system and scale and that are contained within a specified spatial extent. Coverages can be tiled or geographically subdivided for the purpose of improving data management. A tiling scheme defines tile boundaries, the size of tiles and the handling of the features that lie on tile boundaries and text primitives that cross boundaries. Tiling schemes are defined by product specifications rather than by VPF. Coverages are composed of features. Five categories of cartographic features are defined in VPF: Point, Line, Area, Complex and Text. The coordinate system is defined at the library level. [6j  This data organization generally follows historic mapping techniques of organizing data in disjoint thematic layers. While this method is favored for the production of maps in which layers are overlaid to produce the desired map view of the world, its usefulness for other purposes can be problematic. In particular, one study [I91 found that this practice resulted in considerable preprocessing and data integration to resolve inconsistencies between layers (such as positional errors) and to resolve missing attribute and geometric data for purposes of 3D synthetic environment construction.

For example, in some cases in the Digital Nautical Chart, feature attributes may be limited to the Digital Geographic Information Exchange Standard?s (DIGEST) general feature and attribute coding catalogue (FACC) codes. While this provides an adequate description of what a feature is on a map, it fails to give detailed values with respect to this particular feature. In some cases, attribute values are designated as ?unknown.? NIMA?s Mission Specific Data Sets (MSDS) on the other hand can be a good source of detailed data for a given area, with populated attributes. Since these are prepared in relation to specific missions, they may not exist for a geographic area of interest. Of note is the practice of some VPF products to aggregate varying scales within a database?s library resulting in a scale-range rather than uniform scale within the library. For knowledge discovery this means adapting the appropriate knowledge discovery technique to the data.

~   CONCLUSION  2)Model output This section covers issues relevant to use of gridded  model output of the nature of that produced by FNMOC as discussed above. This data covers a spatial extent but is highly dependent on the temporal element in that it consists of atmospheric forecasts at short-term periodic intervals originating from the time of the model run. Format is CRIB, a WMO (World Meteorological Organization) standard format for archiving and exchanging gridded data.

It is a binary format that offers some data compression.

Suitable software is necessary to read the file. Because of the data volume of model output, little historic output is warehoused, necessitating a user-created data store for examining long-term trends or for examining predicted conditions at some time in the past. Further, coordinates for the gridded data values are projected in the Mercator projection. Care must be taken when merging this data with other spatial data to assure a common coordinate system.

3) Observation data This section discusses issues concerning observation  data in the context of the data collected at the Argus Site at the FRF mentioned above. The discussion should be pertinent to a wide range of sensor-based observation data and serves to highlight areas in which special sensitivities are required in the data prep stage of knowledge discovely.

As discussed above, this data consists of detailed sensor readings over long periods of time. Its format is plain text and data for the Argus Site at the FRF is available on the Internet. Sensors are periodically replaced and others temporarily malfunction or are turned off for maintenance.

This effectively produces ?holes? in which observations are missing in recorded series. In addition, sensors record at widely differing intervals ranging from minutes to days or more. Of particular note is that the data provided to the public does not always differentiate between actual readings and a time-series summary. Hourly reports of wave heights, for example, may be a summary of the existing conditions over a one-hour time period. Further, the reported wave height may not have been ?observed? but derived from pressure measurements.

Spatial considerations of datum and projection are relevant here. The spatial locations of sensors and physical measurements of sand bar locations, etc. at the FRF site, for example, are reported in a local coordinate system. That local system uses cross-shore and along-shore axes to designate x,y coordinates. Conversion to latitude and longitude or some other common projection is necessary in order to relate this data to other spatial data.

We have discussed a variety of data mining or knowledge discovery techniques, all having the intent of uncovering useful patterns and associations from large databases. We have been working with data mining techniques for a variety of oceanographic data and have    encountered a number of troublesome issues relative to available data. We have described the steps preparatory to data mining and three data mining techniques that we have applied to spatia-temporal data. We included a detailed review of various sources of geospatial, oceanographic and meteorological data and associated issues inherent in their use in knowledge discovery. We also provided issues relevant to the difficulties in providing an overall integration of this heterogeneous data for knowledge discovery . Generation, TEC-0091, US. Army Corps of Engineers,  [ 161 NIMA 2000, National Imagery and Mapping Agency, Technical Report 8350.2, January 3,2000.

[I71 Snyder J Map Projections - A  Working Manual, U.S.

Geological Survey Professional Paper 1395, U.S.

G0VW"nt Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1987.

[I81 USGS, Map Scales, Fact Sheet, 015-02, US.

[I91 Trott K A n o b i s  of Digital Topographic Data h u e s  in support of Synthetic Environment Terrain Dofa Base  Topographic Engineering Center, November 1996.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  We would like to thank the Naval Research Laboratory's Base Program, Program Element No.

0602435N for sponsoring this research.

