Using Rule Induction Methods to Analyze Gene Expression Data

Abstract  We have applied rule induction to a publicly available adenocarcinoma gene expression data set. The typical approach to the analysis of gene expression data is to cluster the genes. However, interpreting the resulting clusters may be difficult. With rules, the interpretation is more obvious (e.g., (CDKN3 > 253) ? (tumor-stage = 3)). Our rule induction tool is a new semi-autonomous discovery system we are developing called HAMB, and we used it to learn rules for survival status, survival time, and tumor stage. When we searched the world-wide web for publications relating our top 53 genes from our discovered rules to lung cancer, we found that 9 of them are known to be associated with lung cancer, 19 of them are known to be associated with other types of cancer, and the remaining 25 were not known to be associated with cancer. Our results suggest that the latter two groups of genes should be examined more closely for their association with lung cancer.

1. Introduction  The usual approach to data mining gene expression data is to use a clustering technique. However, the interpretation of the resulting clusters may be difficult.

We have found rule induction to be very useful and that the interpretation of the induced rules to be much simpler than with clusters (e.g., (CDKN3 > 253) ? (tumor-stage = 3)). The induced rules may be examined individually to extract ?nuggets? of information, or used in groups to predict membership in some class or to predict the values of a ?target? attribute, such as the identification of high- risk patients, or predicting tumor stage. Some researchers may not believe rule induction to be very suitable for gene expression analysis because rule induction traditionally requires the user to completely set up the  problem for the rule induction program: creating target classes, selecting a feature set of attributes from which the rules will be generated, and selecting parameters for the induction program. Moreover, manually analyzing the hundreds of rules which are typically output by rule induction programs may be overwhelming. We use a new program, HAMB [1] which is a supervisor program to a rule induction program called RL [2]. HAMB has many features which make it desirable for analyzing gene expression data: (1) the user may specify multiple ?target? attributes for which rules sets will be induced, (2) HAMB automatically selects the feature set and parameters for each of the target attributes using search and heuristics, and (3) HAMB does some post-processing of the induced rules, such as pruning and grouping similar rules.

2. Methods  Our gene expression data was generated and first examined by Beer et al. [3]. The gene data set contains expression data for 7,129 genes for 86 lung tumor and 10 normal lung samples. The patient data contains information on tumor stage (stage 1 or stage 3), tumor size, survival time (months), survival status, tumor histological type, tumor differentiation, p53 nuclear accumulation, K-ras mutation, and patient demographics: age, sex and the number of years the patient smoked cigarettes.

We preprocessed the data by removing genes having more than 20% missing values, filtering genes with little change in expression, and genes were removed if their maximum values were 1,000 more than their minimum value and the ratios between standard deviation to average and the ratios between maximum value to minimum value were less than 10. After this filtering, 485 genes remained.

Proceedings of the Computational Systems Bioinformatics (CSB?03)     For the findings presented in this paper, we instructed HAMB to find rules for many of the attributes describing the tumors, such as tumor stage, differentiation, mucousity, and for the attributes describing the survival of the patients and survival time. HAMB automatically used RL to generate rule sets predicting the values of these attributes, automatically selecting the training sets, features sets, and parameter settings needed by HAMB.

After running RL to predict each of these attributes, HAMB analyzed the rules before presenting them to the user, performing pruning to eliminate redundant rules and grouping the rules to facilitate their understanding.

3. Results and Conclusion  To verify our findings, we searched the World Wide Web to identify which of our HAMB?s findings might be novel. The web sites we searched were: www.google.com,  cc.ucsf.edu/people/waldman/GENES/c_genes.html, caroll.vjf.cnrs.fr/cancergene/RETRI1.html, www.ebi.ac.uk/proteome/HUMAN/chromosomes/disease _set/16.html, and http://spore.swmed.edu/Luc+- +Lung+Cancer+genes.xls, http://www.cancerindex.org/geneweb/X1501.htm.

Table 1 presents our strongest novel rules. When we searched the world-wide web for publications relating our  top 53 genes to lung cancer, we found that 9 of them are known to be associated with lung cancer, 19 of them are known to be associated with other types of cancer, and the remaining 25 were not known to be associated with cancer. These results suggest that those genes that we have identified as novel might also have an association with lung cancer and should be examined more closely by biologists.

4. References  [1] Livingston, G., Rosenberg, J. and Buchanan, B., ?An Agenda- and Justification-Based Framework for Discovery Systems?, Journal of Knowledge and Information Systems 5(2), to appear.

[2] Provost, F. J. and Buchanan, B. G., ?Inductive Policy: The Pragmatics of Bias Selection?, Machine Learning 20(1): 35?61.

[3] Beer, D., Kardia, S., Huang, C., Giordano, T., Levin, A., Misek, D., Lin, L., Chen, G., Gharib, T., Thomas, D., Lizyness, M., Kuick, R., Hayasaka, S., Taylor, J., Iannettoni, M., Orringer, M., and Hanash, S., ?Gene- Expression Profiles Predict Survival of Patients with Lung Adenocarcinoma?, Nature 8(8): 816 ? 824.

Table 1. HAMB?s most significant rules for predicting tumor stage or survival time in months containing genes that we could not verify as being associated with lung cancer. TP (true positives) is the number of cases correctly predicted, FP (false positives) is the number of cases incorrectly predicted, SENS is a rule?s sensitivity (TP/all positives), PPV is a rule?s positive predictive value (TP/(TP + FP)), P-VAL is the p-value of a rule?s PPV?that is, the chance that a random rule would have a PPV that is equal to or better than the existing rule, and WWW?Cancer indicates whether we were able to locate an article relating the gene to cancer. Note that none of these genes were found to be associated with lung cancer by a World Wide Web search.

