

Entropy based Intrusion Detection Kenichi Yoshida  Graduate School of Business Science, University of Tsukuba, Otsuka 3-29-1, Bunkyo, Tokyo 112-0012, Japan  yoshida@gssm,otsuka.tsukuba.ac.jp  Abslmcl-An intrusion detection system b an 'hpor tan t component in protecting computer security. Most of the current c o m m a d y  available intrusion detection systems use signature- based rules to detect attacks. A serious defect with this approach is that it only detects attacks that have been sten previously. It cannot deteet newly encountered attacks. As a means to overcome tbis defect, various resear& bas been undertaken using data mining to automatieally detect newly encountered attacks. Our researeh foUows this approach. However, we propose the use of an entropy based data mining method without using the APlUOlU based data mining method wbich b commonly used in the previous -rcb on intrusion detection. Because the results of AF'RIORI a r e  noisy, post-pmnssing of its results are necessary.

However, the use of eutropy alleviates tbis defect.



I. INTRODUCTION  An intrusion detection system is an impottant component to protect computer security. Most of the current commercially available intrusion detection systems use signature-based rules to detect attacks. A serious defect with this approach is that it only detects attacks that have been seen previously. It cannot detect newly encountered attacks. As a means to overcome this defect, various research has been undertaken which use data mining to automatically detect newly encountered attacks (See [1]-[3] forexamples). Our research follows this approach.

However, we propose the use of an entropy based data mining method [4], (51 without using the AF'RIORI based data mining method (61 which has been commonly used in previous research on intrusion detection.

A typical approach to intrusion detection with AF'RIORI is to: 1) First build a profile of normal intrusion free behavior of computer systems and networks, 2) Then the anomalous deviations from this normal behavior are considered as poten- tial intrusions. APRIORI is used in the first step to extract the profile. Here the profile is represented as a typical sequence of events in the system. The basic algorithm of APFZORI, which mines association rules from given data, was introduced by Agrawal et al. in (61. It finds all association rules that have sup- port greater than the user-specified minimum support (called MinSup). Thus AF'RIORI in intrusion detection systems finds typical event sequences as the system profile.

Note that the result of AF'RIORI involves association rules with contradictions. In other words, the result of AF'RIORI is noisy and the post-processing of the results is necessary in order to use those results in the intrusion detection systems.

For example, Barbara et al. [2] use the classification rule learning system in their system.

Motivated by the problem of efficiently transmitting in- formation over a noisy communication channel, Shannon introduced a probabilistic way of thinking about communi- cation and simultaneously created the mathematical theory of entropy. Since entropy has many excellent characteristics to guide the search for rules, a lot of classification rule learning systems uses this index to guide their search (See (71 for examples). The entropy based data mining method uses this concept to guide the search for association rules and can mine association rules with much support and less contradictions.

Thus, it doesn't have a defect, which is common to intrusion detection systems associated with the APRIORI based data mining method.

In this paper, we propose the use of the entropy based data mining method to realize intrusion detection systems. A brief survey of intrusion detection systems and data mining methods are also presented to clarify the advantage of our approach over AF'RIORI based intrusion detection systems.

11. DATA MINING IN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS  To detect newly encountered attacks, various research has been undertaken which use data mining as the key component.

Figure 1 shows the basic framework. Systems that follow this framework use a data mining engine to pre-analyze the behavior of the target system. In the learning phase, they build a profile of normal intrusion free behavior of computer systems and networks. Then anomalous deviations from this normal behavior ate considered as potential intrusions in the actual working phase. Other types of systems directly make signatures from the behavior of the intrusion in the learning phase, and use them in the actual working phase. Both types of systems use the learned behaviors as the signatures for intrusion detection. Human experts have to invest a large amount of effort to update signatures so that those signatures can detect new intrusions in the conventional IDS. However, the framework proposed in this paper automates the update of signatures. Stolfo et al. [ I ]  and Barbara et al. [2], for example, report a typical method used in this framework.

Manganaris et al. [3] also uses data mining tools for intrusion detection. But they use a data mining tool to post- process results of conventional IDSs. As the number of clients converted by the IDS increases, the volume of alarms gener- ated by the conventional signature based IDS tends to become intractable. This problem is aggravated by the fact that some sensors generate a large number of innocent alarms. To filter  0-7803-797&0/03/$17.00 @ZOO3 IEEE 840  mailto:yoshida@gssm,otsuka.tsukuba.ac.jp   Fig. 1. lnmsion Detection System wiul Dan Mining Engine  out innocent alarms and only report real signs of intrusion, they use data mining techniques.

Since the use of data mining for intrusion detection has become an impottant theme to protect computer security, DARPA evaluates various systems and reports their perfor- mances [8]. Other studies not mentioned above include [9], [IO] and [ I l l .  Lundin et al. [9] proposes a method to proiect privacy from data mining analysis without decreasing the performance of intrusion detection. Lippmann et al. [IO] uses an anificial neural network to improve the performance of intrusion detection. Lee et al. [I I] discusses the framework and advantages to using data mining in IDS together with its limitations.

Most of the above mentioned approaches use APRIORI [6] as their data mining engine. APRIORI finds all association rules that have support greater than the user-specified min- imum support (called MinSup). Thus the use of APRIORI requires careful tuning of the MinSup parameter. To analyze intrusions at a backbone segment with a large amount of traffic or a large e-commerce site, MinSup has to be large enough to eliminate noise. To analyze intrusions at a small site. MinSup has to be small enough to catch trifle sized trails.

Although our research uses data mining techniques in IDS, Section lV proposes an approach to alleviate this problem.

111. SELECTING DATA MINING RESULTS The basic algorithm of APRIORI, which mines association  rules from given data, was introduced by Agrawal et al. in [6].

Figure 2 shows the outline.

The input data base D is a large table whose column collects attribute values. During the first loop, it finds all of the attribute values which appear more than MinSup times as itemseu 4. Then it finds the combination of the two attribute values which appears more than MinSup during the second loop as the extended ilemseu Fz. During the N t h  loop, it finds the combination of the N attribute values, i.e. FN,  by extending the results of the previous loop. Finally, the combination of  \the attribute values, i.e. itemsets, are considered as associa- tion rules, and this algorithm finds all association rules that have support greater than the user-specified minimum support (called MinSup).

Although it is the mostly used and well studied algorithm in data mining field (See [12] for the general survey and comparison), it always requires careful tuning of MinSup parameter. Suppose we have a data base and there exists; 1)  Input  ou tpu t  begin  D : Data Base MinSup : Integer  F  FQ - ( 0 ) F + 0 i=O while F, # 0 do  : Frequent Itemsets in D  Ci + Candidate itemsets that are extensions o f f  in F,  F,+1 - {CE Ci : c appears at least MinSup times in D}  F c F U F,+i i = i + l  end  Fig. 2. Algorithm of APRIORI  tule X which has 100 supporting data items in the data base with 200 contradicting data items, and 2) rule Y which has 99 supporting data items with no contracting data items. If we set MinSup as 100, APRIORI only finds rule X. To find rule Y, we have to use a smaller MinSup which tends to produce more noisy results.

ADAM [2] uses the classification rule learning system to post process the results of the association rule mining system.

This seems to alleviate the problem associated with a small MinSup. ADAM first builds a repository of normal frequent itemsets that are held during the attack-free period of a TCP dump audit trail. An association rule mining system is used in this first step. It then uses a classification rule learning system to discriminate suspicious connections of attacks and innocent alarmS.

The combination of the association rule mining system and the classification rule learning system has also been thoroughly studied in the data mining field. Liu et  al. [I31 undertook a pioneering study on the combination of the association rule mining system and the classification rule learning system. Li et al. [I41 reported a method to improve both the efficiency and accuracy of a combined system. Liu et al. [I51 and Wang et al. 1161 also reported on such combined systems.

Another i m p o m t  trend is the U& of other indexes to select rules. Liu et al. [I51 uses the ratio of the class in the data base.

Li et al. [I41 and Liu et al. [I71 use xz test. Smyth et al. [4] and Meretkis et al. [IS] use entropy related indexes. Bayardo et al. [19] compares various indexes for rule selection.



IV. ENTROPY BASED INTRUSION DETECTION  In this study, we propose the use of the entropy based data mining method for intrusion detection. More precisely, we use the graph-based induction (GBI) method [5] for rule finding.

GBI was originally designed as a frequent sub-graph finding algorithm [ZO]. The algorithm to extract sub-graphs, named     conventional classification rule learning system. Although the conventional classification rule learning system uses attribute value tables for data representation, GBI uses directed colored graph.

To use GBI for classification rule learning, class information  is represented as the color of root nodes (4, 1, 4 and 8 in Figure 3). The value of attribute is coded as the color of  The information gain, which measures how a new test T affects entroov and contributes classification of data set D. is defined  connecting nodes (2, 5, 6,  3, 7, 2, 6, 6,  3, and 9 in Figure 3).

._  Information gain@, T) as:  Fig. 3. Algorithm of GBI  stepwise pair expansion, is outlined bellow:  . First, the input graph is contracted according to the extracted Sub-graphs. Every occurrence of the extracted sub-graph in the input graph is replaced by a single node in Step 1. Figure 3 assumes that I )  the algorithm has already extracted two sub-graphs (sub-graph A 4-2 and sub-graph B: 3+3), 2) each occurrence of the sub- graph 4-2 is replaced by a single node A, and 3) each occunence of the sub-graph 1-3 is replaced by a single node B. In this step, the incoming edges are ordered.

and the equivalence between the corresponding edges is examined.

In Step 2, the contracted'graph is analyzed and every possible Sub-graph, called a pair, that is made up of two linked nodes is extracted from the contracted graph. In Figure 3. seven pairs are extracted. . Steo 3 selects the best oair or  airs which satisfv certain  lGil = Entropy(D) - -Entropy(G;) C.EG IDl  where  n Entropy(D) = -p;log,p:  is1  and Gi is a subset of D classified by the test T. p, is the probability of class i.

To use GBI for association rule mining, the color of root nodes may not represent class information. However, during the calculation of information gain. it is treated as if it represents class information. By doing this, the information gain chooses pairs with much suppon and less contradictions.

Figure 4 shows the system configuration under development.

This configuration is modeled on the system proposed in [3] except the data mining engine. Our intentions of this configuration are:  criteria. In Figure 3, pair B+7 is selected as the best pair.

The selected pair is then expanded to the original sub- graph' and added to the set Of the extracted sub-graphs' In Figure 3. pair B e 7  is expanded to sub-graph 1-3-7, since the node B is the replacement of the sub-graph  . The use of an entropy based data mining engine alleviate the defect inherent m conventional approaches. . The use of sensors. which conventional IDSs use, to find the basic signs of intrusion.

1-3  Starting from the empty set of the extracted sub-graphs, this algorithm can extract various sub-graphs which appear frequently in the input graph. By repeating these steps, it extracts complex sub-graphs in a step-by-step manner. The expanding process in Step 3 contributes to finding complex sub-graphs.

Note that if Step 3 selects pairs which appear more than MinSup times, this algorithm can be seen as an extension of AF'RIORI. Although APRIORI uses attribute value tables for data representation, GBI uses a colored directed graph [5]. Also if Step 3 selects a best pair based on the entropy based index, this algorithm can be seen as an extension of the  IDS has to analyze various information sources to find in- trusions. For example, Barbara et al. [2] analyze the TCP dump audit trail. Cabrera et al. 1211 analyze sequences of system calls. Some intrusion needs special knowledge about the TCPiIP protocol. To treat this information in a unified way, we select an alarm log of conventional IDSs as the input for our entropy based IDS.

We also plan to use internal OS information. As reponed in (51, internal OS information such as process invoking relationships and U0 relationships between processes have richer information than the system sequence call used in [21]. The use of GBI also enables this analysis and seems to improve the performance of intrusion detection.84     Alarm  rplamr sandldates In AcMll Worldng phsn, .

I Convsntiml IDS t t  I I  T ~ S y . ! m l / N e l W O R  Fig. 4. Entropy based I n m i o n  Detection System

V. CONCLUSION The use of an entropy based data mining method to realize  intrusion detection systems was proposed. The result of the conventional approach is noisy and the post-processing of the results is necessary. However, the use of entropy alleviates this defect. A brief survey of intrusion detection systems and data mining methods were also presented to clarify the advantage of our approach over APRIORI based intrusion detection systems.

