Web Mining for Electronic Business Application

Abstract--Electronic business is generating massive amount of data on customer purchases, browsing patterns, usage times and preferences at an increasing rate. Web mining techniques can be applied on all the data being collected for obtaining useful information. This paper attempts to present issues associated with Web mining for electronic business.

Keywords: Web mining, electronic business, Web log, association rules, sequential patterns, path analysis.



I. Introduction Electronic commerce sites not only provide an additional  channel for marketing and sales, they also provide a rich source of information about the customers. It is providing an unprecedented opportunity to collect detailed data about all aspects of the commerce activity such as customer purchases, browsing patterns, usage times and preferences at an increasing rate.

As corporations look toward the electronic business, one thing is clear that it will be hard to continue to capture customers in the future without the help of Web mining.

Web mining is a key technology to help make sense of all of the data and better understand and facilitate electronic commerce. Web mining techniques can be applied to understand and analyze such data, and turned into actionable information that can support a web enabled electronic business to improve its marketing, sales and customer support operations. More importantly, the fast feedback the companies obtained using Web mining is very helpful in increasing the company's benefit.

Examples of Web mining in electronic business applications are generation of user profiles, enabling customer relationship management, and targeting web advertising based on user access patterns that can be extracted from the web data. Web mining in electronic business domain is currently a "hot" research area.

In general, data obtained from electronic business transactions are web server access logs, proxy server logs, browser logs, registration data if any, user sessions, user queries, cookies, etc [l] .

This chapter attempts to present Web mining concepts and issues that are associated with electronic business applications. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the survey of Web mining is discussed. Pattern discovery from Web transactions is proposed in Section 3. Section 4 describes analysis of discovered patterns. In Section 5, applications of Web mining are discussed. Section 6 concludes the paper.

11. Web mining  Web mining is the use of data mining techniques to automatically discover and extract information from Web documentslservices [2]. Like other data mining applications, Web mining can port from given structure on data (as in database tables), hut it can also be applied to semi-structured or unstructured data like free-form text.

Three areas of Web mining are commonly distinguished: content mining, structure mining, and usage mining.

2.1. Web content mining  Web content mining is to discover useful information from web contents I data I documents, it is a form of text mining (for an overview, see [3]). The primary Web resource that is being mined is an individual page. Web content mining can take advantage of the semi- structured nature of Web page text.

Web content mining can be used to detect cwoccunences of terms in texts. For example, trends over time may also be discovered, indicating a surge or decline in interest in certain topics such as the programming languages "Java".

Another application. area is event detection: the identification of stories in continuous news streams that correspond to new or previously unidentified events (all examples from 141).

2.2. Web structure mining  Web Structure Mining is to find authoritative Web page, retrieving pages that are not only relevant, but also of high quality, or authoritative on the topic.

The Web consists not only of pages, but also of hyperlinks pointing from one page to another; these hyperlinks contain an enormous amount of latent human annotation. Web structure mining exploits the additional information that is (often implicitly) contained in the structure of hypertext. Therefore, an important application area is the identification of the relative relevance of different pages that appear equally pertinent when analyzed with respect to their content in isolation.

For example, hyperlink-induced topic search [5] analyzes hyperlink topology by discovering authoritative information sources for a broad search topic. This information is found in authority pages, which are defined in relation to hubs as their counterparts: Hubs are pages that link to many related authorities. The search engine Google, for instance, owes its success to the Page Rank algorithm, which states that the relevance of a page increases with the number of hyperlinks to it from other pages, and in particular of other relevant pages [61.

2.3. Web usage mining  Web usage mining, also known as Web log mining, is to discover patterns in the browsing and navigation data of  0-7803-7840-7/031$17.00 02003 IEEE.

-872-  mailto:ABC@SWSC.C0M.CN   Web users. It processes discovering interesting patterns in Web access logs. The primary Web resource that is being mined is a record of the requests made by visitors to a Web site, most often collected in a Web server log [7]. Web server log files provide rich information about Web dynamics, and it customarily contains:  The domain name (or IP address) of the request; the name of the user who generated the request; the date and time of the request; the method of the request; the name of the file requested; the result of the request (success, failure, error, etc.); the size of the data sent back; the URL of the referring page; the identification of the client agent;. and a cookie, a sting of data generated by an application and exchanged between the client and the server.

Given the web data, the goal is to capture the buying and traversing habits of customers in an electronic business environment. Any existing pattern recognition method such as a traditional classification and clustering method can be utilized for this task after applying some preprocessing steps on the data. By mining Web usage data, more complete knowledge about Web usage can be obtained.

Web usage mining has been an important technology for understanding users' behaviors on the Web. For example, one may find that most (e. g., 80%) of those users who were interested in product A were also interested in product B.

The identified association rules are at the center of cross-selling and up-selling strategies in electronic commerce sites: When a new user shows interest in product A, she will receive a recommendation for product B (cf.

[81).

111. Pattern discovery from Web transactions There are a number of issues in preprocessing data for  mining that must be addressed before the mining algorithms can be run. n e s e  include developing a model of access log data, developing techniques to clean/filter the raw data to eliminate outliers andor irrelevant items, grouping individual page accesses into semantic units (i.e.

transactions), integration of various data sources such as user registration information, and specializing generic data mining algorithms to take advantage of the specific nature of access log data.

3.1 Preprocessing subtasks  3.1.1. Data cleaning. Techniques to clean a server log to eliminate irrelevant items are of importance for Web log analysis. The discovered associations or reported statistics are only useful if the data represented in the server log gives an accurate picture of the user accesses of the Web site.

Elimination of irrelevant items can be reasonably accomplished by checking the suffix of the URL name.

