KIMAS 2003 BOSTON, USA

Abstract - Recent development in ITS (Intelligent Transportation Systems) methods and technologies has moved traffic operating systems from passive to pro- active control and management, where real-time and accurate trafic flow information is critical to actual implementation. So far many algorithms have been proposed for traffic network flow forecasting, but problems in accuracy and timeliness still remain to be the major obstacle for their successful applications. For example, presumed human travel habit and vehicle tuming probabilities at intersections have greatly limited the use of dynamic assignment algorithm. In order to improve the forecasting and real-time responsiveness, a new algorithm based on data mining which can do association d e s  mining and association analysis is proposed here for predicting traffic network flow.

Simulation results using Corsim 5.0 have demonstrated effectiveness of the new algorithm in both accuracy and timeliness.

Keywords: ITS; Traffic Network Forecasting; Dynamic Assignment Algorithm; Data Mining; Association Analysis; Association Rules Mining.

1 Introduction With development of ITS (Intelligent Transportation  Systems), it is now changing gradually from passive responding system to active behavior system which highly depends on precise and real-time traffic network flow forecasting and single point flow forecasting (Xiaoyan Gong, 2001). So far, most of research attention is mainly put into single point flow forecasting while little in network flow forecasting.

Dynamic traffic assignment is the main previous approache for traffic network flow forecasting (M Papageorgiou,l990). But because it needs OD matrix prediction and some presumptions such as vehicle turning probability of each intersection and people?s route selection methods, it cannot give accurate traffic condition prediction, especially when accidents occurs somewhere, because it just give regards to statistical and average factors of the traffic network, hut no accidental factors. In KIMAS 2003, October 1-3, 2003, Boston, MA, USA Copyright 0-78057958-6/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE.

Xiaoming Liu Laboratory of Complex Systems and Intelligence  Sicence, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China  Ixm@sina.com  addition, long computation time is needed for its optimizing computation, which greatly confines its real application, even just in small traffic networks. Although several advanced algorithms (Zhaosheng Yang, 2000) such as dynamic traffic assignment model based on genetic algorithm is proposed, it still cannot meet real- time system requirements.

Since dynamic traffic assignment considers little accidental factors, then NPR (Non-Parametric Regression) algorithm [Karlsson and Yakowitz, 19871, a kind of data mining approaches, can be used for each link flow forecasting in trailic network, because it needs no mathematical modelling and thus no data loss, that is to say, accidental factors has been concemed in NPR. In essence, the approach locates the state of the system (defined by the independent variables) in a ?neighbourhood? of past similar states. Once this neighbourhood has been established, the past cases in the neighbourhood are used to estimate the value of the dependent variable. Recent researches [Davis and Nihan, 1991][Brain, 1997][Xiaoyan Gong, 20021 have shown nonparametric regression to hold high potential to accurately forecast short-term traffic flows. But if each link of traffic network adopts NPR, then it cannot assure real-time ability although with high accuracy. So some measures must be taken to increasing its real-time ability, and in this paper a kind of system dimension decreasing method based on data mining is given.

So in this paper a new traffic network forecasting approaches based on data mining is addressed in order to realize predict veracity real-time ability and practicability.

In section 2, scheme of the whole traffic network algorithm is given, and then sections from 3 to 5 present each step of the new algorithm in detail with a simulation example by Corsim5.O. In section 6, simulation test result is analyzed, and in the last section some problems and comments are discussed.

mailto:gxylsh@hohnail.com mailto:Ixm@sina.com   KIMAS 2003 BOSTON, USA  2 Traffic Network Flow Forecasting Scheme  Scheme of the traffic network flow forecasting algorithm is shown in Fig. 1. There are five steps in this algorithm.

1) The whole traffic network is divided into some sub-networks through association analysis among adjacent links in the network.

2) In each sub-network, association analysis among adjacent links is used to locate key link which has great relativity with other links.

3) In each sub-network, association rules mining algorithm is adopted to get association rules between key link and other links.

4) Put all the key links of the whole network into a vector, NPR algorithm is used to predict traffic flow values of all the key links in the network.

5 )  With rules from step (3), deduce predict flow values of other links in each sub-network from its key link?s predict flow value  3 Sub-networks Formation and Dete- rmination of Key Links Based on Association Analysis The whole traffic network is divided into some sub-  networks through association analysis with equation (1).

2 (1, -a)(?, - y3 (1) .m / = I  r ,  =s.s,= J2 (., - ? , I 2  ( U ,  - n2  ,.I /.I  Here, ,y = I ~ , ,  x 2  ?.. 1 is traffic flow vector including whole day average flow with period of 5 minutes of link Lx , and y = c y ,  , y ,  ,,., y ,  1 is traffic flow vector of adjacent link Ly. Y. 7 are arithmetic average value of X and Y respectively.

Here an example by Corsim 5.0 is shown in Fig. 2, in which there is a loop highway network which is divided into eight links from L, to L, , and correlation coefficients through association analysis between each of two consecutively adjacent links is shown in Fig. 3. The first point stands for the correlation coefficients between link L, and link L, , and second point for the correlation coefficients between link L, and link L, , and so do others. From Fig. 3, some gaps can find in the curves and they can become boundaries for division of traffic network. Therefore, three sub networks are made. L, with low correlation coefficients with L, and L, becomes a single sub network SI ; L, , L, , L, and L, ,  constitute a sub network sz , and L, , L, and L, , constitute the last sub network S? .

0.98 0.96  0.94 0.92  0.9 0 88  LILZ L2LI LIL, L,Lr LSLS LeL, L,Ls LaL,  Fig .3 Correlation Coefficients between Adjacent Links  2.5  1.5  0.5  1 L1 L2 L, Ls I Fig. 4 Correlation Coefficients Distribution  Then key links in each sub-network should he determined with the same method. In the first sub network SI, since it includes only one link L, , then L, becomes its key link S l k , .  In the second sub network S2 which includes L, , L, , L, and L, , association analysis is used again. Fig. 4 shows correlation coefficients between L, and L, , L, , L, respectively, L, and L, , L, , L, respectively , L, and L, , L, , L, respectively, and L, and L, , L, , L, respectively. After summing up these  correlation coefficients groups, L, with biggest correlation coefficient becomes key link S?k, of this sub network. With same method, L, becomes key link S?k, of sub networks? .

4 Associasion rules mining among key  links and other links in sub-networks Association rules mining algorithm is first proposed  by Agrawal in 1993(Agrawal, 1993). and often used in commercial data analysis, especially in supermarket commodity management. Through association rule     KIMAS 2W3 BOSTON, USA  mining, clients purchasing habit can be well known and thus these purchasing rules can be considered in commodity ordering. In order to use this method, some conceptions in traffic field should be transforms corresponding to conceptions in association rules mining.(Xiaoyan Gong, 2002)  (a) Traffic flow v of key link L should be interpreted as a fuzzy variable y , and its universe of discourse is:  V = (100 ,300 ,500 ,700 ,900 ,1100 ,1300 ,14W ,1500 ,1600 ,1700 ,1800 ,2000 J  and it takes seven linguistic values y ,  (very high), y 2 (high), y 3  (little high); y4 (moderate), y s  (little low),  - v6 (low), Traffic occupancy o of key link L should be  interpreted as a fuzzy variable 0, its universe of discourse is:  and it takes seven linguistic values: 0, (very high), g2 (high), 0, (little high), e4 (moderate), Os (little low) , 0, (low), g7 (very low) shown as in table 2.

Traffic flow v' of one of the other links L' of L should also be interpreted as a fuzzy variable i . Its universe of discourse is  (very low) shown as in table 1.

0 = (10 ,20 ,30 .40 ,50 ,60 ,70 ,75 ,80 ,85 ,90 , 9 5 )  V '=  (100 ,300 ,500 ,700 ,900 ,1100 , 1300 ,1400 ,1500 ,1600 ,1100 ,1800 .2WO )  improve reasoning accuracy, minsupport is preset to be 60% and minconfidence is preset to be from 80% to 90%.

Based on (a). @) and (c),association rules, that is the relationship between two adjacent links can be dig out with classical priori algorithm(Agrawal,l993).Table 4 shows an example of association rules between key linkL and link L' .

5 Traffic Flow Forecasting for Key Links and Offline Links Classical NPR is employed to generate traffic  volume forecasts for all kev links. Traffic state vector  ~ ... . ...

commodities y ,  and g6 are bought at the same time. All the transactions T comprises D , set of transactions in  average, speed, average time occupancy of key link Slk, during the current time interval t .

vSlH (t - 1) , sSBbl ( t  - 1) , oSZbl (t - 1) -- traffic association rules mining algorithm.

(c) In association rules minine aleorithm. minsunoort , I  I I  'I  and minconfidence should be preset. And minsupport is preset to be 50% while minconfidence is ranges from 70% to 80%. But here in traffic flow forecasting, in order to  average and average tim     KIMAS 2003 BOSTON, USA  key link S'k ,  during the previous five-minute interval t - 1 .

average speed and average time occupancy of key link S'k, during the current time interval of historical average.

traffic volume, average speed and average time occupancy of key link Sik, during previous interval of historical average. So does other factors in the traffic state vector.

Using the state vector above, Euclidean distance from historical record i to the current conditions can be written as Equ (2): dist =$V~,~ , (~) -V 'S~I  ( t ) r  +...... .+[o+*,~ (t -2) - o ' s ~ ~ , ~ ( t  -2)]* (2)  And the forecast generation function is: 1 -  Here, = -$ &, K is nearest state vector number of current state vector. Fig. 5 ,  Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 shows prediction traffic flow and real traffic flow of these three  Then based on association rules and predict flow values from (3) , predict flow values of other links can be deduced. For example, Link L, predict flow values deduced from values of link L, is shown in Fig. 8. It can be seen that accuracy, of reasoning algorithm based on association rules isn't as good as NPR.

keylinks S1kl .S2kl  and S'k,.

6 Summary and Conclusions Table 5 shows the performance comparison between  Dynamic Assignment algorithm, new algorithm of this paper and NPR, AAE stands for average absolute error and APE is Average percent error. The results presented are for an Intel Q Pentium UI 600 MHz computer with 64 MB RAM running Windows 98 in command prompt mode with no other system demands. While individual results may vary, the findings are indicative of general performance. Not only AAE and APE decrease a lot than Dynamic Assignment Algorithm, but also does Ex Time from 15s to 8s.Although it seems that Ex time is approximately the same for new algorithm and NPR, with increasing size of the network, new algorithm will show its superiority over NPR in time consuming. However, its predict accuracy isn't as good as NPR.

Fig. 5 Predict Flow and Real Flow of Key Link S'k,  Fig. 6 Predict Flow and Real Flow of Key Link is  Fig. 7 Predict Flow and Real Flow of Key Link L , I  ~ II_,_.. .",.II ..., I" _I,".__." ." I - .  . ~. .

I  Fig. 8 Predict Flow and Real Flow of Key Link E,     KIMAS 2003 BOSTON, USA  Index M E (  %) Ex Time(m) Dynamic Assignment 12% 15 Proposed Algorithm 9% 1.44  NPR 7.5% 1.56  [4] G.A.Davis, N.L.Nihan, ?Nonparametric Regression and Short Term Freeway Traffic Forecasting?, ASCE Journal of Transportation Engineering, 117(2), pp: 178-188, March 1991.

I .

[ I ]  Xiaoyan Gong, ?Review of traffic network flow [7] R. Agrawal, A.N. Swami, ?Mining Association forecasting?, ICSEC, CASIA Report, December Rules between Sets of Items in Large Databases?, 2001. SIGMOD Conference, pp: 207-216.1993.

[2] M Papageorgiou, ?Dynamic Modeling, [SI Xiaoyan Gong, ?Study of Relationship among assignment and route guidance in traffic Adjacent Road Segments?,accepted by Journal of networks?. Transportation Research B, 24B(6), Highway and Transportation research and pp: 471495,1990. development, July 2002.

[3] Zhaosheng Yang, ?Urban traffic flow routing theory and model?, Chinese Communication Press, Beijing, China, January 2000.

highway network  Sub-Network 1 Sub-Network 2 Sub-Network 3  flow prediction 4-----+-----------*  flow prediction flow prediction valiie nf S?k.

rules reasoning rules reasoning rules reasoning  flow prediction flow prediction flow prediction of SILI.., S?L? of S*L,... S2L. of S?L,,,, S?L.

