A Data Mining Based Algorithm for Traffic

Abstract - Recent development in ITS (Intelligent Transportation Systems) methods and technologies has moved trafic operating systems from passive to pro- active control and management, where real-time and accurate traflc J7ow information is critical to actual implementation. So far many algorithms hove been proposed for trafic network flow forecasting, but problems in accuracy and timeliness still remain to be the major obstacle for their successful applications. For example, presumed human travel habit and vehicle turning probabilities at intersections have greatly limited the use of dynamic assignment algorithm. In order to improve the forecasting and real-time responsiveness, a new algorithm based on data mining which can do association rules mining and association analysis is proposed here for predicting traffic network flow.

Simulation results using Corsim 5.0 have demonstrated effectiveness of the new algorithm in both accuracy and timeliness.

Keywords: ITS; Traflc Network Forecasting; Dynamic Assignment Algorithm; Data Mining; Association Analysis; Association Rules Mining.

.

1 Introduction With development of ITS (Intelligent Transportation  Systems), it is now changing gradually from passive responding system to active behavior system which highly depends on precise and real-time traffic network flow forecasting and single point flow forecasting (Xiaoyan Gong, 2001). So far, most of research attention is mainly put into single point flow forecasting while little in network flow forecasting.

Dynamic traffic assignment is the main previous approache for traffic network flow forecasting (M Papageorgiou,l990). But because it needs OD matrix prediction and some presumptions such as vehicle turning probability of each intersection and people?s route selection methods, it cannot give accurate traffic condition prediction, especially when accidents occurs somewhere, because it just give regards to statistical and average factors of the traffic network, but no accidental factors. In  Xiaoming Liu Laboratory of Complex Systems and Intelligence  Sicence, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China  Ixm@sina.com  addition, long computation time is needed for its optimizing computation, which greatly confmes its real application, even just in small traffic networks. Although several advanced algorithms (Zhaosheng Yang, 2000) such as dynamic traffic assignment model based on genetic algorithm is proposed, it still cannot meet real- time system requirements.

Since dynamic traffic assignment considers little accidental factors, then NPR (Non-Parametric Regression) algorithm m l s s o n  and Yakowitz, 19871, a kind of data mining approaches, can he used for each link flow forecasting in traffic network, because it needs no mathematical modelling and thus no data loss, that is to say, accidental factors has been concemed in NPR. In essence, the approach locates the state of the system (defmed by the independent variables) in a ?neighbourhood? of past similar states. Once this neighbourhood has been established, the past cases in the neighbourhood are used to estimate the value of the dependent variable. Recent researches pavis  and Nihan, 1991][Brain, 1997][Xiaoyan Gong, 20021 have shown nonparametric regression to hold high potential to accurately forecast short-term traffic flows. But if each link of traffic network adopts NF?R, then it cannot assure real-time ability although with high accuracy. So some measures must be taken to increasing its real-time ability, and in this paper a kind of system dimension decreasing method based on data mining is given.

So in this paper a new traffic network forecasting approaches based on data mining is addressed in order to realize predict veracity real-time ability and practicability.

In section 2, scheme of the whole traffic network algorithm is given, and then sections from 3 to 5 present each step of the new algorithm in detail with a simulation example by COrSim5.0. In section 6, simulation test result is analyzed, and in the last section some problems and comments are discussed.

* 0-7803-7952-7/03/%17.00 0 2003 IEEE. 1253  mailto:gxylsh@hotmail.com mailto:Ixm@sina.com   2 Traffic Network Flow Forecasting Scheme  Scheme of the traffic network flow forecasting algorithm is shown in Fig. I .  There are five steps in this algorithm.

1) The whole traffic network is divided into some sub-networks through association analysis among adjacent links in the network.

2) In each sub-network, association analysis among adjacent links is used to locate key link which has great relativity with other links.

3) In each sub-network, association rules mining algorithm is adopted to get association rules bemeen key link and other links.

4) Put all the key links of the whole network into a vector, NF'R algorithm is used to predict traffic flow values of all the key links in the network.

5) With rules from step (3), deduce predict flow values of other links in each sub-network from its key link's predict flow value  3 Sub-networks Formation and Dete- rmination of Key Links Based on Association Analysis The whole traffic network is divided into some sub-  networks through association analysis with equation (I).

z ( x .  - . m y ,  ~ B) (1)  6 n 1-1 S . Y S "  Y n  =--  E (1, - F)* 2 ( Y ,  - B)' i - l  , = I  Here, x = E x , ,  x i  ,... x ,  1 is traffic flow vector including whole day average flow with period of 5 minutes of link Lx , and y = c y , ,  y ,  ,... y, r  1 is traffic flow vector of adjacent link Lu. ?, are arithmetic average value of X and Y respectively.

Here an example by Conim 5.0 is shown in Fig. 2, in which there is a loop highway network which is divided into eight links from L, to L, , and correlation coefficients through association analysis between each of two consecutively adjacent links is shown in Fig. 3. The first point stands for the correlation coefficients between link L, and link L, , and second point for the correlation coefficients between link L, and link L, , and so do others. From Fig. 3, some gaps can find in the curves and they can become boundaries for division of traffic network. Therefore, three sub networks are made. L, with low correlation coefficients with L, and L, becomes a single sub network S' ; L, , L, , L, and L, ,  constitute a sub network Sz , and L, , L, and L, , constitute the last sub network s3.

Fig .3 Correlation Coefficients between Adjacent Links  " L, L2 L3 b  Fig. 4 Correlation Coefficients Distribution  Then key links in each suh-network should be determined with the same method. In the first sub network SI, since it includes only one link L, , then L, becomes its key link S'k,  . In the second sub network S 2  which includes L, , L, , L, and L8,  association analysis is used again. Fig. 4 shows correlation coefficients between L, and L, , L, , L, respectively, L, and L, , L, , L, respectively , L, and L, , L, , L, respectively, and L, and L, , L, , L, respectively. After summing up these correlation coefficients groups, L, with biggest correlation coefficient becomes key link S'k, of this sub network. With same method, L, becomes key link S'k, of sub network S' .

4 Associasion rules mining among key  links and other links in sub-networks Association rules mining algorithm is fust proposed  by Agrawal in 1993(Agrawal, 1993), and often used in commercial data analysis, especially in supermarket commodity management. Through association rules     mining, clients purchasing habit can he well known and thus these purchasing rules can be considered in commodity ordering. In order to use this method, some conceptions in traffic lield should be transforms corresponding to conceptions in association rules mining.(Xiaoyan Gong, 2002)  (a) Traffic flow v of key l i  L should be interpreted as a fuzzy variable !! , and its universe of discourse is:  I? = (100 ,300 ,500 ,700 ,900 ,1100 ,1300 ,14W ,1500 ,1600 ,1700 ,1800 ,2000 }  and it takes seven linguistic values v1 (very high), y 2 (high), x3 (little high), v4 (moderate), x 5  (little low), y 6  (low), y7  (very low) shown as in table 1  Traffic occupancy 0 of key link L should be interpreted as a fuzzy variable 0, its universe of discourse is:  and it takes seven linguistic values: 0, (very high), g2 (high), 0, (little high), g4 (moderate), 0, (little low) , os (low), g7 (very low) shown as in table 2  Traffic flow v? of one of the other links L? of L should also be interpreted as a fuzzy variable .?. Its universe of discourse is  0 = (IO ,20 ,30 ,40 ,SO ,60 ,70 .75 ,80 ,85 .90 , 9 5 )  V ?=  (100 ,300 ,500 ,700 ,900 ,1100 , 1300 ,1400 ,1500 ,1600 ,1700 ,1800 ,2000 )  And it takes seven linguistic values: Ll (very high), .?, (high), f ,  (little high), g2 (moderate), $, (little low), L6 (low), f7 (very low) shown as in table 3  Then each linguistic value of and .? can be regarded as a kind of commodity in association rules minmg algorithm. That is to say that commodity  !!I 9 ! ! 2  !!3 ,!4 I ?!5 >!!a 7 4 7  ?.?I ,E2 ? ,E3 ? 3-4 ,  v? v? - 5 ,  -6 VI 9 d7 canhemade.

(b) Then concurrence of traffic conditions in L and L? in terms of linguistic value can be seen as one transaction T . For example, if traffic flow of link L is v, (very low traffic flow) while traffic flow of link L? is - v16 (low traffic flow). Then in this transaction T , commodities x7 and v?, are bought at the same time. All the transactions T comprises D , set of transactions in association rules mining algorithm.

(c) In association rules mining algorithm, minsupport and minconfidence should he preset. And minsupport is preset to be 50% while minconfidence is ranges from 70% to 80%. But here in traffic flow forecasting, in order to  improve reasoning accuracy, minsupport is preset to be 60% and minconfidence is preset to be from 80% to 90%.

Based on (a)\ (b) and (c),association d e s ,  that is the relationship between two adjacent links can be dig out with classical priori algorithm(Agrawal,1993).Tahle 4 shows an example of association rules between key IinkL and l i  L? .

Tab. 4: Association Rules between Adjacent Links     key link S'k, during the previous five-minute interval t-1.

v ~ ~ ~ . ~ , ~  ( t )  , s ~ ~ ~ ~ . ~  ( t )  , o ~ ~ ~ . ~ , ~  ( 2 )  -- traffic volume, average speed and average time occupancy of key link S ik i  during the current time interval ofhistorical average.

l.'S'kl,h (t - 1) * SSIkl,$ 0 - 1) , OS'kl,h (2 - 1) -- traffic volume, average speed and average time occupancy of key link S'k, during previous interval of historical  ~~  average. So does other factors in the traffic state vector.

historical record i to the current conditions can be written  Fig. 5 Predict Flow and Real Flow of Key Link S'k, Using the state vector above, Euclidean distance from  . . .  as Equ (2): . .

(2)  dist =J[vYkl (t) -Y'SW ( t ) p  + ...... +[ o,,,, (t -2)-o's~,h(f -2)p  And the forecast generation function is: I  d .

, = I  d  - Y r , i l  ( t  + 1.) = c - v  j $ l k i  ( I )  (3)  Here,d = ' 1 , K is nearest state vector number Fig. 6 Predict Flow and Real Flow of Key Link v-'~ C b  .-. I : of current state vector. Fig. 5 ,  Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 shows  prediction traffic flow and real traffic -flow of these three keylinks Sikl ,S2ki  and'S'k,.

Then based on association rules and predict flow values from (3) , predict flow values of other links can be deduced. For example, Link L, predict flow values deduced from values of link L, is shown in Fig. 8. It can be seen that accuracy of reasoning algorithm based on 'association rules isn't as good as NPR.

6 Summary and Conclusions  Table 5 shows the performance comparison between Dynamic Assignment algorithm, new algorithm of this paper and NPR, AAE stands for average absolute error and APE is Average percent error. The results presented are for an Intel @ Pentium Ill 600 MHz computer with 64 MB RAM running Windows 98 in command prompt mode with no other system demands. While individual results may vary, the fmdings are indicative of general performance. Not only AAE and APE decrease a lot than Dynamic Assignment Algorithm, but also does Ex Time from 15s to 8s.Although it seems that Ex time is approximately the same for new algorithm and NPR, with increasing size of the network, new algorithm will show its superiority over NPR in time consuming. However, its predict accuracy isn't as good as NPR.

~ -___- qm  #ILm ........... .-. .......

. .

... .L ................ $ . . . . . I  .....

IPOS ins5 ius i a s  i a s  i n s  id  bn - 5x1 r u l  -?'*I rrcerr  .. __ -. -. - .._ Fig. 7 Predict Flow and Real Flow of Key Link L I  Fig. 8 Predict Flow and Real Flow of Key Link Ea     Index M E (  %) Ex Time(m) Dynamic Assignment 12% 15 Proposed Algorithm 9% 1.44  NPR 7.5% 1.56 . ~  [4] G.A.Davis, N.L.Nlhan, ?Nonparametric Regression and Short Term Freeway Traffic Forecasting?, ASCE Jonrnal of Transportation Engineering, 117(2), pp: 178-188, March 1991.

[SI B.L.Smith, M.J.Demetsky, ?Traffic Flow Forecasting: Comparison of Modeling Approaches?, Journal of Transportation Engineering, 123(4), pp: 261-266,1997.

[6] Xiaoym Gong, Shuming Tang and Feiyue Wang, ?Three Improvements on KNN-NPR for Short- time Traffic Flow Forecasting?, Proceeding of Singapore, September 2002.

[7] R. Agrawal, A.N. Swami, ?Mining Association Rules between Sets of Items in Large Databases?, SIGMOD Conference, pp: 207-216,1993.

[8] Xiaoysn Gong, ?Study of Relationship among Adjacent Road Segments?,accepted by Journal of Highway and Transportation research and development, July 2002.

highway network  Sub-Network 1  S?kl and S?L, ... Slkl and S?L.

