

Multi-target Data Association Approach for Vehicle Tracking in Road Situation  Hongshe Dang, Chongzhao Han  Absfracf - Data association was an important content in Multi-target tracking. Typical algorithms to deal with such problems are the joint probabilities data association filter (JPDAF) proposed by Bar-Shalom and his team. The basis of JPDAF is the calculus of the joint probabilities hrhveen the measurements and the tracks. The algorithm assigns weights for reasonable measurements and uses B weighted centroid of those measurements to update the t rack  Based on the evidence theory and furzy mathematics, a new data association method behveen the tracks and the measurements is proposed in the paper. The mass function is determined by using fuzzy mathematics. and a belief matrix is produced according to the evidence combination rule.

then the decision is made by means of the maximum belief.

The Monte Carlo simulation results indicate that the new method has a good association capacily. Compared with cheap JPDAF method. the new method has improved the track accuracy.

Kqwords: Multi-target tracking. data association.

evidential combination, fuzzy mathematics.

1 Introduction A significant problem in multiple target tracking is the measurement-to-track data association. The problem was derived from Sittler's work [ I ] ,  and there have many different algorithms. Typical algorithms to deal with such problems are the probabilities data association filter (PDAF) in case of single target tracking and the joint probabilities data association filter (JPDAF) in case of multi-target tracking proposed by Bar-Shalom and his team [?I. The basis of JPDAF is the calculus of the joint probabilities between the tracks and the measurements.

The algorithm assigns weights for reasonable measurements and uses a weighted centroid of those measurements to update the track. However, the calculation of joint probabilities in JPDAF seems complicated even ifthe used formulas are well established in probability theory, this motivates some authors to investigate simplifications of these formulations. This includes, for instance, Fitzgerald's ad hoc proposal [3],  Manuscript received Mar 17.2003 Hongrhc Dang is with the Institute of Synthetic Automation. Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi", shm xi, 710049. P. R. China.

(c-mail:hsdana~~ohurom) Choogrhao Han is n'ilh the (Institute of Synthetic Automatioh Xi'an liaatong Univcniv, Xi'an. S h m  xi, 710049. P. R. China.

(e-mail:~an~mail.gltuedu.fn)  0-7803-8125-4/03/$17.00 0 2003 IEEE  which seems to work well in some cases of crossing targets, and the computation cost is smaller than standard JPDAF method. Another weak of JPDAF is that the JPDAF method tends to result in track convergence for closely spaced targets [4], and in road situation, the targets are generally close to each other.

Recently people working in the fusion of uncertain data have been interested in the Dempster-Shafer theor).

essentially because of two of its tools: ( I )  a nice and flexible way to represent uncertainty, be it total ignorance or any form of partial or total knowledge, that is more general than what the probabilistic approach provides. and (2) a rule to combine uncertain data, called the Dempster's rule of combination. that seems to provide an excellent tool for data-aggregation.

In order to treat with the uncertain and inaccuracy of sensor data, Rombaut[S] and Gruyer[6] using fuzzy logic and Dempster-Shafer theory to rebuild the environment for intelligent vehicles, and to increase the reliability of environment perception.

In this paper the Dempster-Shafer theory was used in the data association process to solve the problem of correlation between the tracks (known targets) and the measurements (new targets). The Monte Carlo simulation proves that the tracking accuracy has been improved, compared with the cheap JF'DAF method. The proposed method can adaptive to the situation that the number of targets is uncertain, which is often barging up against in reality.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2.

introduces problem description and JPDAF method.

Section 3. presents the evidence combination method for data association. Section 4. gives the realization of the proposed method. Section 5 the simulation results of four targets tracking in clutters are given. Section 6 presents the conclusions.

2 Problem description and JF'DAF methodology Suppose the discrete state equation of each target model is described by:  x'(k+ 1) = A'(k)x'(k) +d (k)d(k)  (f = l,z...,z-) (1)  The measurement equation is:  (2) Where x'(k+l) is the n-dimensional state vector at time k, represents the relative position, relative velocity and  z(k)  = H ' ( k ) x ' ( k )  + v ' ( k )     relative acceleration between the targets and the self- vehicle. k ( k )  is the transition matrix; Z(k) is the measurement vector at time k ,  H' (k )  is measurement gain matrix. d ( k )  and ~ ' ( k )  are process noise and measurement noise, which are independent zero mean and known variance.

E[w'(k)(w'Ci))'l= Q'(k)Jk, (3)  E[v'(k)(v'(i))T] = R'(k)6,, (4) Where 6 ,  is the Kronecker delta function.

The set of validated measurement received at time k is defined as:Z'(k)={z:(k)}?, m, is the numbers of validated measurement, that is there are m, measurement inside the tracking gate. If we use kalman filter to estimate the state of targets, then the update equation is:  Where ?(kl k)  is the state estimation vector of target t at time k ,  and i'(k1k-I) is the state prediction vector oftarget t ,  v'(k)is known as the combined innovation :  i'(k I k)  = i ' (k  I k-1) +v (k)v'(k) t = l&.$ ( 5 )  Where $(k )  is the joint probability between the measurement j a n d  the target t ,  ((k) is the innovation between the measurementjand the target t .

v; (k)  = z; (k) -3 (k 1 k - 1) j=l&.p 1=1&.,z. ( 7 ) :i(k) represents the k t h  measurement vector of  target t at time k , i'(k1k-I) is the prediction measurement vector of target t .  W ( k )  is the g i n  matrix ofkalman filter.

N." (k) = P(k I k -  l)Kr [KP (k  I k-l)Kr + R (k)r' (8)  The error covariance is: P(kIk)=~(k)P(klk-l)+[l-P,(k)lP,(klk)+P,(k)  G(k 1 k)  =[I -v (k)H(k)lp(k I k-I) (9)  (IO)  ( 1 1 ) The predictions of state vector, error covariance and  measurement vector are:  P (k I k -  1) = Al(k - l)P ( k -  1 I k -  1)AJ (k-I) +p (12)  2 (k I k-I) = A(k  -02 (k-1 I k-I) ( I3 ) (14) 2' (k  I k-I) = A'(k)X(k I k-I)  The general approach to calculate the joint probability in JPDAF methodology is: firstly determining the validated matrix according to gate techniques, then calculating the conditional probability of all possible feasible events, and finally the posterior probability g(k) is produced. When the number of targets is big, the computation cost in making the feasible events is too big for some applications, so some sub-optimize JPDAF method were introduced, among them Fitzgerald [3] gave the cheap JF'DAF method, and the formula of joint probability is:  (16) However, the computation cost o f  the cheap JPDAF  method is also too big for some applications such as target tracking in road situation, in order to handle the multiple target matching problem in automotive radar tracking, we tried to use evidence theory, determining the relation between the tracks and the measurements by using evidence combination. and compared with the cheap JPDAF method, the result is satisfied.

3 The data a s s o c i a t i o n  based on e v i d e n c e theory  3.1 E v i d e n t i a l  reasoning method Let@ be a finite set of mutually exclusive and exhaustive events or propositions of particular experiment, called the fnme of discernment. The distribution of mass is defined on the set 2' .of the subsets of @ . And m : 2' -+ [0,1] is called mass function or basic probability assignment (BPA) defined for every hypothesis A , the value m(A)  satisfies the following conditions:  (l)m(P) = 0 (2) 24'4) = 1 As@  Evidential theoly proposes a combination rule, called Dempster's rule of combination, which synthesizes basic probability assignments and yields a new basic probability assignment representing the fused information. The combination rule is known as the orthogonal sum.

Let ?1, and ni2 be the basic probability assignments, on the same frame of discernment, for belief functions Bel, and Bel, respectively. If focal elements of Bel, are B,? ..., B, and the focal elements ofBeI ,areB, ,  ....E, ~ the total portion of belief exactly committed to A ( A  is not an empv  set) is given by the orthogonal sum.

0 A = m  k = C m , ( A ,  ) m 2 ( B J )  1 A,nX,=4  Where k is called the normalization factor: which is often interpreted as a measure of conflict between the different sources.

3.2 The framework of discernment In order to use the evidence theon. a reference discernment framework must be constructed firstly. For example. suppose there are three known targets in front of our vehicle at time k . and a measurement was detected by a millimeter wave radar or a laser radar. In order to determine the relation beween the known targets and the measurement (new targets), a framework of discernment [ 6 ]  is built as 0 = {y  ,Y,, & >e} ,  where Y, means that the new measurement is original from the known target j , that is the measurement is a measurement of target j . In order to be sure that the framework of discernment is really exhaustive, a last hypothesis noted ?*? is added, which means that there no known targets associated with the measurement, that is the measurement is original from a new target, or a known target had disappeared. The possible state may he:  (18) The definition of the mass function (basic  m,,,(Y,) :the mass function of the proposition that the measurement X ,  is original from the known target j :  m,,,(?) : the mass function of the proposition that the measurement X i  is not original from the known target j :  probability assignment):  ) :  the mass function of the proposition  that it is ignorance whether the measurement X, is original from the known target j or not:  mi,,(*) : The mass function of the proposition that the measurement X ,  is not original from any known target, that is the measurement has no relation with any known targets.

In this mass distribution, first index i denotes the measurements and the second index j the known objects (predictions). If one index is replaced by a dot, then the mass is applied to all measurement or known objects according to the location of this dot.

3.3 Evidence combination According to the Dempster?s rule, the combination result of 17 mass sets is produced in cascade.

n7,..(1;) = K y , ( Y , )  - nI,.t(Yi )) ( 19) k=l ... n  3.4 Processing of the uncertainty Because of the complexity of environment and the inaccuracy o f  sensors, there are some confliction and ambiguity in data association, such as, there are one known target or one measurement is in relation with two measurements or known targets etc. In order to solve the conflicts, and get a reliable decision, the decision is made as follows. First, two belief matrixes are got by exchange the position of the measurement and the tracks, and make a local decision according to the maximization rule. And there are some decision conflicts such as the first maximization gives a decision that the measurement x, is original from the known target j , but the second maximization may gives a contradictory decision. Then, the second decision process is introduced that if the decision from the first matrix is consistent with that of the second matrix, the decision is validate, otherwise the decision is ignored.

3.5 The mass functions to be combined are generated according to the fuuy similarity between two vectors.

Then take a transform to get the mass function. Where the 3 represents the fiuzy similarity of two vector, and d,,, is the distance form of 3, finally the mass function is generated from d8,, . The formulation is as follows:  Generation of mass function [7]  (23)  dt,j = ~ [ 2 ( 1 -  3) - 11 (24)  m1,, (0) = 1 - a0 Realization of the proposed method  (27)  The realizations of data association based on D-S theory are as follows:  Step 1. Starting from previous estimation X(k-llk-I) and P(k-Ilk-I)  for t = l  to T , determine the prediction X ' ( k  1 k - 1) and P'(k I k - 1) using Equ.12 and Equ.13.

Step 2. Calculating mass hnctions behveen the prediction vector X = {Xl,x2, ..., xi . )  and the measurement vectorY = (yl, y2 ,..., y,} .

Step 6.  Updating the state and covariance by using  Step 7. Repeat Steps I - 6 for different time Equ.5 to Equ.11 (m, = 1).

increments.

5 Simulation results The aim in this section is to test the performance of the proposed method, and compared with the cheap JPDAF method. The model trajectories of the four tracks[8] are shown in Fig.1 along with the noisy range and clutter measurements(with the line represents the actual track, and "." represents measurements, "*" represents clutter).

The state equation of the target is :  where x ( k )  represents the state vector composed of position and velocity between the target and the self- vehicle. The four targets have the same state transition and measurement transition matrixes, the deviation of the measurement noise has been selected as 6' = 0.5m', and sample intetval is T = 0. I s .

To evaluate the performance of the proposed method.

two criteria were used, one is the Root of Mean Square error, one is the Time Mean error. generally speaking, the two criteria can evaluate the tracking performance - .

accurately.

The definition of  RMS error is:  (28)  Where d k ) ,  4' ( k )  stand for the true state of target and its estimation in the running j [h at time k . &f is the times ofMonte Carlo running.

The definition of  T M  error is:  I N  N x= , Step 3. Calculate the belief matrix M,,, between the T = - ~ R b [ ~ - e r r o r ( k )  (2%  measurement vector Yand the track vector X, according to the mass functions. Where N represents the sample number.

. .  . . ..

100, Step 4. Calculate the belief matrix M.,, between the  track vector X and the measurement vector Y I according to the mass functions.

Step 5.  Finally decision. The correlation between the measurement vector and the track vector is similarity u,ith the correlation between the track vector and the measurement vector. The matrix M,,. and M,,, can represent the relations between the t r a c k  and the measurements. First, a local decision with the  I .  : . .

matrix Mi,,  or M.,j was made according to the lime (a) maximization rule. Then, if the decision fm,m the first matrix is consistent with that of the second matrix, the decision is the finally decision, otherwise the decision is ignored  Fig.1 noisy track trajectories and clutter signal used in the simulation  The monte car10 simulation has been tried for M=50. F i g 2  and Fig.3 depict the RMS position error, and     Fig.4 and F ig3  depict the RMS velocity error. T, represents the TM error of target j .

0 ,  71 ~ -~ T2iO.21  : . '*\ ~.,'..ii ;. 2.' ....

, .-... - 0 ,  time I S )  Fig?. Position error of the proposed method  r,,/...' D,: w.2-  ,%-s?..,-.+....

bme 1s) Fig3. Position error ofthe cheap JPDAF method  I  !

Fig4. Velocity error of the proposed method  From the above results, we know that the proposed method can get a high tracking accuracy for multiple targets tracking in road situation, compared with the cheap JPDAF method. The data association method using evidence theory is effective and easy to realize in cluner environment.

6 Conclusion The accurate tracking of multiple vehicles is a very important consideration in the design of active safety system. In this paper, a data association method based on evidence theory and fuzzy logic is introduced, which uses fuzzy logic to determine the mass functions, combines the mass functions by using the Dempster-shafer's rule, finally makes the decision according to the mayimization rule. The proposed approach can avoid some problems encountered by other same kind of algorithms like PDAF which is not adjusted to target crossings, either the JF'DAF which take into account a fixed number of targets and doesn't initialize new tracks. Monte Carlo simulations have been provided to evaluate the performance of the method. and it is proved that the proposed method is simplicit). feasibility and efficiency, compared with the cheap P D A F  method.

7 References [ I ]  Sittler R W. An optimal data association problem in  surveillance theory. IEEE Trans on Military Electroni~s.l964~8(2): 125- 139.

121 Bar-Shalom Y, Tse E. Tracking in a cluttered environment with probabilistic data association.

Automatica.l975, I l(9): 451-460.

[3] Fizgerald R. Development of practical PDA logic for multi-target tracking by microprocessor. American control conference. Seattle: Washington. 1986.889- 897.

[4] Blackman S S, Popoli R. Design and analysis of modem tracking systems. Boston: Anech Hourse.1999.

[SI Gruyer D, Berge-Cherfaoui V. Multi-sensor fusion approach for driver assistance systems. IEEE intemational workshop on Robot &Human Interactive Communication, 2001,479-485.

[6] Rombaut M. Decision in multi-obstacle matching process using theory of belief. AVCS'98, Amiens: France, J U I ~  i-3,1998.

[7] Rombaut M, Berge-Cherfaoui V. Decision making in data fusion using Demuster-Shafer's theory. 3th - IFAC Symposium on Intelligent Components and Instrumentation for Control Applications, France, June 1997.

[8] Lee M S, Kim Y H. New data association method for automotive radar tracking. IEE Proc.-Radar, Sonar, Navig. 2001, 148(5), 296-301.

