Clustering Item Data Sets with Association-Taxonomy Similarity

Abstract  We explore in this paper the efficient clustering of item  data. Different from those of the traditional data, the fea-  tures of item data are known to be of high dimensionality  and sparsity. In view of the features of item data, we devise  in this paper a novel measurement, called the association-  taxonomy similarity, and utilize this measurement to per-  form the clustering. With this association-taxonomy simi-  larity measurement, we develop an efficient clustering al-  gorithm, called algorithm AT (standing for Association-  Taxonomy), for item data. Two validation indexes based  on association and taxonomy properties are also devised to  assess the quality of clustering for item data. As validated  by the real dataset, it is shown by our experimental results  that algorithm AT devised in this paper significantly out-  performs the prior works in the clustering quality as mea-  sured by the validation indexes, indicating the usefulness of  association-taxonomy similarity in item data clustering.

1 Introduction  Data clustering is an important technique for exploratory  data analysis. Data clustering is an application dependent  issue and certain applications may call for their own spe-  cific requirements. Different from those of the traditional  data, the features of market-basket data are known to be of  high dimensionality and sparsity. There are several clus-  tering technologies which addressed the issue of clustering  market-basket data [2][3][4][5].

Explicitly, the support of item is defined as the percent-  age of transactions which contain . Note that in mining  association rules, a large item is basically an item with fre-  quent occurrence in transactions. Thus, item is called a  large item if the support of item is larger than the pre-given  minimum support threshold. In market-basket data, the tax-  onomy of items defines the generalization relationships for  the concepts in different abstraction levels.

EC Recommendation (Association Rules)  Association-  Taxonomy  Similarity  Item A  List Price: xxx  Price: xxx  You Save: xxx  Customers who bought this item also bought:  Item W  Item X  Item Y  Shelf-Space  Organization  (Taxonomy)  Shelf-Space  Organization  (Association-  Taxonomy  Clustering)  (a) Guidance (c) Guidance and  Recommendation  (b) Recommendation  Figure 1. An example for taking guidance and  recommendation into consideration.

In this paper, we devise the techniques of clustering item  data sets for fulfilling both the guidance and recommenda-  tion purposes which is shown in Figure 1. By using the tax-  onomy of items, it is shown in Figure 1(a) that shelf-space  is intuitively organized to guide customers to find the items  according to the corresponding categories. In addition, it  is shown in Figure 1(b) that association rules of items are  used for item recommendation in the electronic commerce  environments. In view of the features of item data, it is  shown in Figure 1(c) that we devise in this paper a novel  measurement, called the association-taxonomy similarity,  and utilize this measurement to perform the clustering for  shelf-space organization. With this association-taxonomy  similarity measurement, we develop an efficient clustering  algorithm, called algorithm AT (standing for Association  Taxonomy), for item data in the following.

2 Preliminaries  In market-basket data, a database of transactions is de-  noted by = { 1, 2, ..., }, where each transaction is     a set of items { 1, 2, ..., }. In mining association rules [1], the minimum support is given to identify the large  itemsets. In addition, the support of an itemset in database  is defined as the number of transactions which contain  this itemset in database . An itemset is called a large  itemset if its support is larger than or equal to the minimum  support . In this paper, an association itemset is defined  as a large itemset that contains at least two items and is not  contained by any other large itemset. The set of association  itemsets is denoted by = { 1, 2, ..., }. Items in the transactions can be generalized to multiple concept levels  of the taxonomy and represented as a taxonomy tree. In the  taxonomy tree, the leaf nodes are called the item nodes and  the internal nodes are called the category nodes.

In view of the features of item data, the items are catego-  rized into three kinds of items which are association items  (represented as ), single large items (represented as ),  and rare items (represented as ). An association item is  an item which appears in at least one association itemset. A  single large item is a large item but not an association item.

In essence, a single large item can be viewed as a large 1-  item which is not contained by any large 2-itemset. A rare  item is not a large item (i.e., not frequently purchased). Ex-  plicitly, the rare item is an item whose support is smaller  than the minimum support.

In this paper, a clustering = 1, 2, ..., is a partition of items into clusters, where is a cluster con-  sisting of a set of items. Note that purchasing relationships  (i.e., association) and taxonomy relationships are important  for the shelf-space organization. In this paper, the objec-  tive of clustering item data is to cluster the items with high  association relationships and high taxonomy relationships  together.

In view of the features of item data, we propose associ-  ation index and taxonomy index, which are defined below,  to assess the qualities of the clustering results.

Definition 1: (Association Index) The association index  of the clustering is defined as:  ( ) =  X (  X ( , )  ( , )  2 (| |)(| | 1)  )  | |  where ( ) is the association value of item and item . Explicitly, ( ) = 1, if and are in the same  association itemset based on the minimum support , and  ( , ) = 0, otherwise.

Definition 2: (Taxonomy Index) The taxonomy index  of the clustering is defined as:  ( ) =  X (  X ( , )  ( , )  2 (| |)(| | 1)  )  | |  where ( , ) is the taxonomy value of item and item . Explicitly, ( , ) = 1, if and are in the same  category under the cluster level , and ( , ) = 0, otherwise. In this paper, the cluster level is defined  as the level where the number of categories is equal to the  number of clusters .

3 Design of Algorithm AT (Association Tax-  onomy)  In this paper, we devise algorithm AT for clustering item  data. The similarity measurement of AT will be described  in Section 3.1. Section 3.2 describes the procedure of AT.

3.1 Similarity Measurement  The similarity measurement employed by algorithm AT  is called association-taxonomy similarity which consists of  the association similarity and the taxonomy similarity. As  described before, the set of association itemsets is denoted  by = { 1, 2, ..., }. For each association itemset, the association relationships of items can be represented as  a complete graph = { }, consisting of a set of ver- tices and a set of edges . In each complete graph,  each vertex represents an item in the association itemset and  each edge represents the association between two items. In  mining association rules, an association rule holds  in transaction database with confidence ( ) if ( ) of transactions in D that contain also contain . In this paper, we use co-confidence as the mea-  surement of the association between two items. Here the  co-confidence between and is defined as:  ( ) =  ( ( ) + ( ))  =  (  ( )  ( ) +  ( )  ( ) )  where ( ) is the support of item . The co-confidence ( , ) represents the association between item and  item .

Each association itemset is viewed as a cluster of items  (i.e., = ). For notational simplicity, the union clus- ter of and is denoted as . The set of over-  lapped items in is denoted as and the set of non-  overlapped items in is denoted as . In addition,  denotes the set of edges in , denotes the set  of edges connecting the overlapped items in , de-  notes the set of edges connecting the overlapped items and  non-overlapped items in , and denotes the set of     edges connecting the non-overlapped items in . Sim-  ilarly, the association similarity between overlapped items  of and is defined as:  ( , ) =  X ( , )  | |+ | |  Moreover, the association similarity between overlapped  items and non-overlapped items of and is defined  as:  ( , ) =  X ( , )  | |+ | |  Note that | | is a normalization factor for considering the effect of the edges of non-overlapped items in decreas-  ing the similarity between two clusters. Explicitly, the ex-  istence of non-overlapped items represents the dissimilar-  ity between two clusters. Thus, an edge between the non-  overlapped items increases the association dissimilarity be-  tween two clusters.

Definition 3: (Association Similarity) The association  similarity between and is defined as:  ( , ) = ( , )+ ( , )  where is the weight of the association similarity be-  tween overlapped items and is the weight of the as-  sociation similarity between overlapped items and non-  overlapped items.

In view of the factor of the taxonomy similarity, the simi-  larity for different properties are thus conducted. The taxon-  omy similarity of overlapped item to union cluster  is defined as:  ( , ) = X =1  | ( , )|  where is the number of levels in the taxonomy tree  and ( , ) is the set of items which is in the same cate- gory with item in level in . Similarly, the taxonomy  similarity of overlapped items of and is defined as:  ( , ) =  X ( , )  | | (| | 1)  Moreover, let be an item in and is not overlapped  with any item in . The taxonomy similarity of non-  overlapped item in cluster to cluster is defined  as:  ( , ) = X =1  | ( , )|  where ( , ) is the set of items which is in the same category with item in level in . As a result, the tax-  onomy similarity of non-overlapped items of and is  defined as:  ( , ) =  X ( , ) +  X ( , )  | | | |+ | | | |  Definition 4: (Taxonomy Similarity) The taxonomy simi-  larity between and is defined as:  ( , ) = ( , )+ ( ( , )  )  where is the weight of the taxonomy similarity of over-  lapped items and is the weight of the taxonomy similar-  ity of non-overlapped items. If each item in and each  item in only have the root node as the same category,  is totally dissimilar to according to the taxonomy tree  and ( , ) should be zero. Hence, because there are no overlapped item between and , the constant 1  is subtracted in the non-overlapped part for normalization  purpose.

Definition 5: (Association-Taxonomy Similarity) The  association-taxonomy similarity between and is de-  noted as ( , ) defined as:  ( , ) = ( , ) + ( , )  where is the weight of the association similarity and  is the weight of the taxonomy similarity. The deter-  mination of values of and is in fact application-  dependent.

3.2 Procedure of Algorithm AT  Algorithm AT is designed to consist of three phases: the  segmentation phase, the association-taxonomy phase, and  the pure-taxonomy phase. Note that the association items  consist of the elements in association itemsets. The overall  procedure of algorithm AT is outlined as follows.

Procedure of Algorithm AT (Association-Taxonomy)  (1) The Segmentation Phase:  Step 1. Identify the set of association itemsets, the set of  single large items, and the set of rare items.

(2) The Association-Taxonomy Phase:  Step 2. For each pair in the set of the association itemsets,  calculate the corresponding association-taxonomy similar-  ity.

Step 3. Merge the pair which has the largest association-  taxonomy similarity as a new cluster.

Step 4. Repeat Step 2 and Step 3 until the dendrogram is  constructed.

(3) The Pure-Taxonomy Phase:     Step 5. Identify clusters in the dendrogram.

Step 6. For each single large item, allocate it to the cluster  with the largest taxonomy similarity.

Step 7. For each rare item, allocate it to the cluster with the  largest taxonomy similarity.

Step 8. Repeat Step 6 and Step 7 until no item is moved  between clusters.

The advantageous features of algorithm AT are twofold.

The first one is on employing the association-taxonomy  similarity to effectively improve the quality of clustering  association items. The second one is to allocate the sin-  gle large items and rare items into clusters by calculating  the taxonomy similarity. As such, these items can be effi-  ciently and effectively allocated into the clusters. Note that  the numbers of single large items and rare items are usually  large as compared to the number of association itemsets. If  we take each single large item (or each rare item) as a cluster  and put them into the procedure from Step 2 to Step 4, the  execution time will be prohibitive. In addition, lack of large  association similarity with other clusters, these clusters with  only one single large item (or one rare item) would never be  merged until most of the association itemsets are merged.

These problems are avoided in algorithm AT.

4 Experimental Studies  To assess the efficiency of AT, we conducted experi-  ments to compare AT with the k-modes algorithm [3] and  the ROCK algorithm [2]. For the lack of space, we merely  use the real market-basket data from a large bookstore com-  pany for performance study and the analytical comparison  from synthetic data will be conducted in our future extesion.

In this real data set, there are | | = 100 transactions, | | = 58909 items, and = 3 levels. In addition, the number of the taxonomy level in this real data set is 3. In the real  data, the items with the same category are usually purchased  together. Thus, the association relationships and taxonomy  relationships are related to each other.

Figure 2 shows the relative quality of clustering results  of AT, ROCK, and k-modes in real data set where the data-  base size | | varies from 20K to 100K. When we vary | | from 20K to 100K in ROCK, the numbers of clusters are,  respectively, 576, 524, 468, 413, and 519. With association-  taxonomy similarity measurement, AT significantly outper-  forms other algorithms as validated by ( ) in Figure 2(a) and by ( ) in Figure 2(b). In this real data set, because the items with high taxonomy relationships are usually pur-  chased together while the items with low taxonomy rela-  tionships are not, AT has higher taxonomy index than asso-  ciation index, i.e., ( ) ( ).

5 Conclusion  In this paper, with the association-taxonomy similarity  measurement proposed, we developed algorithm AT for  item data. Two validation indexes based on association and  (a) A ssociation Index  (b) Taxonom y Index   0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  20K 40K 60K 80K 100K  |D|  T I(  U ) A T  ROCK  k-mo d es   0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  20K 40K 60K 80K 100K  |D|  A I(  U ) A T  ROCK  k-mo d es  Figure 2. ( ) and ( ) for algorithms when | | varies.

taxonomy features of items was also devised in this paper  to assess the quality of clustering for item data. As vali-  dated by real data, it was shown by our experimental results  that algorithm AT devised in this paper significantly outper-  forms the prior works in the clustering quality of item data.

Acknowledgement  The authors are supported in part by the Ministry of Ed-  ucation Project No. 89-E-FA06-2-4, and the National Sci-  ence Council Project No. NSC 91-2213-E-002-034 and  NSC 91-2213-E-002-045, Taiwan, Republic of China.

