

A Data Mining Based Algorithm for Traffic Network Flow Forecasting  Xiaoyan Gong, Xiaoming Liu  Absrracr- Recent development in ITS (Intelligent Transportation Systems) methods and technologies has moved trafiic operating systems fmm passive to pr-active control and managemen& where real-time and accurate traffic flow information is critical to actual implementation. So far many algorithms haw been proposed for traffic network flow forecasting, but problems in accuracy and timeliness still remain to be the major obstacle for their successful applications. For erample, presumed human travel habit and vehicle turning probabilities at intersections have greatly limited the use of dynamic assignment algorithm. In order to improve the forecasting and real-time responsiveness, a new algorithm based on data mining which can do association rules mining and association analysis is proposed here for predicting t raf f ic network flow. Simulation resultr using Corsim 5.0 have demonstrated rflertivencss of the new algorithm in bath accuracy  . and timeliness.

Index Tu"-ITS; Traffic Network Forecasting; Dynamic Assignment Algorithm; Data Mining; Association Analysis; Issociation Rules Mining.

1. I INTRODUCTION With development of ITS (Intelligent Transportation  Systems). it is now changing gradually from passive responding system to active behavior system which highly depends on prccise and real-time traffic network flow forecating and single point flow forecasting (Xiaoyan Gong.

ZOO I). So far. most of  research artention is mainly put into single point tlow forecasting while little in network flow forecasting. Dynamic traffic assignment is the main previous approaches for traffic network tlow forecasting. But because it needs OD matrix prediction and some presumptions such as vehicle turning probability of  each intersection and people's route selection methods. it cannot give accurate traffic condition prediction. especially when accidents occurs somewhere. because it just give regards to statistical and  Mmnurcript received March 9th. 2003.Thir work was supported by Chinese Academy of Science Knowledge lnitiativc Engineer Project: Ciry Traffic lntegratd Control and Management System.

Xiaoyan G o n ~  Ph.D. is with Intslligent Canmi and Syrlemr Engineering Centn, InsitUte of Automation. Chinese Academy of Sciences, P. 0. Box2728. Beijing IM)080. P. R. China(te1ephone: 86-10- 62554288. e-mail: prrlrh@hotmail.cam).

Ximming Liu, R.D. is with Intelligent Conml md System3 Enginccring Centcr. I ~ S I I I Y E  of Aummion. Chincw Academy of Sciencer, P. 0. Box 2728. Bsijing IOfI080. P. R. China (telephone: 86-10-6?554288. e- mail:lun@inacom).

0-7803-8125-4/03/S17.00 0 2003 IEEE  average factors of  the traffic network, but no accidental factors. In addition, long computation time is needed for its optimizing computation, which greatly confines its real application, even just in small traffic networks. Although several advanced algorithms (Zhaosheng Yang, 2000) such as dynamic traffic assignment model based on genetic algorithm is proposed. it still cannot meet real-time system requirements.

So in this paper a new traffic network forecasting approaches based on data mining is addressed in order to realize predict veracity. real-time ability and practicability. In section 2. scheme of  the whole traffic network algorithm is given. and then sections from 3 to 7 present each step of the new algorithm in detail with a simulation example by Corsim5.0. In section 8, simulation test result is analyzed. and in the last section some problems and comments are discussed.

11. TRAFFIC NETWORK FLOW FORECASTING SCHEME  Since dynamic traffic assignment considers little accidental factors, then NPR (Non-Parametric Regression) algorithm [Karlsson and Yakowitz, 19871, a kind of data mining approaches. can be used for each link flow forecasting in traffic network. because it needs no mathematical modeling and thus no data loss. that is to say. accidental factors has been concerned in NPR. In essencel the approach locales the stare of  the system (defined by the independent variables) in a 'neighborhood' of past, similar states. Once this neighborhood has been established. the past cases in the neighborhood are used to estimate the value of  the dependent variable. Recent researches [Davis and Nihan. 1991][Brain. 1997][Xiaoyan Gong. ZOOZ] have shown nonparametric regression to hold high potential to accurately forecast short-term traffic flows.

But if each link of traffic network adopts NPR. then it  cannot assure real-time ability although with high accuracy. So some measures must be taken to increasing its real-time ability. and here a kind of system dimension decreasing method based on data mining is given. scheme o f  the algorithm is shown in Fig.

I. There are five steps in this algorithm.

a) The whole traffic network is divided into some sub- networks through association analysis among adjacent links in the network.

b) In each sub-network. association analysis among adjacent links is used to locate key link which has great relativity with other links.

c) In each sub-network, association rules mining algorithm is adopted to get association NICS between key link and other links.

d) Put all the key links of the whole network into a vector, NPR algorithm is used to predict flow values of all the key links in the network.

e) With rules from step (c) deduce predict flow values of other links in cach sub-network from its key link?s predict flow value.

111. SUB-NETWORKS FORMATION A M ,  DETERMINATION OF KEY LINKS BASED ON ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS  The whole traffic network is divided into some sub- networks rhrough association analysis with equation ( I ) .

z ( z , - F K , - ?  (1) 6 U , . I  ? ?  =s,s,- f (i, - F ) > f  (J?, - TI: I . ,  I.,  Here. X =[x,,x,! ... x,] is traffic flow vector including whole day axrage flow with period of 5 minutes of link Lx .

and Y = [y , ; )~ , , . . .y~]  is traffic flow vector of adjacent link Ls. X. .? are arithmetic average of X and Y respectively, Here an example by Corsim 5.0 is s h o w  as in Fig. 2. in which there is a loop highway network ahich is divided into eight links from L,t o L, , and correlation coefficients through association analysis between each of two comccutieely adjaccnt links is shown in Fig. 3.The first point stands for the correlation coefficients between link L, and link L, . and second point for the correlation coefficients between link L2 and link L, , and so do others. From Fig. 3.

some gaps can find in the curves and they can become boundaries for division of traffic network. Therefore, three sub networks are made. L, with low carrclalion coeffkicnts with L, and L, becomes a single sub network s1: L, .

L, . L, and L,, constitute a sub netusork s2,  and L, .

L, and L, . constitute the last sub network SI.

Then ke! links in each sub-network should be determinated with the same method. In the first sub network s! since it includes only one link L, , then L, becomes its key  ~  L1L2 L*Lc LJL4 L4b L L S  LsL7 L7LS LBLl ~ I  F ig3 : Correlation Coefficients between Adjacent Links  link S?k ,  . In the second sub network S 2  which includes L, . L, . L3 and L, , association analysis is used again.

Fig. 4 shows correlation coefficients between L,  and L 2 , L, . L, respectively . L, and L, ~ L, . E, respectively. and L, and L, . L, . L, respectively. After averaging these correlation coefficients groups, L, with biggest average correlation coefficient becomes key link  S?k, of this sub network. With same method, L, becomes key link S?k,  of sub networkS? .

2. 3   I .  5  I  0. .i  LIL? IhL? I.Ih s,vg 1.?1.1 1.21.1 1.2111 I>LI LIL2 Lll.8  Fig. 4 : Correlation Coefficients Distriburion -. .~~ .- - .- . . ~.

lv. ASSOClASlON RULES MINING AMONG KEY LINKS AND OTHER LINKS IN SUB-NETWORKS  Association rules mining algorithm is first proposed by Agrawal in 1993(Agrawal, 1993), and often used in commercial data analysis, especially in supermarket commodity management. Through association rules mining.

clients purchasing habit can be well known and thus these purchasing rules can be considered in commodity ordering. In order to use this method. some conceptions in traffic field should be transforms corresponding to conceptions in association rules mining.

(a) Traffic flow v of key link L should be interpreted as a fuzzy variable y , and its universe of discourse is: V = ( I W  ,300 ,5W ,700 .9MI .I100 .13W  and it takes seven linguistic values: vl (very high), 9 , (high), v, (little high), y 4  (moderate), y 5  (little low), v6 (low), x, (very low) shown as in table I  as a fuzzy variable p , its universe of discourse is:  and it takes seven linguistic values: p, (very high), 94 (high), e,  (little high), g4 (moderate). er (little low), g6 (low), 0,  (very low) shown as in table 1 1 .

,1400 ,1500 ,1600 ,1700 ,1800 ,2000 1  Traffic occupancy o of key link L should be interpreted  0 = ( I O  ,20 .30 ,40 ,SO .60 ,70 .75 ,80 ,85 .90 ,95 I     0.2 !6  0.7 I 0.7 0.2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  Tab.IU : Value ofLinguistic Variable U'  I 0.8 0.6 0.4 Y 7  Trafic flow, U' of one of the other links L' of I! (little low), v'~ (low), d, (very low) shown as in table UI.

Then each linguistic value of yand < can be regarded as a kind of commodity in' association rules mining  ._^ / .  . .~~~ algorithm. That is to say that commodity  should also be interpreted as a finzy variable d .  Its universe ofdiscoune is:  I"= {IW .3M) .SW ,700 .9UO . 1 1 U U  .And i t  takes seven linguistic values: d ,  (very high). y t .y2  y ,  .Y4. y5 ,ya . y ,  .dl .V'> . i ; . g , .  gi. f" . c- g2 (high),  2, (little high). <, (moderate), i5 can be made.

(b) Then concurrence of traffic conditions in L and L ' in terms of linguistic value can be seen as one transaction.

0.2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  19.5  Linguistic Values  Traffic Occupancy 10 I 20 I 30 I 40 I 50 I 60 I 70 I 75 I 80 I 85 I 90 I 95    L el I 02 I ?3 1 04 1 05  I>&, , ( t )  . ~ , ~ ~ ~ , ( r ) .  ~ , ~ ~ ~ , ( t )  -. traffic voiume. average speed. average time occupancy of key link S'k,  during the current time interval I .

( t  - 1) . s,,,,(t - 1) . - 1) -- traffic volume. average speed and average time occupancy of key link S'k, during the previous five-minute interval t - 1 .

ltsl,l,h(~) , ss~kl ,h( t )  I  'Slkl  -- traffic volume .

average speed and average time S ' k ,  during the current time interval of historical average,  occupancy of key link  ~ ; , ~ l ~  ],,, (I - 1) . s , ~ ~ ~ ~ , ~  ( t  - 1) . ~ ~ , ~ ~ , ~ ( f  - 1) -_ traffic volume. average speed and average time occupancy of key  link S'k, during previous interval of historical average. So does other factors in the traffic state vector.

Using the state vector above, Euclidean distance FTom historical record i to the current conditions can be written as Equ(2): disr, = ~ [ ~ , ~ , ~ , ( r ) - ~ ' s , ~ , ( i ) ] *  +.......+[os ,,,, , ( I - ~ ) - O ' . A ~ * ( I  -2)l'  (2) And the forecast generation function is:  1 -  06 I 07  (3) Here. = -f I, I< is nearest state vector number of  current state vector. Fig. 5 .  Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 shows prediction traffic flow and real traffic flow of these three key links S ' k ,  . S'k, and S'k,  ) - I  d .

Fig. 5 : Predict Flow and Real Flow of Key Link S'k, Then based on association rules and predict flow values  i?om (3) and (4), predict flow values of other links can be deduced. For example, Link L, predict flow values deduced from values of link L, is shown in Fig. 8. It can be seen that accuracy of reasoning algorithm based on association rules isn't as good as NPR.

. ~ .~ ~ Fig. 6 : Predict Flow and Real I?low ofKey Link S 2 k ,  I  I_ .____ll__l____l--.l ~ ~ - ~ - Fig. 7 : Predict Flow and Real Flow of  Key Link S ? k ,  Fig. 8 : Predict Flow and Real Flow ofKey Link L,

V.  SIMULATIONS SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Table 1V shows the performance comparison between  Dynamic Assignment algorithm. new algorithm of  this paper and NPR. AAE stands for average absolute error and APE is Average percent crror. The results presented are for an Intel @ Pentium IO 600 MHz computer with 64 MB RAM running Windows 98 in command prompt mode with no other system demands. While individual results may vary, the findings are indicative o f  general performance.

Not only AAE and APE decrease a lot than Dynamic Assignment Algorithm. but also does Ex Time from 15s to 8s.Although it  seems that Ex time is approximately the same for new algorithm and NPR, with increasing size of the network. new algorithm will show its superiority over NPR in time consuming. However, its predict accuracy isn?t as good as NPR.

Simulation test result shows the new traffic network flow forecasting algorithm based on data mining above can exactly decrease executive time and increase predict  accuracy at the same time comparable with dynamic assignment algorithm.

Tab.Ar: Performance Index Comparison Index 1 MA?PE(%) I ExTime(m) 1  Dynamic Assignment I 12% I 15 Proposed Algorithm I 9% 1.44  NPR I 7.5% I I .56  But its predict accuracy isn?t as good as NPR; Some future research work is needed to solve this problem.

Maybe in one sub network. two key links can be selected out to reason other links? traftic flow, or some other deduction method can be used instead of  fuzzy logic based on data mining. Additionally, since new traffic data is producing every day, so the history database in this algorithm is also increasing at a quick speed, then some data record must be deleted, but how to manage and update the history database? Some research also should be done to try to assure a updated and concise database all the time.

Acknowledgement This work has been supported in part by the Outstanding  Oversea Scientist Award by the SDPC (the State Development Planning Commission) and the KIE. Grant by the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, all to Prof, Fei-Yue Wang. We are grateful to the helps from the Bureau of Beijing Traffic Administration. And the authors are sole responsible for the arguments and conclusions in this paper.

