THE RESEARCH THAT MININGASSOCIATION RULES ARE BASED ON  FEQCL REDUCED BY UNCERTAINTY COEFFICIENT APPROACH

Abstract: It is reduced attribute landscape orientation by  uncertainty coefficient. Frequent Equivalent Quantified Concept Lattice (QCL) constructed is an efficient tool which represents form of knowledge and data which introduces frequent equivalent quantified base of the concept lattice, Association rule implicated among values of attributes of a database can be mined accurately according to the user?s interesting and strong relativity attributes rather than Apriori algorithm to compute frequent item set, then reduces lots of redundant association rules and improves the accuracy and efficiency of rules mining.

Keywords:  Rule Data Mining; Concept Quantified Lattice; Association  1 Introduction  Mining association rule [?I is one of main content of data mining research at present, and emphasizes particularly on finding the relation of differ items in the database. There are many attributes of feeble pertinence, owing to practice database, so that mining association rule may exist many redundancies and errors, or may not exist any relation. On the other hand, mining?s rules may assemble explosion. It can effectively resolve these problems that using uncertainty coefficient way reduces the attribute of feeble pertinence. Uncertainty coefficient way is that user select pertinence, so that it can eliminate feeble pertinence?s attribute in resolving problem, so we can reach intention of predigesting explain.

Concept Lattice (It also stands for Galois Lattice) is that R. Wille firstly introduced in 1982r51, can open out all kinds of relation what contain in the data. In applying practically, whereas, concept Lattice exists deficiency, XueGang Hu enlarged Galois Lattice in the paper [2331, and researched and applied Galois Lattice what also contains in Quantified Concept Lattice (QCL). QCL reduces the form of the expression, accordingly imports the idea of frequent equivalent and quantified extension so that FEQLC is the  same with the problem which we discover knowledge in the large database. The paper will introduce to eliminate feeble pertinence attribute and construct FEQCL so that we can efficiently mine association rule.

2 Association Rules Description  Supposed that I=[il,i2,i3, ... in] is set of n dissimilitude items, Transaction can express { TID,< X I ,  x2.

x3...xm>}, TID is transaction? mark in set ,which is oniy in set , and D is transaction?s database in which every transaction T is set of many items. Association rule is also the logic formula of X s Y ,  therein XET, YET and XnY=0. If there were contained XuY into S%  Association rule?s supporting degree can definite as Support (X*Y)=Support (XuY)=S in the transaction?s database; if there were contained Y into X?s transaction in transaction?s database at the same time, (X3Y)  association rule?s confidence can definite Confidence (XsY)=Support  In order to effectually mine association rule, we must give minimal support and minimal confidence. Mining association rule is via seeking rules which contain all of support and confidence what partly exceed minimal support and minimal confidence , namely appeal to satisfy: Support(X3Y) zminsupport, Confidence(X3Y) 2minconfidence rules are the form of X-Y, so that seeking rule can decompose of two child problem : ( 1 1 One problem is to find out all of frequency item?s sets from transaction database D; ( 2  ) the other problem is to create association rules which can not be under the minimal confidence using frequency item?s sets.

(XuY)/Support (X).

3 Uncertainty Coefficient approach  Uncertainty coefficient what was cited in the C4.5[?], uses to measure how degree supporting attribute affect analysis attribute. Uncertainty coefficient way is a sort of  0-7803-7865-2/03/$17.00 02003 IEEE  mailto:Xueghu@mail.hf.ah.cn,hfmyb999@sohu.com   standardization and asymmetry way of correlation measured. The bigger supporting attribute?s uncertainty coefficient is, the more this supporting attribute affects the analysis attribute. Supposed that Y and X partly express two attributes, there are J number values of the Y attribute, and there are I number values of the X attribute. We use one cross table of I rows and J lines which can express J X I  kinds of results which Y associates with X. Figure 1 as follows:  PI1 RI ( ? .  PJ Pl.

X Value2 n?, iilt ? 1 .  R x  hl pl? ? * ?  hJ h. . . .  . *  . .

Velw I r ~ y ,  r q l  . . W J  RI  PI1 pzz ?? m J  Pl.

?liitd ?., n 2  .. RJ IL.

h P.1 .. F J  1.0 Figure 1 two dimensions cross table  In the table, no is frequency number what arises in the result n, Is the amount of No n row, n, is the amount of No n line?s values. n.. is the summation of frequency number of two dimensions. p,,=n,J/n We must take notice of all of the summation of proportion is 1. Table has two attributes can call the two dimensions cross table, as analogy there is three dimensions cross table, and so no.

According to criterion by the figure 1, if Y is analysis attribute and X is the supporting attribute, we can definite the uncertainty coefficient, as following:  J  at this location: hy = - z p - ;  log, p,; ;=I  Uncertainty coefficient is a sort of standardization measurement, which the bigger value is, the stronger pertinence is. when Uyx =O,it can denote no correlation between supporting attribute and analysis attribute.

Moreover, when UYx = 1,it can denote the strongest correlation between supporting attribute and analysis attribute.

4 Frequent Equivalent Quantified Concept Lattice (FEQCL)  Definition4.1: the one conception C= (A,B) =({BI, ..., Bk)) is context (O,D,R) and is the concept of ECL given    C?=(IAI,B) mean C?s quantified concept, C will be named as C? real concept, therein [A( is the cardinal number of extension A, namely concept?s extension is quantified , which predigest concept intension.

Definition4.2: Supported that C=(A,B, (AI) is a concept in the EQCL, if there is IA(/(Ol>minsup, so that concept C is called as Frequent concept, therein 101 is the cardinal number of object 0, which is the number of the transaction in the database.

Lattice structure is made up by frequent equivalent quantified concept is shortened as FEQCL. Equivalent quantified concept which is formed by intension B is defined as C (B), and frequent equivalent quantified concept sets (shortly named as FEQCS) which is contained to all of extension cardinal number what is N, written down  Definition4.3: Supported that C=(A, B, (AI) is the frequent concept in the FEQCS, if there is the equivalent intention Bi in the Equ (A), coming into existence B,EB, ( j= l* - .k ,  l<=i<=k), B, is named as C? s maximal equivalent intention , written down MaxEquInten(C). if any of frequent conceptC?=(A? ,B? ,lA?l) ( A?# A ) toward the FEQCS, not to exist MaxEquInten(C) c MaxEquInten(C?), so that frequent concept C is named as Maximal frequent concept.

Proposition4.1: In the FEQCS(C(N)), two elementary quantified concepts which are equivalence between Cl=(Bl) and C2=(B2), whose sufficient and essential condition is C(B~UB~)EEQCS(C(N)).

Proposition4.2: In the FEQCS(C(N)),if there are two elementary quantified concepts, the one is Cl=(Nl, Bl),the other is C2=(N2, B2),which content BlB2,Cl would be equal with C2.

FEQCS(C(N)).

5 Mining Association Rule in the FEQCL  Definition5.1: Lattice concept which is decided by context(O,D,R),namel y C=(A,B) , Support(C)=IA(/lO( means supporting degree of concept C .Therein (01 is cardinal number of the context (0, D, R) extension, I A I is cardinal number of the concept C extension.

Definition5.2: Supposed that C=(A, B=(B,, BZ, . . ., Bk}) were the concept of quantified expand concept lattice(with the exception of complete concept),if Support(C) is beyond the given threshold value S, so C is defined as frequency concept in the quantified expand concept lattice, therein every group of elementary intension Bi(i=l ... k) is elementary frequency item set, redundancy intension of C and comparatively redundancy intension of C is also called     A B D E I J  K 1 1 0 1 0 0 1  0 2 1 0 0 0 1 1  1  ~  as redundancy frequency item set.

Definition5.3: If there were the two concepts in the  lattice which are decided by the context (0, D, R), one concept is Cl=(Al, Bl), the other is C2=(A2, B2),and ClcC2,we can call  According to being structured to quantified concept lattice beforehand, we can acquire with elementary frequency item set from frequency concept. To be frank, in the frequency concept C, every group of elementary intension also is elementary frequency item set, whose supporting degree is the cardinal number of concept extension.

Proposition 5.1: Frequency item set is equal with equivalence intension of concept lattice one by one.

Proposition5.2: if C=(A, B={BI, Bz, ..., Bk}) were the concept of quantified concept lattice, so that B,(i=l,. ..,k) must be the frequency set whose supporting degree is (A(; If X were the frequency set whose supporting degree is S, so that there is a group of equivalence intension which certain concept has cardinal number of extension what is S. (owing to proposition 1 ,it can be proofed).

Proposition5.3: Supported that the frequent concept CI=(AI ,BI)<CZ=(AZ,BZ), therein BI={BII,BI~, . . . ,BI,,,}), B2={BZI,Bz,. . .,B2")), if there exist equivalent intention B,@,qu(Al), BzJ~Equ(A2), and coming into existence AI/A2<minconf, that the association rule that confidence degree equal AUA2 is B~,--(BI,-B~~).

Proposition5.4: Supported that the frequent concept C=(A,B) in the FEQCL, therein B=(B1,B2,. . .,Bk}, if there exist B, rB ,  (i,j=l.. .k,ifj) in the equivalent intention ,so there is the association rule that the confidence degree equal 100% is the B,+ (B,-B,) .

Taking into account these factor above, mining association rules, we can recur to the frequent equivalent  Support(Cl=C2) =JAl l/lA21.

Table 1 Purchase record table  , 1 1 1  ' 3  1 1  l o  l o  1 0  1 1  1 1 4 l o  I 1  l o  l o  I o  I 1  quantified concept lattice and Hass graph to acquire maximal item set expediently and straightly, moreover, to come out association rule what is least redundancy.

Supporting degree of the concept reflects supporting degree of the entire database, moreover, confidence degree reflects the confidence degree which concept is relative to father concept or to straight hypernotion.

The example can illustrate that mining association rules make use of frequent equivalent quantified concept lattice reduced by uncertainty coefficient approach.

Hypothesis that the big supermarket would have eleven kind of commodity, these records are that five customers who purchase commodities, a bargain of every customer is equal with a transaction, all attributes of each record are valued as 1 or 0 (1 denotes that customer has purchased this kind of commodity, 0 denotes that customer has not purchased this kind of commodity; as following table 1).

Two dimensions cross table is structured by attribute A and attribute B, according to this table, we can calculate the pertinence between the attribute A and the attribute B. The user can decide to select the attribute of the stronger pertinence so as to reduce the structure of frequent equivalent quantified concept lattice and to fall the redundancy of the association rule. The approach which uncertainty coefficient is calculated between other supporting attributes and other analysis attributes are same.

The final result lies in the table 2.

In the table 3, the K uncertainty coefficient is 0.435, which means that the error degree of the analysis result would decrease by 43.5%, if K would participate in analyzing the A pertinence. So the bigger the uncertainty coefficient of the supporting degree is, the higher the precision of the analysis is due to this attribute participation.

We can gain the table 2 that the user can mutually select the attributes that are the stronger peitinence. Distribution data  Table 2 Final result   5 l o  1 1  ( 0  1 1  ( 0  1 1  1 1  1 - 1  I I 1 -  I I- I -  I I - I Uncertainty(%) I 1.00 I ' 0.023 I 0.178 I 0.332 I 0.023 I 0.023 I 0.023 1 0.435 I 0.175 I 0.435      of the supemarket is denoted as the duality relation R, the Because of A E AI, according to definition 5.2, we know chart underneath is relevant concept Hass graph of concept that conf(AI - (AI - I))= conf(A1 + A) = lattice (chart 1). There is relatively the quantified concept Exten(#z)/Exten(#l) =3/5 =60%>minconf =59%, so that  the association rule AI - A content to demands. lattice (chart 2).

We introduce the arithmetic of the mining association Homoplastically, the concept #6 and its generalized rule that introduces to go through frequent equivalent hypernotion #1,#2,#3, there is the rule A-J(2/3), AJ- quantified concept lattice from up to down so as to dig out  speedily the association rule, in the moment of checking a 1(2/2), AI-J(2/2) content to demands, and that the frequent concept C, according to proposition5.4 at first, we -AJ, because of conf(1-kl) =2/5 < mincon+59%, which can dig out the rule, afterward compare bemeen the does not content to demands. We can dig out other concept and its hypemotion in turn so as to find the relation association rules in co-on.

of equivalent intention. Namely it is based on proposition The chart 2 shows that we can easily figure out the  I  ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ,  I) (1 ,  2 ,  3, 4, 5, I, 5)  (2, 3, a i )  (1, 3, aj) (4, 5, jk) (2, 5, bk)  (2, 3 ,  ai, 2) (1, 3, aj, 2) (4, 5, jk, 2) (25, bk, 2)  (2, ajk) (3, aij) (1, adj) (4, bjk) (5, bejk)  (2, ajk, 1 ) ( 3 ,  aij, ) ( l , ad j ,  1) (4, bjk, 1)(5, bejk, 1)  (0 , all) -\# Ivy t# 13 Chart 1 Hass graph of concept lattice (0, all) 814  Chart 2 Hass graph of FEQCL  5.3 to dig out other associaticn rule. The description of the arithmetic is in detail as follows:  The arithmetic S.l(the arithmetic is based on FEQCL to dig out the association rule)  Input: frequent equivalent quantified lattice (FEQCL) Output: the integrity set of the association Begin For all of maximal frequent concept Ci do  For all of son concept Cj of the concept Ci do According to proposition5.4, digging out the  association rule between Ci and Cj If (Cj is not checked) then According to proposition5.3, digging out the  End; We can define the form of the association rule: concepti+ concept2 (conf(cl - cz)), based on  frequent equivalent quantified concept lattice.

Supported that the minsupp equal to 59%, the minconf  equal to 59%, there is the concept #2 and its straight hypemotion #1 toward chart 2, according to the definition, we can know Equ(#2) equal to {A}, Equ(#l) equal to {I}.

association rule from Cj  frequency sets via using the Hass graph of frequent equivalent quantified concept lattice, which is more concision and directness than that of the Apriori arithmetic.

Firstly, we can utilize uncertainty coefficient approach to reduce the attribute of feeble pertinence so as to decrease the number of the frequency item sets. Nextly, we can gain the frequency item set via using the FEQCL, which is more agility and concision than that of the Apriori arithmetic.

The user searches his interesting association rules according to the Hass graph so as to decrease many redundancy rules and to improve the efficiency of mining association rules.

6 Conclusion  In the paper, we utilize uncertainty coefficient approach to reduce the attribute of the feeble pertinence so as to structure effectively the FEQCL and to avoid the explosion of the concept lattice structure, and mine the association rule via the FEQCL. Moreover, the user can mutually select his interested association in the Hass graph of the FEQCL so as to improve the mining efficiency, at the same time, this arithmetic avoids the complex calculation      of frequency item set in the Apriori arithmetic. Because the lattice structure has the maturity character so that the mining association rules are the maturity character. This arithmetic is very applied to mining the association rules from the big database of supermarket, bank and insurance and so on.

