DISCOVERING ASSOCIATION RULES IN ENGINEERING DOCUMENT"

ABSTRACT would significantly enhance the efficiency of documenting new product and shorten time to market. Engineering document digitizing and text  computer-aided engineering document edition.

Text mining is one field of knowledge  management, TexT is applied L\ide,y in.

retrieving, analyzing, reorganizing, classifying and excavating plain tests (e.g. Web pages and market transactions) [31,41, In contrast to text mining, engineering document mining needs analyzing document databases for discovering relationships among document structures and item in order to provide editors with the relevant knowledge and  The paper introduces the problem Of mining mining t e c h o l o ~ ,  are the &,,o necessities of association rules in engineering document for computer-aided engineering document editing system. The feature in engineering document and the method of mining market transactional databases are reviewed. The procedure of mining association rules in engineering dociment is proposed for generating engineering document contents efficiently and accurately. The resulting association rules accompanied by an experiment are able to enhance the productivity of editing engmeering document.

Information. Mining association rules in engineering document is a tvpical one,  The problem of computer-aided engineering document edition can be decomposed into two subproblems [ 5 ] .  One is document structure generation. Another is document contents qeneration.

Keyword: Knowledge dmoveq, Association rule mining. Engineering document editing, Apriori algorithm  1. INTRODUCTION -  We solve the second problem by mining association rules in engineering document. Association rules in engineering documents are 1'f contents A ~ then  Knowledge economy drives shifting from Contents B It Reusing these rules will obtain high production-oriented mode to management-oriented efficiency of editing engineering document.

mode and innovation-oriented mode [l]. This ne organization of the rest of the paper is as transition would finish such a production mode follows, Section 2: the regular association i n called bnce succeeded. no change in decades", and engineering document is presented. In Section 3, a acheve a fast speed product renewd. Consequently, formal model of engineering document is presented.

rapid engineering document editing Plays an In Section 4, the procedure for mining association important role in enhancing enterprise competition. rules in engineering document is presented.

Reusing document contents is an approach available ~ ~ ~ d + j ~ ~  rules are obtained from a large set of to fast edit engineering document. By statistics [2] :  documens in section 5,  Section 6 the reusability of aircraft dramtng reaches 8W'r concludes the paper, more duiing changing model of aircraft Obviously, developing and reusing legacy engineering document  . Suppolted hy the ERCIM (the Europraii Resemh Consortium for iiifoniiatics and Matheiiiatics) Fellowship.

Correqoiiduig autlior. Address: Embalded Sofkare, V I T  Electronics, Oulu 90571, Finland. Tel.: +358 8 551 231 1  > 1: a\ .. +?58 8 55 I 2320, E-mail addresses: ~rt-Jiehan.Zliou~vtt,li  (Jiehm Zhou)     2. FEATURES OF ENGINEERING DOCUMENT  2.1 Noimalized engineeiiug document Engineering documents record enterprises' technical activities and outcomes, which are impersonally and orderly described in document contents. That is normalized content which results in common use of engineering document [2]  [6].  Normdized content is the prior condition of developing and reusing these engineering documents. The normalized engineering documents are characterized as follows:  Normalized structures in a series of documents.

Each techca l  action always complies with some disciplines and restrictive sequences. which are shared by a typical speciality Engineering document established in even; action is .relatively fixed. A special engineering document corresponds to a certain structure and specification.

Normalized contents. Technical actions must comply with a certain technical standards and specification. For example, Design must conform to the product standardization. Routine experiments must be carried out by testing new products. These actions are definitely mirrored by engineering documents. which appear as nomiahzed engineering document contents.

Normalized descriptions. Concepts and parameters in engineering documents are generally described by a set of terms. For example, Technical parameters are described by a set'of dedicated symbols and formulae.

2.2 Association in engineering document Editing engineering documents runs from product market analysis to new product making. There are similarity and succession among document contents edited in decision-maljng, design, trial-production and operation stage. Namely. in a certain estent document contents are edited nith the basis of refemng and modi&Jing legacy documents. Let D be' a set of product A documents. Where D records the procedure and outcome of product A. Let d, be a unit document. Where d3 records the procedure and outcome of a unit action. The succession of D are embodied in normalized structures and association contents of engineering documents. In a case of editing design specification d , ,  let  d ,  = {d:,d:;..d:} be a set of legacy design  specification. On the one hand, design specification requires every document d: to contain the same primary contents. These primary contents are abstracted by structures of document d:  ~ namely.

d:  = {S , ,S2 ; . .Sn8} .  St denotes des iy specification; S2 denotes product function. Each document structure is composed of several sentences.

Each sentence is composed of several items, namely, Si = {l~,lI?;..1,!}. On the other hand, there is a certain statistics regularity in repeating contents between design specification d,' and d,"+. These regularity mostly appear as the following association rules: 0 Item i edition is said to contain item j edition if  and only if I ,  3 I,.

Structure i edition is said to contain structure j edition if and only if S,  =Si Structure i edition is said to contain item j edition ifandonlyif S, - I j .

Mining association d e  in engineering document aims to discover the above-mentioned edition patterns, that is edition knowledge, and aid engineers to publish engineering documents efiiciently and accurately.

.

3. MODELING ASSOCIATION RULES IN ENGINEERING DOCUMENT  3.1 Formal engineeiing document model On account of features of specialization .and standardization in engineering document, sentences in engineering document can be seen as a set of several engineering terms. Idioms, figures and forms in engineering document could be represented by special terms. As a result, a simplified engineering document model is shown as follows:  Let I = {il,i,;..iM}(A4 2 1) be a set of items, let D = {d l ,d2; . . ,d , , }  be a set of engineering documents, where each document di is a set of  items. A document d,  is said to be a subset of I That is d, c I     Definitiori I :  Document d is said to support item set I ,  if and only if I ,  c d  where I ,  is a set of items.

Definiriorz 2: The association rule is an implication of the form X z Y (s, c) if and only if .c%of all the documents D support X and Y together, c% or documents supporting X support Y at the same time. That is;  X 3 Y (.F,c) is defined as item association rule, where X c I ,Y c I ~ and X n Y = CJ X z Y (s,c) is defined as structure association rule, where X c S ,Y c S ~ and X n Y = CJ .

X a Y (.s,c) is defined as item-structure association rule: where X c S _Y c I .

Definition 3: Mining association d e  in engineering documents is a process of generating association rules R = {r,,r?;..,rn): where each d e r, satisfies both a minimum support threshold and a minimum confidence threshold.

D@irim d; I; rs defined as the full-large set of D, if and only if F c I .  d,GD, and IOOMf all the documents d, support F.

3.2 Properties of association rules Associations rule mining process may generate a large number of pattems. Typically, only a small fraction of these patterns will actually be of interest to the given user. Thus. users need to further confine the number of uninteresting pattems retumed by the process. This can be achieved bv specifying interestingness measures that estimate the confidence? support_ expected confidence and lifi[7] [SI  Confidence: The association rule X 3 Y has confidence c in the document set D if c is the percentage of documents in D containing X that also contain Y . This is taken to be the conditional prohahiliiy: P(Y ix). That is confidence(X =) Y )  = P(Y i X)  Szuppa-r: The association rule X 3 Y holds in the document set D with support s ,  where .Y is the percentage of documents in D that contain both X and Y . This is t&en to be the probability:  I?.x/iec/ed confidence: the association rule X 3 Y has expected confidence e in the document  P ( X  U Y ) .

Structure Mssion  Technical specification  output  Itemset Operational system, run-time place, precise place, run-time direction, precise direction: relative velocity:  Direction error, horizontal error, place error, velocity error, . . .

Operational system, direction,  . . .

Environment Military standard, , , .

I posture, velocity_ . . .

Reliability 1 MTBF: . . .

Maintainability I i  I Environment I condition I I  I     occur more frequently than I. Therefore, X is not frequent either, that is, P(I U A)<min-sup.

The join step: To find Lp , a set of candidate k- itenkets is generated hy joining Lk.f with itself, This set of candidates is denoted C,. The join action, L,-, PQ L,-,, is performed; where members of Lr., are joinable if their first (K-2) items are in common.

The prune step: CA- is a superset of 4, that is, its members may or may not be frequent, but all of the frequent k-itemsets are included in C,. A scan of the document base to determine the count of each candidate in C, would result in the determination of 4. The Apriori anti-monotone property is used to reduce the size of C,.

4.2 Generating association rules from frequent itemsets Once the frequent itemsets from documents in a document base have been found: it is straightforward to generate strong association rules from them. This can he done using the following equation for confidence; where the conditional probabilitJ. is expressed in terms of itemset support count:  corlfidence(A 3 B ) = P(B. 1 A )  4. PROCEDURES FOR MINING ASSOCIATION RULES IN  ENGINEERING DOCUMENT  A set o f  items is referred as an itemset. An itemset that contains k items is a k -itemset. The occurrence frequency of an itemset is the number of documents that contain the itemset. This is also !mown, simply, as the frequent!., support count, or count of the itemset. An itemset satisfies minimum support if the occurrence frequency of the itemset is greater than or equal to the product of minsup and the total number of documents in D .  If an itemset satisfies minimum support. then it is a frequent itemset. The set of frequent k -itemsets is commonly denoted by L, . In this information. the problem of mining association rules ca~i be decomposed info hvo subproblems  Find all frequent itemsets: By definition, each of these itemsets will occur at least as frequently as a pre-determined minimum support count.

Generate strong association from the frequent itemsets: By definition, these rules must satisfi minimum confidence.

181 191  4.1 Finding frequent itemsets using candidate generation Apnori is an influential algorithm for 'mining frequent itemsets for association rules. The name of the algorithm is based on the fact that the algorithm uses prior knowledge of frequent itemset properties.

Aprion employs an iterative approach known as a level-wise search. where k-itemsets are used to explore @+/)-itemsets. First. the set of frequent 1- itemsets is found. This set is denoted L,. L ,  is used to find LI: the set of frequent 2-itemsets, which is used to find L j .  and so on, until no more frequent k- itemsets can be found. The finding of each L, requires one full scan of the document base. A hvo- step process consisting of join and prune actions is performed to find Lp. The prune action uses the frequent itemset property called anti-monotone in the sense that if a set cannot pass a test, all of its supersets will fail the same test as well. In a word, if an itemset I does not satisfy the minimum support threshold, min-sup, then I is not frequent, that is, P(IJirnirz-.wp. If an item A is added to the itemset I.

then the resulting itemset X (i.e.: X=I U A )  cannot  = sup port _coiint(Au B)lsup port -count(A)  Where support-count( A U B )  is the number of documents containing the itemsets A u B :  and supportgount(A) is the number of documents containing itemset A. Based on this equation, association rules can be generated as follows:  For each frequent itemset I ;  generate all nonempty subsets of I .

For evev nonempty subset s of I ,  output the rule ir  support-count(l)lsupport~o~t( s) 2 minconfi, where mingonfi is the minimum confidence threshold.

:. s 2 ( I  - s) )1  4.3 Procedures of generating association rules in engineering document Given the set of documents D ;  we use two certain additional actions for generating all rules: (1) Finding the itemset associated with an item: That is, when we edit documents in computer, given an item, itemsets associated with it come out with their association degree.

(2) Sorting association rules: The step sorts the association rules with their supports and confidences.

The procedure of generating association rules in engineering document is shown as follows:  Finding the full-large set of D.

Mining all of structure-structure association rules s izs, ; Sorting structure-stsucture association rules with their supports and conlidcnccs: Mining a11 of slruclure-item association rules s, 3 I , .

Sorting structure-item association iules with their  Mining all of ilcni-iter nssbciatioii rules =3 I ,  :  suppoits and cont'idenccs; Computing the net ot't'scqucnt I-itemsets;  Sorting item-item association rules with their supports and confidences:  I ,  operational system 12 run-time place 13 precise place  ~ 1 4  run-time direction 1, precise direction 16 relative velocity I ,  direction error k horizontal error 1, place error 1, 0 velocity error  5.  EXPERIMENTS  dl d, dj d4 dj ' dg d, d8 d p  dio  I, ,I, .I, ,I, J 3 J 4  I ,  .I, .I, .I, I ,  .I, .I, , I , I1 .I, .Ij .I, , Ij 1.. .I3 . Ij .I6 I ,  , I, , I ,  ,I, 11 .I2 .Ij,,& 318 I J ,  .I, ,I, 1 I ,  .I, Ii ,I, ,I,  ,I< I 16 ,I7  I dio I S I  .s, , s, .s, ,sj . s, .s, Table 4 Item sets of document Brmament system  s, s, S 3 S, sj s6 &  smxification"  Outline System mission System function System composition System plan System simulation System evaluation  d l  & llj  &  d6 d7 d?

u'o  dj  as1 .s, .sj . is4 .Sj .L76 .sj s, ,s, .Sj .s, , s, .S6 .s j s, .s, .S, .S, .s i s, ,s, .sj .s, , Sj .s, ,SI  s, , S, .s, .s, .sj ,s, .Si s, .s, ,S3'.S,..Sj 3'.

s, ,s, .Sj .s, , sj .s, ,si S I  .s, .sj .s, .sj ,S;  S I  .& .sj.s6.s;     Rule ( I )  above means that 60% of structure Si contains items ll. I.. and 1; together. Rule (2) above means that 75% of item 1, occuiring in the structure S I  contains I, and I;. Rule ( 5 )  above means lhat 86% of items 1, and 1; together occumng in the structure S, contains I;. These document association rules can help engineers to edit engineering document structures and contents in computer.

6 .  CONCLUSION  We introduced the problem of computer-aided engineering document editing. We solve the problem b!. mining association rules in engineering document.

Those rules are:  Structure-structure association rules: Structure-item association rules; Item-item association rules;  Having a n d y e d  features of engineering document. we simplify engineering document using i tem as a unit, and give a formal model of engineering document. Then the procedure is presented based on the conventional algorithm. In the end. we experimented the effectiveness of the procedure by applying it to mining association rules in engineering document obtained from a military compan!. The resulting rules ware able to enhance the accuracy and efficiency of editing engineering document.

7 .  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  I thank Haiyng Lan for his help in esperiencing the procedure of mining association rules in engineering document. I also thank Xudong Chai for his help in providing the data used in the experiments.

