

Mining OLAP Cubes: Semantic Links Based on Frequent Itemsets  Sami Naouali Mohamed Quafafou Gilles Nachouki LINA, 2, r. la Houssini&e,Nuntes IAAI, 12, av. gCnkral Leclerc LINA, 2,r. la Houssinizre, Nantes Naouali@,Iina. univ-nuntes. fi- Qua f;7 fou @, iaa i. fr Narhouki(2Ilina. univ-nantes:fr  With the fast evolution of OLAP (On Line Analytical Processing) systems which proved their efficiency to analyze multidimensional data, several works were proposed in the literature to extract knowledge from data warehouses. Algorithms used in this context were, most of time, not suited with the multidimensional data and the OLAP structure of a data warehouse. A simple example is that applying rules generating algorithm on a data warehouse?s fact table (principle table in a data warehouse) produces rules that are expressed with keys values of dimensions data at a given hierarchical level. Such rules are of no meaning, nor sense, for the user who aims to find the interest of this knowledge in his decision making process. This problem imposed so limits on data warehouses? mining. Every approach, even though approved to be efficient on operational data, has to prove its effectiveness if applied on OLAP systems.

Our objective, in this paper, is to propose an algorithm to pragmatically extracting knowledge from data warehouses. Results of this algorithm should be shown in the graphical representation of the OLAP cube. This goal is not an end in itself. It is rather the solution that we adopted for the cnrichmcnt of the analytical capabilitics of OLAP systems. Such visualisation or morc gcncrally analytical capabilities are of a big importance for users of data warehouses according to first founders of OLAP systems [ 1, 21.

Association rules discovery was successfully used for mining huge databases. But the problem with association rules discovery, if we try to apply it on a data warehouse, is that it will return dimensions values that are usually associated in the fact table (main table in a data warehouse). Such results relate values of dimensions of a same line (record of the fact table). Or a record of the fact table is represented in the OLAP cube, corresponding to the whole fact table, by a cell. Association rules are so intra-cellular relations, and the unique solution to represent them to the user is simply to list them. Such knowledge representation is obviously not evident to be understood and then explored by the OLAP system?s user who needs visualized results according to the OLAP literature.

To meet this problem, we propose in this paper a new approach for discovering relationships between OLAP cube cells. Such relationships are based on frequent itemsets computation which was always used in the literature as a first step for association rules generation. They define semantic links between cells of the OLAP cube. These cells share so one or several values for the dimensions of the application. Such relationships are inter-cellular by nature, which makes possible their graphical representation together with the 3D representation of the OLAP cube by means of lines relating associated cells and whose colour is varying according to the number of frequent itemsets shared by the two associated cells.

As mentioned above, inter-cells semantic links are based on discovering frequent itemsets. The most common solution for this stemming [3 ,  41 is to start with the frequent itemsets containing only one item and to add to them, step by step, more items, until no growth is possible. Each step generates a set of candidate itemsets that are counted in order to select the frequent ones. On dense databases the main drawback of this approach is the number of candidates that suffers a combinatorial explosion [ 5 ] ,  rendering the algorithms very slow and inefficient.

Rather than exhaustively enumerating all the frequent itemsets, we want to provide an image, an approximate set. If finding all the frequent itemsets is too time-consuming, we are willing to trade  0-7803-8482-2104/$20.00 02004 IEEE. 447    the completeness of the result with an approximate set of frequent itemsets, obtained in a significantly shorter time. This approximate set must be a representative image of the set containing all the frequent itemsets.

We propose in this context an extension of an algorithm proposed in [6] to quickly discover an image of the complete set containing all the frequent itemsets. This extension is based on genetic algorithms which are known to be efficient in such contexts. To monitor the discovery process we introduce the notion of dvnamics of the algorithm. To measure the performances of our frequent itemsets discovery algorithm, we introduce the notion of ejiciency of the discovery process. The genetic algorithm we have implemented succeeded in finding the most frequent itemsets, for different dense databases and different minimum supports. A comparison between our approach and the Apriori algorithm proposed by Agrawal [3] is shown in [6]. It illustrates clearly the advantages of our approach mainly in time response and the quality of returned results.

The experimentation of our approach on a data warehouse built for on-line registered patents is briefly illustrated in the following figures which are portions of graphical interfaces of a prototype we developed to visualize OLAP cubes[7]. Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the whole discovered inter-cells relationships and relationships from any interrogated cell. Considered dimensions are the patent application date, its issue date and the sector of activity in which the patent is considered. A cell of these cubes contains the number of patents sharing the same values for these dimensions. We call such information the measure of the data warehouse. The colours of cells depend on this value (only in figure I and 2) .

Figure 1 : Global clustering Figure 2: Star clustering Figure 3: OLAP cube with only related cells  The interest of our approach, besides visualized inter-cells relationships and clustering capabilities, is the enrichment of OLAP analytic capabilities by producing new OLAP cubes containing only inter-related cells. This is illustrated by the figure 3 where OLAP cube contains only cells belonging to clusters. Each cluster is colored differently in this figure. Operators, detailed in [ 7 ] ,  that we developed to selecting clusters showed that the green cells are not of the same cluster.

They belong to several other clusters, so their color results from the combination of these clusters? colors. Such capabilities allow OLAP users to focus more on inter-related cells which are certainly more interesting to analyze since they define the common behaviour of the cube and not its exceptions. Eliminating cells that don?t belong to any cluster is so possible. Such cells can, in fact, mislead the user in his decision making process. These tools allow so a better investigation of the initial OLAP cube by discovering new cubes that bring certainly information and knowledge initially hidden. In fact, more significant analytic results are computed when OLAP operators are applied on these so obtained cubes rather than on the initial cube.

Bibliography: [ 13 Codd S.B., Codd E. F. and Salley C.T.,? Providing olap (on line analytical processing) to user analysts: an it mandate?, on line, 1993.

[2] Kimbal R., ?The Data Warehouse Toolkit?, Wiley Computer Publishing, 1996.

0-7803-8482-21041$20.00 02004 IEEE. 448    [3] Agrawal, R., Imielinski, T. and Swami, A., ?Mining Association Rules between Items in Large Databases?, Proc. of the 1993 ACM-SIGMOD Int?l Con. on Management of Data, Washington, D.C., 1993 [4] Agrawal, K. and Srikant, R., ?Fast Algorithms for Mining Association Rules?, Proc. ofthe 20th VLDB Conference, Santiago, Chile, 1994 [5]  Bayardo, R.J., Agrawal, R. and Gunopulos, D., ?Constraint Rules Mining in Large, Dense Databases?, Proc. of1 51h Con$ on Data Engineering, 1999 [6] Teusan T., Nachouki G., Briand H. and Philippe J. ? Discovering Association Rules in Large, Dense Databases?, Proc. of the 4th European Conference, PKDD 2000 Lyon, France, Septembre  [7]  Naouali S. and Quafafou M., ?Web Traffic Analysis?, In Proc. Int? Con.  on Information and Knowledge Shar-ing (IKS?2002), Virgin Islands, United States, 2002.

