Verizon vs. the RIAA:  Implications for Privacy and Democracy

Abstract In January 2003, a US district court in the District of Columbia ruled that Verizon must comply with a subpoena by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) requesting the name of a subscriber who allegedly made available more than 600 copyrighted music files over the Internet. This ruling rocked the Internet community, especially those critics who saw the decision as one advancing the interests of copyright owners at the expense of broader democratic values in cyberspace such as freedom of speech and privacy for individual users.  In an appeals ruling on December 19, 2003, however, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia overturned the lower court?s decision. A particular challenge for computer ethicists is to determine how arguments on both sides of this case can be sorted out and evaluated from a moral perspective. The purpose of the present essay is to elucidate the issues surrounding this case by analyzing arguments advanced by both Verizon and the RIAA, and to examine some of the implications that the outcome of this ruling may have for future activities in cyberspace. Section 1 of the paper sets the background for understanding the arguments and rulings involved in both lawsuits, while Section 2 examines the infrastructure of the peer-to-peer (P2P)distribution model and how it supports the values inherent in democracy and democratic ideals.  Section 3 examines some interrelationship between privacy and democracy, and shows why the former is essential for the latter. We conclude this essay in Section 4 by supporting Verizon?s refusal to hand over the names, on the grounds that doing so would have violated the privacy of the individual subscribers which, in turn, would undermine any goals of achieving democracy in cyberspace.



I. INTRODUCTION  In September 2003, as part of its attempt to stop file sharing of copyrighted music over the Internet, the Record Industry Association of America (RIAA) issued hundreds of lawsuits against Internet users who had used peer-to-peer networks (P2P) to distribute proprietary music. These lawsuits were filed against users that the RIAA argued had violated US copyright laws.  The initial lawsuits targeted users who had downloaded and disseminated substantial amounts of proprietary music on- line; the RIAA also offered amnesty to some individuals who  voluntarily came forward and agreed to sign a confession admitting guilt and who also promised that they would discontinue their practices of downloading and exchanging proprietary MP3 files. The latest batch of lawsuits, issued in March 2004, targets ordinary downloaders of music. RIAA claims that the illegal copying and distribution of music has cost the recording industry millions of dollars.  While we do not dispute the fact that concerns on the part of the RIAA about protecting intellectual property are legitimate, we focus our attention in this paper on issues involving privacy and democracy that also arise in the debate about P2P file sharing in cyberspace.

In January 2003, a US District Court in the District of Columbia ruled that Verizon must comply with a subpoena by the Recording Industry Association of America requesting the name of a subscriber who allegedly made available more than 600 copyrighted music files over the Internet. The contention of the RIAA was that the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) supported its demand that Verizon release the name of the owner of the machine connected to its network that was involved in pirating over 600 proprietary musical recordings.

Verizon refused to comply with the subpoena, arguing that no pirated music was stored on its servers and that as an on-line service provider, Verizon fell outside the scope of the subpoena.  The ruling of the lower court concluded, "that the subpoena power ... applies to all Internet service providers within the scope of the DMCA, not just to those service providers storing information on a system or network at the direction of a user" [1].  This ruling appalled the Internet community, especially critics who saw the decision as one advancing the interests of copyright owners at the expense of broader social values such as privacy and democracy.

In an appeals ruling on December 19, 2003, however, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia overturned the lower court?s decision.  According to this court?s interpretation, the DMCA applied only to those sites hosting illegal content and not to those simply transmitting it.

The Appeals Court also affirmed that while it was sympathetic to those who hold music copyrights, it was not in the court?s purview to rewrite the DMCA.   Only Congress, the Court argued, could amend the DCMA.  To appreciate some of the  490-7803-8251-x/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE.

controversial issues at stake in the Verizon v. RIAA dispute, it is important to understand aspects of the P2P architecture.



II. P2P INFRASTRUCTURE  The P2P architecture is a network of ?peer machines,? each identified with an IP (Internet Protocol) address.  In this scheme, there are no fixed clients and servers.  Thus all nodes on the network are equal and they can both send and receive packets. P2P networks facilitate person-to-person communication and are not limited to file sharing. (Email is a network application that can also be thought of along lines similar to a P2P model.)  P2P networks like KaZaA and Grokster use software to facilitate the sharing of music.  Their applications identify all nodes on their networks by their IP addresses, which are unique identifiers.  The P2P infrastructure facilitates this transfer, as any node can theoretically ?talk? to any other node on the network.  Unlike Napster, which used a centralized database, and thus a centralized point of vulnerability for attack by the RIAA, later P2P models sought to preserve node anonymity as much as possible by eliminating the need for a centralized database. Most current implementations of the P2P architecture work on a distributed network structure. In these networks, each node maintains its own local database and each ?talks? to a set of neighboring nodes when requesting a particular musical recording (e.g., a specific song) by a particular artist. The distributed algorithm of the network determines how this communication occurs.  A responding node that has the requested song replies and the file is sent.   The main point is that no one node knows about all the other nodes on the network.

Newer versions of P2P networks go one step further in trying to protect the privacy of the individual by not using identifiable IP addresses; instead, random address strings are used.  Jason Rohrer, a 26-year-old programmer, developed one such system called MUTE.  Each time a node connects, a new address is generated, making it extremely difficult to track.

When a node requests a particular song, it sends the request to nearby nodes. If the song is not found, then those computers send out the request to the next set of nodes, etc. When the file is found, it is passed back through the network until it reaches the requestor.  Thus the privacy and anonymity of the user is protected.

In order for RIAA to find out the identity of a node, it would have to track the entire network.  "It's a scary environment to be living in when an organization like the RIAA can just snoop on what you're doing online," says Rohrer. "I've created a piece of software that helps people protect their privacy"[2].  His response is reminiscent of that by Philip Zimmerman, who created Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), an email encryption program that was designed to help users protect the privacy of their email communications.

Arguably, P2P architecture is inherently democratic.  It promotes democratic values by facilitating both open communication and freedom of speech. Furthermore, no one node in the network dominates.   Individuals have the opportunity to join P2P networks; in fact, there are communities of users associated with most file sharing networks.   Privacy is preserved in these networks both by the ISPs that provide access to P2P networks, and by the networks themselves.  We believe that the lawsuits advanced by the RIAA, which attempt to enforce copyright laws that are at best murky ? and perhaps are even ?made-up rules,? as Jessica Litman [3] suggests ? as they apply to sharing of music over the Internet, undermine democratic values by threatening privacy.



III. PRIVACY AND DEMOCRACY  What is the relationship between privacy and democracy? Is the former essential for the latter? Why is privacy valued? In this section, we address each of these fundamental questions involving personal privacy. To answer these questions, however, we first try to get clear as to exactly what we mean by privacy.

Defining Privacy  Privacy is a difficult concept to define. Often, privacy is closely associated with concepts such as liberty and autonomy, both of which also are closely linked to democracy. In the context of cyberspace, privacy is also frequently associated with concepts such as anonymity and security. The notion of privacy in the US has evolved during the past two centuries from one that initially was concerned with governmental intrusion (as expressed in the Fourth Amendment to the US Constitution), to worries about governmental interference involving one?s personal decisions (expressed in important court decisions in the 1960s), to current concerns about access to and control of personal information. Privacy is still often defined in terms of non-intrusion into one?s personal space (sometimes called ?accessibility privacy?), a view that traces its roots to a definition of privacy in a classic article by Warren and Brandeis [4]. At other times, privacy is defined in terms of non-interference into one?s personal affairs (a view that some describe as ?decisional privacy?). And, more commonly today, privacy is viewed from the perspective of concerns having to do with access to and control over personal information (i.e., informational privacy).

We defend a definition of privacy introduced by James Moor [5], which incorporates key elements of the non- intrusion, non-interference, and informational views of privacy into a unified theory. According to Moor, an individual ?has privacy in a situation if in that particular situation the individual is protected from intrusion, interference, and information access by others.? [Italics Added] An important aspect in this definition is Moor's notion of a "situation." His definition of a situation is left deliberately broad so that it can apply to a range of contexts or "zones" that can be "declared  500-7803-8251-x/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE.

private" in a normative sense. In other words, a situation can be an "activity," a "relationship," or the "storage and access of information" in a computer or on the Internet. For example, a P2P context in cyberspace fits Moor?s notion of a situation.

Should such a situation receive privacy protection?

Central to Moor's theory is a distinction between naturally private and normatively private situations. Moor?s distinction enables us to differentiate between the conditions required for: (a) having privacy, and (b) having a right to privacy. This distinction, in turn, enables us to differentiate between a loss of privacy and a violation of privacy. Consider that in a naturally private situation, individuals are protected from access and interference from others by "natural" means. Examples would include physical boundaries in natural settings, such as when one is hiking alone in the woods. In this case, privacy can be lost but not violated because there are no norms ? conventional, legal, or ethical ? according to which one has a right or even an expectation to be protected. In a normatively private situation, on the other hand, individuals are protected by conventional norms. Privacy can be violated only in "normatively private situation" because it is only in those kinds of situations that zones or contexts that merit some kind of normative protection have been formally established. So for example, if we declare a P2P context to be normatively private, then organizations like the RIAA violate the privacy of individuals whenever they succeed in identifying the names of users via subpoenas directed at ISPs. Should ISPs in general, and P2P contexts in particular, be declared normatively private situations? If so, should we presume in favor of protecting privacy as a starting point in negotiations, as DeCew [6] suggests? Perhaps the answer to this question presupposes an answer to a larger question: Why do/should we value privacy?

Privacy as a Social Value  People generally agree, at least those in Western societies, that personal privacy is something to be valued and protected.

But what kind of value is privacy? Is it something valued intrinsically, i.e., for its own sake? Or does privacy have only instrumental worth ? as a means to some further end or ends?

Arguments for the view that privacy is an intrinsic value are extremely difficult to defend. Charles Fried [7] argues that even though privacy can be viewed as a value that is instrumental in one sense, there is another sense in which having privacy is also essential or necessary. We often tend to associate intrinsic values with necessary conditions, and instrumental values with conditions that are non-necessary or contingent. Because privacy is necessary for human ends such as trust and friendship, however, Fried believes that privacy cannot be a value that is merely contingent. So even though privacy has instrumental worth, Fried believes that we should conclude that privacy is not similar to most instrumental values. That is, we should not infer that privacy is simply one means among others that can be used to achieve important human ends such as trust and friendship. According to Fried, privacy is a necessary condition for achieving those ends.

Perhaps an analogy involving human biology can help to  illustrate the central point of Fried's argument regarding the necessary-contingent vs. intrinsic-instrumental aspects of privacy. Consider that a human heart and a human appendix each have instrumental worth, but neither is valued intrinsically. Yet while the appendix has mere instrumental or contingent worth and can be removed without serious consequences to the biological survival of a human being, having a heart ? whether one's own natural heart, a transplanted heart, or even an artificial heart ? is essential or necessary for one's biological survival. Note that we do not value having a heart merely because it is means to some end, viz., having a biological life.  Instead, it is valued because having a biological life would be inconceivable without having a heart. Similarly, Fried believes that we value privacy not simply because it serves as a means to human ends such as trust and friendship; rather, having those human ends would be inconceivable without privacy [8].

Agreeing with the claim that privacy is more than merely an instrumental value, Moor [5] takes a slightly different approach to illustrate this point. Like Fried, Moor argues that privacy is not an intrinsic value. However, Moor believes that privacy is the articulation or expression of security, which he describes as a "core value." Security is a core value, Moor further argues, because it is essential for human flourishing in all societies. So Moor, like Fried, shows why privacy, which is not itself an intrinsic value, is nonetheless essential to achieve certain important human ends. And Moor further suggests that as information technology insinuates itself more and more into our everyday lives, privacy becomes increasingly important as a mode for articulating or expressing the core value of security.

Others have argued that privacy is valuable because it essential for individual autonomy. James Rachels [9] notes that having privacy enables us to control how much personal information we wish to disclose to others and how much we elect to retain or not divulge. Thus one important value of privacy is that enables us to form relationships with individuals, ranging from intimate to casual, by being able to control how much information about ourselves we share with others.

Privacy as Essential for Democracy  Does privacy have any ?social capital,? or is it simply an individual good? Privacy should not be thought of as a value that simply benefits individuals. For example, Priscilla Regan [10] has pointed out that oftentimes we are tempted to frame the privacy debate simply in terms of how to balance privacy interests as an individual good against interests involving the larger social good. If we view privacy in that sense, Regan believes that support for those interests believed to benefit the social good will generally override concerns regarding individual privacy. If, however, privacy is understood not solely as a value concerned with individual good but as a value contributing to the broader social good, then concerns for individual privacy might have a greater chance of receiving equal consideration in debates involving the balancing of competing values. Along similar lines, Alan Westin [11] and  510-7803-8251-x/04/$20.00 (C) 2004 IEEE.

others suggest that because privacy is essential for democracy, it should be viewed as a social good. An examination of Westin?s arguments for why this is so, however, would take us beyond the scope of this paper.

So it would appear that privacy is valued for several reasons ? from those involving individual autonomy and choice to those involving greater social goods such as democracy. Thus privacy is not only a value worth protecting at the level of individuals, it is a social value that is essential for democracy.

And in so far as the actions of the RIAA threaten privacy, they threaten democracy itself.

We have briefly sketched some ways in which privacy and democracy are related. But what exactly is the relationship between democracy and the Internet? Is the Internet an inherently democratic medium? Does it enhance democracy?

Deborah Johnson [12] has pointed out that claims involving the connection between the Internet and democracy tend to be made in one of three different ways. Whereas some authors claim that the Internet is a democratic technology (suggesting that it is inherently democratic), others claim that the Internet tends to facilitate or even enhance technology. Still others claim that because democratic values are at stake in the cyberspace policies we adopt, we should develop the Internet along democratic principles. We defend this last view, arguing that the infrastructure of cyberspace should support democratic principles. And we believe that the P2P architecture does this.

Values underlying the P2P architecture ? i.e., values involving freedom, choice, openness, etc. ? would certainly seem to favor democratic ideals. Yet many recent laws and governmental policies seem to threaten a future cyberspace that is truly democratic and that exhibits democratic ideals.

Consider, for example, of the controversial Patriot Act and the implications it has for the possibility of undermining democratic ideals such as personal privacy and related basic civil liberties in cyberspace. But the threat to undermine democracy comes not only from federal laws, such as the Patriot Act, but also from commercial and interests. As we have seen, the policies advocated by the RIAA in the case of file sharing in cyberspace, also serve to erode further some of the basic civil liberties essential for a democratic system.



IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS  As noted above, we have chosen privacy and democracy as the key topics on which to focus in our discussion of the moral implications in the Verizon v. RIAA case. Several additional ethical issues also arise in this case ? perhaps most notably among these are concerns having to do with intellectual property. However, we deliberately elected not to approach our analysis from the perspective of property rights. Clearly, property-right issues are very much at the heart of the Verizon case, especially from the point of view of the RIAA which is interested in protecting proprietary information from being exchanged freely via MP3 files. Because of this concern, one might reasonably argue that the ?presumption in favor of privacy? that we have defended, following DeCew [6], can be counterbalanced by a presumption in favor of protecting  intellectual property rights. Such a presumption would no doubt support the RIAA?s interests in protecting the proprietary information of is clients. However, we believe that another presumptive principle can be brought into play here. In particular, we also defend the presumptive principle ?Information Wants to Be Shared? [13] which presumes against the ?fencing off? or enclosing of information in favor of a view of information as something that should be communicated and shared. This presumptive principle is offered as an alternative way of viewing the intellectual property debate; if adopted, we believe that it could help to reverse trend to turn all digitized information into a ?commodity? that can be hoarded and thus made more exclusive.

The arguments for adopting the presumptive principle that information wants to be shared, which are elaborated upon in [14], cannot be examined here. Unfortunately, doing so would take us beyond the scope of our present paper. However, we believe that when our presumptive principle ? advocating the sharing of information as a default position ? is combined with the interests at stake for protecting social values such as privacy and democracy in the current debate involving Verizon and the RIAA, we can justify a policy that tilts in favor of defending the position articulated by Verizon rather the one advanced by the RIAA. (We have begun to see a realization of this combination of values in Web sites such as iTunes, which provides downloadable music at the reasonable cost of ninety- nine cents per song.) As noted above, a thorough examination of the Verizon vs. RIAA case from the vantage point of intellectual-property-right issues requires a separate paper.

In focusing on privacy-and-democracy concerns related to the Verizon case, we have also indirectly touched on other moral issues, including those having to do with anonymity and liberty in cyberspace. Just as anonymity issues closely relate to concerns involving privacy, questions involving liberty are closely connected to those affecting democracy.  We noted that privacy is essential for a range of social values including liberty, which in turn is necessary for democracy. So by focusing on privacy concerns in the Verizon case, we have also shown some implications this case also has for liberty and freedom, which underlie the possibility of realizing democracy in cyberspace.

