GenExplore: Interactive Exploration of Gene Interactions from Microarray Data

Abstract  DNA Microarray provides a powerful basis for analysis of gene expression. Data mining methods such as clustering have been widely applied to microarray data to link genes that show similar expression patterns. However, this ap- proach usually fails to unveil gene-gene interactions in the same cluster. In this project, we propose to combine graphi- cal model based interaction analysis with other data mining techniques (e.g., association rule, hierarchical clustering) for this purpose. For interaction analysis, we propose the use of Graphical Gaussian Model to discover pairwise gene interactions and loglinear model to discover multi-gene in- teractions. We have constructed a prototype system that per- mits rapid interactive exploration of gene relationships.

1. Motivation  With the description of complete genome sequences, DNA microarray technology has become a powerful means for genome-wide expression profiling and analysis. It al- lows the simultaneous examination of thousands of genes in a single experiment. The raw microarray images are trans- formed into gene expression matrices where the rows usu- ally denote genes and the columns denote various samples, conditions, or time points. The uniqueness of microarray data is that genes in rows are of very high dimensional- ity (e.g., 103 - 104 genes) while samples in columns are of relatively low dimensionality (e.g., 101 - 102 samples).

The challenge is to rapidly and efficiently extract useful information and discover knowledge from the data, such as gene functions, gene interactions, regulatory pathways, metabolic pathways, and effects of environmental factors.

We have been building a prototype system which allows user to explore and analyze gene interactions effectively and efficiently. The core of the system is gene interaction anal- ysis using Graphical Gaussian Modeling (GGM) and log- linear modeling. We subject the input data of GGM and loglinear model to the output of other data mining tech- niques (e.g., clusters from hierarchical clustering, frequent  item sets from association rule mining), prior to analyzing gene interactions. Our system also enables domain users to interactively explore gene interactions by adding or remov- ing genes based on domain knowledge.

2. System Overview  Our goal is to explore inter-relationships between a sub- set of genes. To make this process intuitive and efficient, we propose to combine interactive techniques and informa- tion visualization with data modeling. First we subject the input data to hierarchical clustering or association rule min- ing, prior to analyzing gene interactions. Subsets of genes (clusters or frequent itemsets) are then analyzed for pair- wise gene interaction using GGMs.

The graphical gaussian model method is statistically sound and computationally tractable for analyzing microar- ray data and inferring biological interactions from them.

However, it can only detect dependencies that are close to linear. In particular, it is not likely to discover combinato- rial effects (e.g., a gene is over expressed only if several genes are jointly over expressed, but not if at least one of them is not overexpressed). To discover combinatorial ef- fects, we apply loglinear modeling which assumes multino- mial distribution and requires a discretization of the data.

During this process, the users may explore the output of both GGMs and loglinear models interactively given the in- accuracies and limitations of modeling methods.

