A data mining approach to PubMed query refinement

Abstract  Finding disease relationships requires laborious  examination of hundreds of possible candidate  heterogeneous factors. Much of the related  information is currently contained in biological and  medical journals, making biomedical text mining a  central bioinformatic problem. More than 14 million  abstracts of such papers are contained in the Medline  collection and are available online. In this paper we  present a data mining engine, namely MeSH Terms  Associator (MTA), that has been employed in a  distributed architecture to refine a generic PubMed  query by means of discovery of concept relations in the  form of association rules. However, the number of  discovered association rules is usually high and the  interest of most of  them does not fulfil user  expectations. In addition, the presentation of  thousands of rules can discourage users from  interpreting them. To overcome this problem we  investigate the application of some filtering  techniques. Experimental results on datasets  corresponding to real-world biomedical queries are  discussed and future directions are drawn.

1. Introduction  In biomedicine, the decoding of the human genome  has increased the number of online publications  leading to information overload. Every 11 years, the  number of researchers doubles [7] and Medline, the  main resource of research literature, has been growing  with more than 10,000 abstracts per week since 20021.

Therefore, finding disease relationships requires  laborious examination of several possible candidate   1 www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/medline.html  heterogeneous factors. Moreover, the data to be  examined (i.e. textual data) are generally unstructured  as in the case of PubMed search results.

The need to analyze this volume of unstructured  data collected in biomedical applications is where data  mining promises more benefits.

Data mining allows to extract patterns from data  such that they are certain, previously unknown, and  potentially useful for the specific application.

Discovered patterns can be in various forms, such as  classification rules, which describe the partition of the  data into a given set of classes, clusters of data,  patterns describing trends, that is, regular changes of  one or more attributes when moving away from a  given start object, and subgroup patterns, which  identify subgroups of objects with unusual,  unexpected, or deviating distribution of a target  variable [4].

In this work we investigate association rules [2] as  means to explore biomedical text corpora in a query  expansion process. In information retrieval, the term  query expansion stands for any process which builds a  new query from an old one. Generally the expansion is  performed by adding new terms. In particular, starting  from an initial PubMed user?s query Q that selects a  set of PubMed abstracts A, we extend Q by adding  associations discovered among MeSH terms in A.

Therefore, we propose MeSH Terms Associator  (MTA) that is a data mining tool able to discover  association rules on biomedical text corpora.

MTA has been integrated in a distributed  architecture, where the association rule discoverer  interfaces the PubMed repository and supports users in  the iterative process of refining a PubMed user?s query  on the base of the discovered associations. Since the  number of discovered association rules is usually high  Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications (DEXA?04) 1529-4188/04 $ 20.00 IEEE    and the interest of most of them does not fulfil user  expectations, filtering techniques have been applied.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2  presents a distributed framework for MTA. The  problem of mining association rules in MTA is  described in Section 3. Finally, the application of MTA  to common biomedical datasets is presented in Section  4. Some experimental results are reported and  conclusions are drawn.

2. A general framework for MTA  In a real-world scenario, the PubMed user could be  interested in looking for factors which are correlated to  a specific disease or drug reaction. A typical query in a  workflow for MTA is composed by a disease name  and/or chemical compound names (e.g. drugs). The  MTA module takes the PubMed user?s query and  related retrieved abstracts as input, then it discovers  association rules on the retrieved abstracts and finally  it formulates some possible query expansions on the  base of discovered associations.

As shown in Fig. 1 the user?s query is run on the  PubMed remote database through the IBM Web  Services for Life Sciences2 to obtain the list of  corresponding abstracts. Abstracts that satisfy the  user?s query are initially annotated by the BioTeKS  Text Analysis Engine (TAE) provided within the IBM  UIM Architecture [5], by using a local MeSH terms  dictionary. The Terms Associator (TA) computes the  most frequent MeSH terms in the tagged abstracts  returned by BioTeKS TAE and runs the association  rule discovery engine. The discovered associations are  automatically pruned by means of a filtering module.

Then the user can either forward remaining discovered  association rules to the query expansion module or  interact with MTA through the template filtering  module. Additionally, MTA allows the user to evaluate  the quality of pruned rules according to his/her domain  knowledge by defining rule templates. User-defined  templates are used to select the associations that  generate possible query expansions taking user  preferences into account. The associations involved in  the new queries correspond to new terms of biological  nature, which are in some way related to diseases or  drugs reactions specified in the initial query.

Finally, the new queries are again submitted via  web services to the PubMed repository and the new  retrieved abstracts are sent to BioTeKS TAE, which in  this case, annotates exclusively gene names contained  in abstracts. Extracted genes will be useful for  subsequent bioinformatics analyses.

3. Mining association rules in MTA  The discovery of association rules has attracted a  great deal of attention in data mining research.

Association rules are a class of regularities introduced  by [3] that can be expressed by an implication:  X  Y  where X and Y are a sets of items, such that  X Y = . The meaning of such rules is quite  intuitive: Given a database D be of transactions, where  each transaction T D is a set of items, X  Y  expresses that whenever a transaction T contains X  than T probably contains Y also. The conjunction X Y  is called pattern.

Two parameters are usually reported for association  rules, namely the support, which estimates the  probability p(X T  Y T), and the confidence, which  estimates the probability p(Y T | X T). The goal of  association rule mining is to find all the rules with  support and confidence exceeding user specified  thresholds, henceforth called minsup and minconf   2 Weil, N. BioIT World, URL: http://www.bio-  itworld.com/news/042203_report2381.html  Fig. 1. MTA framework.

Association rules discovery  Filtering  new query  tagged  abstracts query  query/abstracts  IBM Web Services  Query expansion  Knowledge of interest associated to initial query  association  rules  BioTeKS TAE MeSH  PubMed  abstracts  Template filtering  Preprocessing  MTA  TA  gene names  Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications (DEXA?04) 1529-4188/04 $ 20.00 IEEE    respectively. A pattern X Y is large (or frequent) if its  support is greater than or equal to minsup. An  association rule X Y is strong if it has a large support  (i.e. X Y is large) and high confidence.

In MTA association rules are mined by means of  Association Rules Extractor (ARE) that is a data  mining module implemented in KDB2000 [1]. ARE  includes Apriori algorithm [3] to discover associations  among items composing transactions of a database.

Although discovered association rules are evaluated  in terms of support and confidence measures, which  ensure that discovered rules have enough positive  evidence, the number of discovered association rules is  usually high and even considering only those rules  with high confidence and support it is not true that all  of them are interesting. It may happen that some of  them correspond to prior knowledge, refer to  uninteresting items or are redundant. On the other  hand, the presentation of thousands of rules can  discourage users from interpreting them in order to  find nuggets of knowledge. Furthermore, it is very  difficult to evaluate which rules might be interesting  for the end users by means of some simple statistics,  such as support and confidence. Therefore, an  additional processing step is necessary in order to  clean, order or filter interesting patterns/rules.

We propose the application of a filtering technique  that is inspired by association rule covers proposed by  [9]. Rule covers is a domain independent method to  eliminate redundancy in rules. A rule cover is basically  a subset of the original set of discovered rules such that  the cover matches all the transactions that the original  set matches. In particular, structural rule cover can be  defined as follows:  Given a collection C of rules with the same item set  Y as consequent, S is a structural rule cover if for all  rules (X Y) S there is no rule (X? Y) C such  that X?  X.

Once covers have been built the remaining rules are  pruned.

In the following example, the first rule is pruned  because it is more specific of the second one and then  redundant:  therapeutic, diabetes mellitus non insulin dependent  insulin (5.3%, 82.2%),  diabetes mellitus non insulin dependent  insulin (7.4%, 59%).

We extend the definition of structural rule cover  also to collections of rules that share the same item set  as antecedent. In this way, we look for the most  specific rules of the original rule set.

Although the rule covers strongly exploit power of  rules of matching data, it is an uninformative filtering  method. Indeed, automatic approaches do not take into  account user preferences and expectations, so they  should be augmented with user-guided methods, such  as templates, to take domain knowledge into account.

Hence, in MTA an additive filtering method, based on  user-defined templates, has been implemented.

Templates describe a set of rules by specifying what  items occur in the antecedent and what items in the  consequent. The templates approach, used as a means  to find interesting rules, has been proposed by [6]. In  particular, they specify in the form of templates both  what is interesting (inclusive templates) and what is  not (restrictive templates). In this way, a rule is  interesting if it satisfies at least one inclusive template  and no restrictive templates. In practical applications,  restrictive templates can be used to filter out rules that  express prior knowledge.

An example of template is specified as follows:  human, any  cell  This pattern matches the following rules  human, neoplasm  cell;  human, tissue  cell  and it does not match  human, neoplasm  heart disease.

Using the following inclusive template:  any  Alzheimer disease, any  which asks for rules that contain the term Alzheimer  disease in the consequent, the user wants to discover  associations involving factors correlated to the  Alzheimer disease.

In addition, the user may recognize some of the  mined associations (e.g. human, cell  Alzheimer  disease, neuron) as uninteresting and decides to filter  out them because they represent trivial or prior  knowledge. This filtering is obtained by setting a  restrictive template as follows:  human, cell, any  Alzheimer disease, any.

4. Experimental results  In this section, we intend to evaluate the data  mining engine on datasets generated by means of  PubMed queries formulated by experts in the  biomedical sector. An example of PubMed query  formulated by biomedical researchers may ask for  discovering the factors related to the reactions to  Alzheimer disease treatments (i.e. ?Alzheimer drug  treatment response?).

In particular, in this work seven PubMed queries  are considered and are detailed in Table 1.

Each query generates a different dataset that has  been stored in a single table of a relational database,  where each transaction is associated to an individual  Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications (DEXA?04) 1529-4188/04 $ 20.00 IEEE    Table 2. Statistics on discovered association rules.

Table 1. Biomedical datasets.

abstract and is described in terms of items that  correspond to MeSH terms.

For each query, we run the association rule  discovery engine on the 50 most frequent MeSH terms  belonging to the retrieved abstracts. After some tuning  of the parameters minsup and minconf, we decide to  run the association rules discoverer with the parameter  values equals to 0.05 and 0.5, respectively. This means  that we are interested in mining associations X Y  involving MeSH terms such that the pattern X Y  occurs at least in the 5% of abstracts (i.e. database  transactions). In addition, the ratio between the number  of abstracts in which the entire pattern occurs and the  total number of abstracts in which X occurs is greater  than 0.5.

By setting support and confidence as explained  above, the MTA data mining engine is able to discover  strong association rules. An example of rule returned  by MTA for the fourth dataset is the following:  brain, amyloide  therapeutic, Alzheimer disease  (8.73%, 80.7%)  which states that in the 80.7% of cases patients that  have both brain problems and neurons with protein  aggregates (amyloide) has Alzheimer disease. The term  therapeutic is also involved in the discovered  association. A justification is that a solution to reduce  damages of the Alzheimer disease is to avoid the  forming of amyloide through the right use of a  particular drug.

Another example of mined rule in the fifth dataset  follows:  hypertension, therapeutic, angiotensin converting  enzyme inhibitor pharmaceutical preparation  (6.4%, 86.6%)  which states that in the 86.6% of cases a  pharmaceutical preparation that can be used for the  pharmaceutical treatment of hypertension is an  inhibitor of the angiotensin converting enzyme. A  justification is that this inhibitor improves blood  circulation in patients with heart left ventricle  dysfunctions.

Discovered association rules can be employed in  expanding the query to obtain new abstracts from  PubMed. We extract the gene names whose correlation  to the initial query will be examined by experts. For  instance, using consequent terms of the first  association rule example, the following gene names are  found by the system: APP, S182, STM2, SOMATOSTATI, BCL2A1, ANON, ANXA, RHO, of which the first three are related to Alzheimer disease  and the others need further investigation.

In Table 2 statistics on the number of discovered  association rules for different datasets are reported.

It is noteworthy, that more specific queries select  sets of abstracts that contain few shared terms. This  leads to a quite high number of discovered association  rules because the data mining engine does not discover  regularities in data. Nevertheless, this set of rules may  describe associations that are quite specific and  without generalization power. Therefore, the filtering  capability is high because the implemented pruning  method aims to eliminate the most specific rules.

5. Conclusions  In this paper a data mining tool for MeSH terms  associations discovery in biomedical text corpora,  namely MTA, has been presented. The typical  workflow in which MTA runs has been illustrated. We  have also presented some details on the data mining  approach implemented in MTA and the application of  MTA to real-world biomedical case-studies. Results  show that MTA mines interesting rules.

For future work we intend to apply clustering  methods to structure the rules set as additional  technique to reduce the number of mined rules.

Clustering of rules lead to new open questions. How to  define distance measures between rules? Can the  number of clusters be intuitively or statistically  Query id Query in detail  NARP Neuropathy Ataxia Retinitis Pigmentosa  ADI Alzheimer Drug Interactions  HARD Hypertension Adverse Reaction Drugs  ADTR Alzheimer Drug Treatment Response  HDI Hypertension Drugs Interactions  DDR Diabetes Drugs Response  CDTE Cancer Drugs Treatment Environment Query id Number of  retrieved  abstracts  Number of  extracted  association  rules  Number of  association  rules after  pruning  NARP 113 2472 310  ADI 136 211 96  HARD 130 137 39  ADTR 653 168 60  HDI 816 311 77  DDR 679 54 24  CDTE 704 76 36  Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications (DEXA?04) 1529-4188/04 $ 20.00 IEEE    defined? How to select the candidate rule that is  representative of each cluster?

Furthermore, we plan to investigate the discovery of  generalized association rules according to user defined  taxonomies between classes of items [8]. We intend to  explore the extraction of generalized rules involving  classes of items rather than single items. In the  considered application scenario, exploiting the inherent  hierarchical structure of the MeSH taxonomy is a  natural extension of our method. Hierarchies allow  association rules mining at multiple abstraction levels  that can be exploited for the generation of query  expansions that take into account correlations that are  stronger than those discovered with the current MTA  approach.

Acknowledgements  The authors would like to thank dr. Graziano  Pappad? for his contribution and assistance in  conducting experiments.

6. References  [1] A. Appice, M. Ceci., and D. Malerba, ?KDB2000: An  integrated knowledge discovery tool?, In A. Zanasi, C. A.

Brebbia, N.F.F. Ebecken, P. Melli (Eds.) Data Mining III,  Series Management Information Systems, Vol 6, 531-540,  WIT Press, Southampton, UK.

[2] R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski , and A. Swami, ?Mining  association rules between sets of items in large  databases?, Proc. of the ACM SIGMOD Conference on  Management of Data: Washington, D.C., 1993.

[3] R. Agrawal, and R. Srikant, ?Fast Algorithms for  Mining Association Rules?, Proc. of the Twentieth  Int.Conf. Very Large Databases: Santiago, Cile,1994  [4] U.M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth,  ?From Data Mining To Knowledge Discovery: An  Overview?. In Advances In Knowledge Discovery And  Data Mining, eds. U.M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro,  P. Smyth, and R. Uthurusamy, AAAI Press/The MIT  Press: Menlo Park, CA., pp. 1-34,1996.

[5] D. Ferrucci, A. and Lally, "UIMA: An  Architectural Approach to Unstructured Information  Processing in the Corporate Research Environment", to  appear in Natural Language Engineering , June 2004.

[6] M. Klemettinen, H. Mannila, P. Ronkainen, H. Toivonen,  and A. I. Verkamo. ?Finding Interesting Rules from Large  Sets of Discovered Association Rules?. Proc. of the 3rd Int'l  Conf. on Conference on Information and Knowledge  Management: Gaithersburg, Maryland, pp. 401-407,  November 1994  [7] M. F. Perutz, Will biomedicine outgrow support?

Nature, 399, (1999), 299-301.

[8] R. Srikant and R. Agrawal, ?Mining Generalized  Association Rules", Proc. of the 21st Int'l Conf. on  Very Large Databases: Zurich, Switzerland, Sep.

1995.

[9] H. Toivonen, M. Klemetinen, P. Ronkainen, K.

Hatonen, and H. Mannila, ?Pruning and grouping  discovered association rules?, Mlnet Workshop on  Statistics, Machine Learning, and Discovery in  Databases, 1995, 47-52.

