Using Fuzzy Support and Confidence Setting to Mine  Interesting Association Rules

abstraction. Some examples can illustrate our point of view: let?s consider that if items X and Y have higher support in May and if we set lower minimum support for other months in the year, we probably lose interesting rules that could be discovered in either the beginning of June or  the end of April.

Another example is to consider the items? price effect on association rules. Assuming that people buy computers and printers together is a common sense to us. But is there any way to know whether people buy expensive laser printer while they buy expensive personal computer?

Fig. 1 is the concept hierarchy that shows only the concept of desktop PC and laser printer. Fig. 2 is the concept hierarchy that displays the concept abstraction level of desktop PC and laser printer prices. This is not a simple Boolean association rules mining. Our work for mining rules is not just taking the item?s quantitative attributes into consideration. As we know, the quantitative attributes of items, such as item price or transaction time stamp, could he considered as fuzzy attributes [9]. For example, a price for product A may be considered as high, but the same price may   0-7803-8376-1/04/$20.00 Copyright 2004 IEEE.

be just medium for product B, or even may be categorized as low price for another product. The ambiguity exists in conceptual abstraction. In this paper, we will introduce the fuzzy set to explicitly represent and process this ambiguity.

A fuzzy set is an extension of a crisp set. Crisp sets only allow full membership or no membership at all, where fuzzy sets allow partial membership. In fuzzy logic, every thiig is a matter of degree [17]. It means that we cannot define a certain price only belonging to a certain set. And that also implies that the support value not only varies in different concept level but also varies in the same level of conceptual abstraction. Fig. 3 illustrates the fuzzy concept hierarchy for this example.

In this paper, by extending the multilevel mining method of association rules proposed by [8], a fuzzy inference model for deriving minimum support in the same concept abstraction level is developed. The main contribution in our proposed method is that one more virtual conceptual level is added to help us find association rules with quantitative attributes consideration. The fuzzy inference model will be applied to this special concept level to processing the ambiguity and then deriving reasonable minimum support ,values. In effect, different minimum support values represent different input conditions and will lead us to obtain different pattems. That is, we have the ability to know the output pattems we got under what input conditions; therefore, it is not necessary to define a lower minimum support value to prevent losing interesting rules.

This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, the concepts related to our framework are introduced. In section 3, an improved multilevel mining metbod of association rules is proposed. In section 4, an experiment is conducted to identify our proposed framework. The study is concluded in section 5 .

11. RELATED WORKS  A Apriori Algorithm The key of mining association rules is to set an  appropriate support and confidence values to f i d  frequent itemset. The well-known algorithm, Apriori, exploits the following property: If an itemset is frequent, so are all its subsets. Apriori algorithm generates itemsets in a level-wise manner where each candidate k-itemset {il, ..., ik.2, ih.,, i h )  in the kth iteration is generated from two frequent (k-1)-itemsets ( i l ,  . . ., ik.2, ik.,} and {il, . . ., ik.2, ih} .  A generated candidate can be further pruned if any subset of size k-Z cannot satisfy user- defined thresholds, such as minimum support.

The rules generated from the Apriori algorithm are known as Boolean association rules. The mining of Boolean association rules did not deal with any attributes in database.

Attributes in database can be quantitative (e.g., age and income) or categorical (e.g., zip code). The mining of quantitative association rules tries to find rules in database containing both quantitative and categorical amibutes [15].

An example of such a rule might be ?10% of married people between ages 40 to 60 have at least 2 cars?. Our research is also taking quantitative attributes into consideration, but rather than mining quantitative association rules.

No matter Boolean or quantitative association rules mining, the minimum support setting is always a problem. In reality, the minimum support should not be uniform. This is especially true in mining multilevel association rules.

B Concept Hierarchy Concept hierarchies allow the discovery of knowledge at  multi-level abstraction. It defines a sequence of mappings fiom a set of low-level concept to high-level, a more general concept.

In order to explore multilevel association rules mining, one needs to provide data at multiple levels of abstraction.

This work can be done by providing concept taxonomies from the primitive level concepts to higher levels. In many applications, the taxonomy information is either stored implicitly in the database, or provided by experts or users, or computed by using cluster analysis methods [6]. With the recent development of data warehousing and OLAP technology, arranging data at multiple levels of abstraction has been an ordinary practice [4]. Hence, in this research, we assume such concept taxonomies exist.

C Fuzzy Logic Control Fuzzy control, which directly uses fuzzy rules, is the most  important application in fuzzy set theory. Using a procedure originated by Mamdani et al., in the late 70s [12], three steps are taken to create a fuzzy controller:  1) Fuzzification (Using membership functions to graphically describe a situation)  2) Rule evaluation and decision making (Application of  3) Defuzzification and action taking (Obtaining the crisp results)  In the design of a fuzzy controller, one must identify the main inputfoutput control parameters and determine a term set that is at the right level of granularity for describing the values of each linguistic variable. For example, a term set for linguistic variable price may be defmed as {low, medium, high}. Several different types of fuzzy membership functions can be adapted to map crisp input values to partial membership degrees. Assuming the control knowledge rule base can be well defined by experts, and then we can make decisions according to input parameters and knowledge rule base. Since the decisions (outputs) are still fuzzy, we need to !?form these fuzzy outputs to crisp values.

Following is a simple example to show how fuzzy controls are constructed consider the following classic situation: the inverted pendulum. Here, the problem is to balance a pole on a mobile platform that can move in only two directions, to the left or to the right. The angle between the platform and the pendulum and the angular velocity of this angle are chosen as the inputs of the system. The speed of the platform is chosen as the corresponding output. Then a knowledge rule base can be constructed by experts or experienced people. The final speed can be calculated through the above three steps.

fuzzy rules)     D Multilevel Association Rules Mining In multilevel association rules mining, different minimum  support setting should apply to different concept levels. Some algorithms have been developed for efficient mining. One approach progressively reduced the minimum support thresholds at lower levels of abstraction [PI. The underlying assumption in [8] was only to explore the descendants of the frequent items since if an item rarely occurs its descendants will occur even less frequently and, thus, are uninteresting.

The following describes the procedure of Hank algorithm [8] to find frequent pattems: (1) Discover frequent pattems and strong association rules at the top-most concept level. Assume the minimum support at this level is 5 percent and the minimum confidence is 50 percent. One may fmd a set of single frequent items (each called a frequent 1-itemset), a set of pair-wised frequent items (each called a frequent 2-itemset) and a set of strong association rules. At the second level, if the minimum support is 2 percent and the minimum confidence is 40 percent, one may fmd frequent I-itemsets and frequent 2-itemsets and strong association rules.

(2) The process repeats at even lower concept levels until no frequent pattems can be found.

111. THE EXITXDED MODEL In our extended model, we are going to find association  rules that consider item?s quantitative attributes. To simply our discussion, we will use the example shown in Fig. 1 as a running example to illustrate ow framework. The approach is divided to the following steps:  A.  Mining Multilevel Association Rules First, we use a hierarchy encoded transaction table instead  of the whole original transaction table. This is because a data mining query is usually in relevance to only a part of the transaction database, sncb as computer and/or printer, rather than all the items. At this stage, we do the multilevel association rules mining without considering any quantitative attributes. We need to set the minimum support very carefully in order to collect all possible association rules. In effect, the main purpose here is to do several times of evaluation to find reasonable minimum support range for each concept level.

The method we used is the multilevel mining algorithm for association rules described in section 2.

B Adding One Concept Abstraction Level to Express Quantitative Concept  The rules generated at the previous stage may be massive since the quantitative attributes are not taking into consideration. Sometimes people may want to know, for example, the association related to price or purchase quantity.

Assume that people buy computers and printers together is a common sense to us. But is there any way to know whether people buy expensive laser printer as they buy expensive personal computer? At this stage, one virtual concept  abstraction level is added to represent the concept for a special quantitative attribute that may have some relations to mined rules. This virtual concept abstraction is helpful for mining rules more related to consumer behavior. For example, we can have: 1) the association about famous brand sale; and 2) the association about marketing in different time interval.

Fig. 2 is the example of concept hierarchy abstraction to express PC and price concept of laser printer. As we can see, the price abstraction level partitioned into two or three concepts is added. However, new problem comes along with minimum support setting at this newly added virtual concept abstraction.

According to multilevel mining algorithm for association rule, we sbould apply only one minimum support value at this level. Therefore, a lower minimum support value could be applied to collecting rules as many as possible. But there are also lots of uninteresting rules generated at this scenario.

Frequent items will be associated with one another in all possible ways and many of them are meaningless. Setting a uniform threshold at this virtual level seems unreasonable to the human sense. Let?s use ow running example to demonstrate our approach. In general, expensive items usually have lower support value and medium price items have higher support. This observation leads us towards to define, for example, three minimum supports setting for high, medium and low price items. Now we could use a higher minimum support to find the associations just related to medium price items. This is trivial, however, if one wants to know the associations including medium and bigb price items, then what minimum support should apply. That is, we would like to know whether there is a way to adjust minimum support setting that will fit our requirements rather than using previous fixed settings to mine rules.

C Constructing Fuuy Control Model to Infer Reasonable Minimum Support Setting  Linguistic ambiguity usually exists in virtual concept abstraction. Our example does not deal with this ambiguity.

On the contrary, the price of any single item can only belong to one single price range set. This is Boolean algebra that partitions universal domain into disjointed sets and an element either belongs to a certain set or does not belong to that set.

This does not comply with the human perception. The fuzzy set concept is better than the partition method because the fuzzy set provides a smooth transition between member and non-member of a set [9].

We should tum ow discrete concept abstraction to fuzzy concept abstraction and Fig. 3 shows ow modification. We then can set up a fuzzy control model as following steps:  1) Identifying the linguistic input/output variables, e.g., the PC price and laser printer price will be input variables and output will be minimum support. Each variable has its own linguistic term set, e.g., high and low.

2) Selecting the fuzzy membership functions for each input/output variable.

3) Setting up the knowledge base.

4) Fuzzifying each input value by its corresponding  5 )  Applying the knowledge rule base to resolving the  6) Defuzzifying the fuzzy output to its crisp value.

Fig. 4 shows the fuzzy control model for infemng a  membership function.

conflict and making the decision.

reasonable minimum support value.

D Mining Association Rules with Inferred Minimum Support We can set a fuzzy control model to infer m i n i u m  confidence value as well. We could then apply the mining algorithm for association rules to discovering rules under a predefined condition. Since the threshold value is inferred from a fuzzy control model, the pattems will not lose the items in the sharp boundary between partitioned intervals.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  In this section we will use our running example to evaluate the extended model. Table 1 shows the price information about desktop PC and laser printer. Table 2 shows the minimum support range from low to high. We assume that multilevel association mining work is done and we like to know association rules about PC price from 570 to 625 and laser printer price from 250 to 270.

In our model, both the PC price and printer price are the input variables. Minimum support value is the output variable.

Fig. 5 shows the input/output variables and their corresponding membership functions. Fig. 6 is the knowledge base. The crisp value of the control action is converted by using the COM (Center of Maximum) method. Table 3 shows the output results after defuzzification and the minimum output will be chosen as minimum support value. Table 4 shows the comparing results between fuzzy m i n i u m  support and uniform minimum support. The output from fuzzy minimum support is reduced to almost half size of uniform setting. Now we can take less time to review our mined rules and the most important is these rules should contain itemsets that match predefined price range. Since the minimum support value is derived from a fuzzy inference model, the rules may reveal some surprising information to us

V. CONCLUSION  We have extended the scope of multilevel association rules mining. By adding one virtual concept abstraction level we can discover rules more realistic. We also defme different threshold settings for different concept levels and construct a fuzzy control inference model to derive the fuzzy minimum support values at the same concept level. The major contribution of our model is to overcome the problem caused by the uniform minimum support setting. In other words, we can set a higher minimum support value derived from a mathematical method instead of setting a lower minimum support to prevent from losing interesting rules. The benefit is that we get fewer rules without losing potential valuable association rules. Our given example shows that our approach is easy to implement. Furthermore, by properly defining the  virtual concept abstraction levels, we can mine association rules more realistic to human sense, e.g., different locations l i e  north/south areas, different seasons or any time interval, famous brandnon-famous brand concepts, sale price, and sale volume. We can also specify more fuzzy linguistic terms to enhance fuzzy inference model that allows mined rules more comprehensible.

