MOBILE PERSONAL FIREWALL

Abstract - More and more activities (such as, e-commerce, e-learning, e-chat, etc.) rely on mobile devices. It is an im- portant issue on how to protect mobile users engaged in mo- bile services. Unfortunately, the conventional firewalls are inappropriate for mobile networks because of the limited computing and communication capabilities of mobile de- vices. Furthermore, with a conventional firewall, a guardian is not able to monitor/control dynamically the mobile node?s activities when the mobile node roams. In this paper, we introduce a new concept of mobile personal firewall and propose a concrete scheme that matches mobile environment and exploits mobile network facilities. When a mobile node (MN) roams into a foreign network managed by a mobility anchor point (MAP), the home agent (HA) will authorize the M P  to serve as a security proxy. The HA will negotiate with the M4P on the security association and then transfer to the M P  the defined security rules that will be applied on all communications to the M N  (via the MAP). The MAP could send the m s  traffic logs to the HA. The MArs guard- ian could dynamically monitor the M A r s  activities by re- trieving the m s  traffic logs through the HA. If necessary, the MArs guardian could update the security rules so that the MN?s activities could be controlled dynamically. All the operations are transparent to the MN, and the MN will be served in the way specified by his guardian no matter where he roams.

Keywords - Firewall, Mobile Network, MIPv6, Security.



I. INTRODUCTION  The demand for mobile communication is growing exponentially. In many countries, the number of wired phone users is currently well below that of mobile phone owners, and the function of a mobile phone is far beyond the voice communication. There will be a huge market of mobile e-commerce.

According to the analysis of ?Mobile Commerce Report? [l], teens are the primary target markets for m-commerce services. As teens are not independent in economy and must be guarded by their parents or guardians, a secure system is required to dynamically monitor and control the teens? activities on the Internet. Unfortunately, due to the limitation of the framework, conventional firewall is not suitable for mobile networks.

0-7803-8523-3/04/$20.00 02004 IEEE.

In this paper, we introduce a new concept of mobile personal firewall to meet such a requirement in mobile networks. A concrete scheme is proposed. In the scheme, the Home Agent (HA) authorizes the Mobility Anchor Point (MAP) as the security proxy on behalf of the HA when the mobile node (MN) visits the MAP subnet. When the HA negotiates with the correspondent node (CIV) about the secu- rity association (SA) and shared keys, it also negotiates with the MAP about security key and transfers to the W P  the defined security rules for the na! The security rules could specify:  which correspondent sites the M N  can access without limitation, e.g. school network, studying web sites; which correspondent sites the MN can access but with time and/or data limitation, e.g. game sites, movie sites, purchase sites; which correspondent sites the M N  can access on spe- cial occasions, e.g. world cup web sites; which correspondent sites the M N  cannot access, e.g.

adult web sites or all sites but those specified above.

After receiving the security rules and the MiV?s binding up- date message, the MAP creates an entry for the MN that includes home address (HoA) as index, Regional Care-of- Address (RCoA), On-Link Care-of-Address (LCoA), security keys and the security rules, and adds it to the MP?s access control cache. When the M N  leaves the MAP, the MAP can delete this entry from the access control cache.

When a packet routes through the hrtAP to the MN, the MAP will retrieve the Mhrs entry and decide whether to forward or to drop the packet.

Meanwhile, the MAP can send the MN?s traffic log to the HA at specified intervals. The parents or guardians can monitor the MN?s (i.e. child) activities by reviewing the MN?s traffic logs from a remote machine. If necessary, the parents can modify the security policy stored in the HA for the MN, then the HA sends the updated security rules to the MAP. Afterwards, the M P  updates its access control cache automatically.

The operation is transparent to the M N  (i.e. child). The MN will be served in a way specified by his parents no matter where he roams.

Furthermore, before the M N  could finally register with the M P ,  the MAP should be authenticated by the HA. If the     MAP is a denied router on the HA?s access control list, the HA could inform the MN to choose another nearby MAP.

M ? S  (at HA) HoA  or  RCoA (at MAP)  11. BASIC KNOWLEDGE:  In the HMIPv6 framework [3], the MAP is a router located in a domain visited by mobile nodes. The IMAP provides the localized mobility management for the visiting mobile nodes. Every MN bundles three addresses: HoA, RCoA and LCoA. For details, please refer to [3,5].

The MAP functions like a Network Address Translating (NAT) server [6]. If the M N  sends the packets to its HA or CNs, the source address of the packets would be set to RCoA. On the contrary, when the MAP receives packets with the destination address RCoA from the CN or the HA, the MAP tunnels the packets to the related LCoA. The CNs and HA always connect to the M N  with its K O A .

In order to perform mutual authentication between the HA and the MAP, digital signature is used in our scheme. PH and SH are the publiclprivate key pair of MN?s HA. SH is kept by the HA in the home link, probably inside ia tamper-resistant cryptographic processing device. The home link obtains a public-key certificate  CertH = {HLSP, PH, Valid-Interval, SIGcA) from a certification authority CA, where HLSP is the home link subnet prefix. Valid-Interval is the va!lid duration of the certificate, and SIGcA is the CA?s signature on HLSP, PH and Valid-nterval. The advantage on the use of HLSP is de- scribed in the CBU protocol [2]. Similarly, the MAP has its own security suite, PMp,  Swp and Certwp.

Below is a list of the notations used throughout the paper:  h()  a cryptographic secure one-way hash function, or one-way hash function in short, such as MD5 or SHA.

a keyed pseudo random function. It accepts a secret key k and a message nz, and generates a pseudo random output. This fimction is used for both message authentication and cryptographic key derivations.

e(k, m) encryption of message m with a secret key k.

Sig(Sx m) digital signature on a message m by using a  private key Sx .

PxlSx a public and private key pair of node X in a  digital signature public key c rypto-system such as RSA or DSS.

concatenation of two messages rn and n.

prf(k, m)  mln  Any All HA?s Address Accept  CNl?s Pass / Bytes / Address Drop Time / Both ? Ports  ..... .... .... ....

CN,?s pass / Bytes /  Address Drop Time / Both protocols ? Ports  111. SECURITY TABLES  In our scheme, 6 cache tables will be established. The HA holds 3 cache tables: a trusted MAP cache, a security rule cache and a security association cache for MAP.

The MAP holds 2 cache tables: another security rule cache, and another security association cache for MN and HA.

In addition, the M N  holds the third security association cache for the MAP.

Table 1. An entry of trusted MAP cache I MAPaddress I Accepted/Denied I  The trust MAP cache indicates which MAP the mobile node can or cannot register with. If the MAP submitted by M N  is not acceptable, the HA will inform M N  to try other nearby MAPS. The trusted MAP cache is configured by the adminis- trator or children?s parents and kept in HA. Table 1 shows an entry in the trusted MAP cache.

Table 2. The content of an entry in the security rule cache  1 Remote 1 Action 1 Lifetime I Restriction 1 Address Address Y  I Y   A home agent could serve a number of registered mobile nodes, which we call local devices. Each local device could be connected to several correspondent nodes, which we call remote devices. The connection between a local device and a remote device is called a channel. We can assign different security rules for every channel, which we call an entry of security rules. Table 2 shows the content of an entry in the security rule cache. The reason we emphasize the security rule for the channel between M N  and its HA is to avoid the communication between them being blocked by MAP.

We retrieve an entry of this security rule cache by both the A 4 ? s  local address and its remote address. The local address is the MN?s home address. The remote address could be the CN?s static address withlwithout subnet mask or its domain name if the CN is a wired machine, or the CN?s home ad- dress if the CN is a mobile device.

The item of ?Action? specifies which operation will be per- formed on the packet between the local device and the re- mote device. Pass Option: the firewall will be transparent to the packet between the M N  and the CN, Drop Option: the firewall will discourage the communication between the M N and the CN.

The item of ?Lifetime? indicates how long the communica- tion is allowed. It could be based on the transferred data, on the transferring time, or on both. It could even be specified for a special period of a day.

The item of ?Restriction? specifies which application proto- cols or ports would be affected by the term of Action. The security rule cache is configured by the administrator or     children?s parents and will be transferred to the M P .  Then the MAP generates a copy of the security rule entry, and uses it to control the communication between the registered MN and its CN.

Time stamp Binding Update Key (ksu)  Table 3. An entry of security association cache located in the home agent (HA) of a mobile node.

Acknowledgement I Request Key ( ~ B , / R )  M ? S  Time Stamp  HoA M?s  M?s LCoA RSA Public Key of  Encryption Binding Update Acknowledgement/ Key  EN) Key ( k d  Request Key ( k ~ u , ~ )  RCoA M?s HA (PH)  MAP Address

IV. NEGOTIATION PROCESS  Before building a channel between a mobile node and its correspondent node, the registering MAP must negotiate with the home agent of the mobile node to generate a secu- rity association, which includes Diffie-Hellman key pair for both the M P  and the HA, secure session keys, etc.

The message exchange in our scheme is the extension of the Certificate-based Binding Update (CUB) protocol [2]. In our scheme, the existence of the HA and the MAP is transparent to the CN. In addition, the operations performed by the HA and the M P  are transparent to both the M N  and the CN.

Figure 1 shows the message exchange among the MN, the MAP and the HA.

When a M N  enters a MAP domain and informs its HA that it would like to register under this MAP as a router, it sends a route optimization request  M ~ Q  = (Src=HoA, Des=HA, RCoA, MAP, Reg, Ran) to the HA via reserve tunnelling, where Reg signals the start of the protocol and Ran is a random number. Here MAP represents both the mobile anchor point and its ZP address.

Message MREQ is sent to Mhrs home link via the IPSec pro- tected secure tunnel [2]. IPSec provides replay protection only when dynamic security association establishment is used. This may not always be possible and manual keying might be preferred in certain circumstances. For this reason,  Binding Update Acknowledgement / Time Key ( B U )  Request Key ( ~ B A I R ,  Stamp  we have included a random number Ran in M ~ Q  to counter message replay.

MN MAP HA  Fig. 1. Message exchange among MN, MAP and HA  Upon receiving message MREQ, the HA will check whether the M P  is an acceptable router according to the HA?s own trusted MAP cache. If the MAP is a denied router, then HA will send back a message  MDNr = {Src=HA, Des=RCoA, HoA, MAP, Denial, Ran) to the MN. After receiving this message, the MN will select another nearby MAP and resend message MREQ to HA.

(Please refer to HMIPv6 [3] for choice of a proper MAP.)  If the MAP is acceptable, the HA generates a nonce No and a Diffie-Hellman secret value x < p ,  and computes its Diffie- Hellman public value X = g? modp. Then, the HA sends the MAP a message  MHK =(Src=HoA, Des=MAP, No, X, p ,  g, Time-Stamp) where Time-Stamp is a time stamp. This time stamp has two functions. One of them is used to indicate how often to up- date the nonce NO. Another is used to trace back the culprit should a malicious mobile node flooding attack have oc- curred.

Upon receiving message MHK, the MAP generates a nonce NI and a Diffie-Hellman secret value y < p ,  computes its Diffie-Hellman public value Y = g? mod p ,  the Diffie- Hellman key k = 3 modp and finally a master secret  mastersecret = prf(k, NOIN,).

Meanwhile, the MAP also computes 3 secret session keys, kBa = prf(master-secret, NIINolO), kBA/R = prf(master-secret, NI IN01 1) kEN = prf(master-secret, N~lN012)  where kBu is the binding key used for authenticating binding     update messages from the M N  to the MAP, kBA/R iS the ac- knowledgementhequest key used for authenticating binding acknowledgehequest messages from the AMP to the MN, and kEN is the encryption key used for eincrypting packet between the MAP and the HA. Then, the MM sends a mes- sage  M ,  = {Src=MAP, Des=HoA, NI, Y, MAC*} to the MN, where  M A  CO = prf( master-secret, NI I Y IMHK).

Note that the destination address of M, is the MArs home address HoA. As a result, this message is delivered to the W s  home link and intercepted by the HA using IPv6 Neighbor Discovery [7].

Upon intercepting message M , ,  the HA also generates the master-secret and three session keys -- knu knA/R and kEN by following the same formulas used by the IMP. If MAC0 is verified to be correct with the mastersecret, the HA will send to the MAP a message  MHC = fSrc=HoA, Des=MAP, CertIf, SIGH} where  SIGH = Sig(S, HoAIMtlpINoINI I M H K I ~ ~ ~ I  Certlt), and  CertH = {HLSP, Pm Valid-Interval, SIGCA} is the public-key certificate of the home link defined before.

After receiving message MHc, the MAP varlidates the home link?s public key certificate CertH, the signature SIGH, and, importantly, checks the equality between the home link subnet prefix strings embedded in both CertH and HoA. If all the validations and check are positive, the MAP will create an entry of security association cache for this M N  that  Time-Stamp. At the first time, RCoA and LCoA should be null and void. Finally, the MAP sends to the HA the following message  MMC ={Src= MAP, Des= HoA, CertMAp, SIGwp} where SIGMp=Sig(SMp, MAPI HoA IN0 I NI I MHK~ MMKIMHCI CertMAp) and  Certup = {MAP, Pwp, Valid-Interval?, SIGCA ?) is the public key certificate of the MAP as defined before.

Again, this message is intercepted by the IYA. Then the HA validates the MAP?S public key certificate CertMp, the sig- nature SIGMp, and, importantly, checks the equality be- tween the IP address of the MAP in both CertMp and the source address (MAP). If all the validations and check are positive, the HA sends knv, and knA/R to the M N  through the secure IPSec ESP protected tunnel,  M ~ K  = {Src=HA, Des=RCoA, HoA, Ran, knu, kBA/R}, where Ran is the random number received in M ~ Q .

After receiving message MSK, the M N  checks if Ran is the same as the one it sent out in MREQ. If so, the M N  sends the binding update message  includes HOA, R C d ,  LCOA,, kBv, knA/R, kEN and  MBU = { Src=LCoA, Des=MAP, HoA, RCoA, Seq#, Lge-Time, MACBU}  to the MAP, where Seg# is a sequence number used to detect replay attack, Lge-Time is the lifetime of the binding and  M A  CBV = prf@na HoA I LCoA I RCoA I Seg#ILge-Time) are the MAC on the binding update parameters.

If MBv is verified positive, the MAP may reply with a bind- ing acknowledgement message  M B A  = {Src=MAP, Des=LCoA, HoA, RCoA, Seq#, L fe-Time ?, MAC,,),  where Seq# is copied from the BU message; Lge-Time? is the granted lifetime, and  M A  CBA = prf@BA/R, RCoA I MAPI Seq#l L fe-Time is a MAC generated using kBA to authenticate the BA mes- sage. Then, the MAP will update the entry in security association cache.

When the MN moves to other access router (AR) and changes its LCoA, it needs only to resend message MBU to inform the MAP to update the entry in security association cache for this MN.

After the M N  leaves this MAP for other MAP, the HA will delete the related entries in its security association cache.

Meanwhile, the HA also sends a message  MLV = {Src=HoA, Des=MAP, Leave, MACL~] to the MAP, where  MACL, = prf(mastersecret, HoAILeave).

Upon receiving the message MLv, the MAP will delete the related entries in its security association cache and security rule cache.

It is beyond the scope of this paper on how to provide seam- less communication when a M N  roams among APs and MAPS. For related materials, please refer to [3,7,8].



V. FIREWALL PROCESS  Figure 2 shows the message exchange to activate a mobile firewall.

MN MAP HA  Fig. 2 .  Message exchange to activate a mobile firewall  When a M N  and its CN begin the communication, the HA will act as a secure proxy to negotiate the security keys for the channel between MN and CN, which has been described in [ 2 ] .  Meanwhile, the firewall for the M N  is launched.

As soon as the HA intercepts the initial message MIN~ MINI = fSrc=HoA, Des=CN, CoA(RCoA), Reg, Ran]  from the MN, the HA will retrieve the related MAP based on the Mhrs HoA from its security association caches. If the MAP?S entry is not available in the HA?s security association cache, then the HA will send to the M N  a message Mmp = fSrc=HA, Des=CoA(RCoA), HoA, Req-MAP, Ran) to request the M N  to resend the message MEQ in order to inform HA which MAP the M N  currently registeres in. Upon receiving the message, the M N  will then re-initiate the negotiation process described in the above section.

Otherwise, if the MAP?S entry is available, then the HA will get the encryption key kEN and will retrieve the security rule cache to get the security rule entry based on both W s  HoA and CN (or CN?s HoA). If no security rule entry is available for the HoA and CN, the default security rule will be used.

Then the HA will send to the MAP a message MsR.

MsR = {Src=HoA, Des=MAP, rules*, SIGH) where, rules* is the security rules encrypted by the encryp- tion key kEN,  rules *= e(kEN, security-rules), and SIGH is the signature of the security rules signed by the home link?s private key SH,  When the MAP receives the message MsR, the MAP retrieves from its security association cache the related public key PH and encryption key kEN. After validating the signature SIGH and getting the positive result, the MAP generates an entry for the security rule and adds to its security rule cache.

According to HMIPv6 framework, every packet from the CN to the M N  will pass through the router MAP. The MAP can capture all these packets, and decide how to process these pockets according to the related security rule: fonvard- ing or dropping the packets. As the security rule is config- ured based on the source address, destination address, appli- cation protocols and ports, our solution could implement all the features of a normal firewall [4].

Moreover, the MAP could also count the connecting time and the size of data transferred between the CN and the MN.

If they exceed the specified value in the security rule, the MAP may break the communication.

Further, the MAP may log the MArs activities and report the activity log to the home agent at specified intervals:  MLOC = fSrc=MAP, Des=HoA, i, HoA, log*] where, HoA is used to indicate the mobile node, i is used to indicate the sequence number of the log, and log* is the en- crypted activity log of mobile node at the specified interval,  log*= e(kEN, activity-log), where, kEN is the encryption key between the MAP and the HA generated in the negotiation process.

The parents of the M N  (i.e. child) can monitor the Mhrs activities by reviewing the Mhrs  logs from a remote ma- chine. If necessary, the parents can remotely modify the  SIGH = (SH, HoA(MAP(rules*)  security rules stored in the HA for the MN, then the HA can send the message M ~ R  to the MAP again so that the MAP can update the MV?s security rules for synchronization. All the operation in the firewall process is transparent to the MN (child).



VI. CONCLUSION As a conventional firewall is unsuitable for mobile net- works, we introduced the concept of mobile personal fire- wall, and described how to implement a stateful firewall in the mobile IF? infrastructure. There are three main parts in our scheme:  1. Authentication and authorization: this part focuses on how to authenticate between the HA and the MAP as well as between the AlN and the MAP.

2. Control and monitor: this part focuses on how the guardian of the Iwv can control and monitor the Mhrs activities.

3. Management: this part focuses on how to effectively manage the security stuff.

All the operations are transparent to the mobile user, and he will be served in a way specified by his guardian no matter where he roams. The mobile firewall could have full fea- tures of a conventional stateful firewall.

For the reasons of privacy and law, we limit our discussions on a scenario of teens and their parents or guardians in the paper. Obviously, the idea could be employed in enterprises.

With the mobile firewall, the administrators could monitor and control their mobile employee?s activities in the same way that they do on their fixed employees with conventional firewalls.

