Proceedings of the 2004 International Confennu  on Intelligent Mechatronics and Automation

Abstract - There have been several algorithms for mining association rules, such as Apriori and some improved Aprioris, only to be Interested in those itemsets, which have support above a userdefined threshold. However, there exists a kind of important rule, indirect association, hidden in these itemsets, which are filtered. out. When a pair of items, (A, B), which seldom. occur together in the same transaction, are highly dependent on the presence of another itemset, Z, the pair (A, B) are said to be indirectly associated via Z In this paper, the definition of indirect association is firstly given. Then a measure of dependence to estimate the correlation between relative frequent items and a simple way to express the closeness between a pair of items indirectly associated by another itemset are provided. I n  addition, two kinds of classifying standard for indirect association rules are proposed for further research. I n order to mine such indirect association rules, an algorithm of indirect association mining (IAM) is presented. And the complexity analysis about this algorithm is showed. An experiment in order to verify the utility of this algorithm is made.

Finally, some issues about the IAM algorithm are put forward for future research.

Krywords - data mining, ossociafion rule, indirect associalion, the bridge itemset. IAM

I. INTRODUCTION The purpose of association rule mining is . to '  find  interesting association relationships among a large set of data items. A lot of industries are becoming interested in mining association rules from their databases with large amounts of data continuously being collected and stored.

Association rule mining was first proposed by Agrawal, Imielinski, and Swami [I]. The Apriori algorithm was published independently by Agrawal and Srikant [2], and Mannila, Toivonen, and Verkamo [3]. A joint publication combing these works later appeared in Agrawal, Mannila, Srikant, Toivonen, and Vekamo [4]. Current research has focused on developing algorithms to improve association mining efficiency [5,6,7,8] as well as extending the concept beyond the single transaction,binary literal paradigm [9,10].

Generally, the process of association rule mining is divided two steps: (1) find all frequent itemsets. By definition, each of these itemsets will occur at least as frequently as a pre-determined minimum support count; (2). generate strong association rules from the frequent itemsets. By definition, these rules must satisfy minimum support and minimum sonfidence. Under this framework, any itemset that fail the pre-determined minimum support count will be considered to be uninteresting. However, some of infrequent itemsets may  provide useful insight into the huge amounts of business transaction records in the database.

When a pair of items, (A, B), which seldom occur together in the same transaction, are highly dependent on the presence of another itemset, Z, we can say that the pair (A, B) are indirectly associated via Z. For example, in a supermarket, TV set and HIFI Sound Box are' seldom bought by the same customer. But TV set and Video are often bought by the same one, so do HIFI Sound Box and Video. Such facts show that TV set and HIFI Sound Box are indirectly associated via Video. According to the indirect association rule, we can make the right decision that TV set .and Video should be put near as much as possible, so do HIFI Sound Box and Video.

The task of mining that indirect association rule is called indirect association mining.

When a pair of items, (A, B), is indirectly associated via Z, another itemset, Z is called the bridge itemset. How to find the bridge itemset is the most important for indirect association mining.

This paper is organized as follows: In Section 11, the related work of indirect association is introduced; In Section 111, the definition and formulation of indirect association are given; Next, an algorithm of indirect association mining is proposed, followed by the complexity analysis; In Section V, an experiment .is made in order to verify the utility of this algorithm; Finally, Section VI concludes with a summary ,of our work and puts forward some suggestions for future research.

11. RELATED WORK  In [I l l ,  the importance of indirect association between attributes of a dataset in the database has firstly been recognized. What's more, the formulation of intemal and extemal measures of similarity between attributes of a database relation has been proposed. Generally, indirect association has close relations with the notion of negative association rules in [I21 to some extent. In addition, another related research area is how to define the suitable dependency function for the specific situation with the purpose of finding out dependent attributes for applications such as semantic query optimization [13]. In the research field of data mining, the notion of indirect association is firstly proposed in [14].

And our work is an essential expansion about it.

111. DEFINITION AND FORMULATION Let 1=(il,i2,:..,im) be a set of items. Let D be a set of  database transactions. A transaction T is a set of items such that T E I  . Each transaction is identified by a TID  83 1 0-7803-8748-1/04/$20.00 02004 IEEE.

mailto:wawahohobibi@l63.com   (Transaction IDentifier). Let A be a set of items. A transaction T is said to contain A if and only if A T. An association rule is an implication of the form A 3  B , where A C I , B c Z ,  and A n B = B .  The rule A Z B  holds in the transaction set D with support(A,B), where support(A,B) is the percentage of transactions in D that contain both A and B.

This is taken to be the probability, P ( A  n B )  . The rule A j B has confidence(A,B) in the transaction set D if confidence(A,B) is the percentage of transactions in D containing A that also contain B. This is taken to be the conditional probability, P(B I A).

Definition 1. The support of the association rule A a B , support(A,B) = P( A n B) . And min-sup is the  minimum support threshold, which is pre-defined by users for the specific situation.

Definition 2. The confidence of the association rule A 3 B , confidence(A,B) = P(B I A) . And min-conf is a minimum confidence threshold, which is also pre-defined by users for the specific situation.

Rules that satisfy both min-sup and min-conf are called strong. Conventionally, we write support and confidence values so as to occur between 0% and loo%, rather than 0 to 1.0.

The occurrence frequency of an itemset is the number of transactions that contain the itemset. This is also known, simply, as the frequency, support count, or count of the itemset. An itemset satisfies minimum support if the occurrence frequency of the itemset is greater than or equal to the product of min-sup and the total number of transactions in D. The number of bansactions required for the itemset to satisfy minimum support is therefore referred to as the minimum support count. If an itemset satisfies minimum support, then it is a frequent itemset The set of frequent k- itemsets is commonly denoted by Lr.

In conventional association mining, we are just interested in those strong rules. But in the field of indirect association mining, we are fixed on those rules, which are filtered out by the minimum support threshold, min-sup.

The above definitions are the concepts, which are often used in the association rules mining. Next, some concepts related with indirect association mining are put forward.

Definition 3. The dependence of a pair of items (A,B) is defined as  P( A n B ) =  It is often in effect to use a support-confidence framework for association rules mining. However, this framework can be misleading in that it may identify a rule A a B as interesting when the occurrence of A does not imply the occurrence of B practically.

Over the years, many measures have been given to measure the degree of dependence between attributes of a   dataset. In the field of statistics, the x 2  test is adopted for this purpose. The X 2  statistic can be used to determine if the correlation is statistically significant and also determine negative implication. However, this approach has a drawback that it does not quantify the strength of dependencies between items. What?s more, the x 2  statistic depends on the number of transactions in the database. As a result, other statistical measures of association are often used, includirig Pearsons coefficient, Goodman and Kruskal 1 ,etc.

For binary variables, correlation coefficient is defined as E(A,B) - E ( A ) W )  J W ) ( l  - E ( A ) ) J W w  - E ( m  ? PA.B =  In this pap&, we will take the formulation in Definition 3 as the form of dependence function. However, the capability to recognize the statistical notion of correlation is nn important standard for a good measure.

associated via an itemset X, which is called the bridge itemset, under the conditions that:  (1) suppon(A,B)<min-sup(5,, where min-sup(sl is called the support threshold of infrequent itempair.

This is called the infrequent itempair support condition;  (2) There exists a non .empty itemset X, for each  Definition 4. A pair of items, (A, B), are indirectly  x, E X ,  where min-sup(p) is called the relative frequent support threshold. This is called the bridge support condition;  (3) In terms of the non empty itemset X in Condition (2), for each xi E X , d(A,xi)t  min-dpd , @ , x i )  t min-dpd , where min-dpd is called the relative frequent dependence threshold. This is called the bridge dependence condition.

(4) In terms of the non empty itemset X in Condition (2), for each xi E X ,  confidence(A, xi) K i d  t min-con&,, and  CUI Zconfidence(B,x,) & E X  t min-con& ,  1x1 where min-conf(n is called the relative frequent confidence threshold. This is called the bridge confidence condition.

Here, a simple analysis about these conditions is made as follows:  (1) is required. Here, our research emphasizes an indirect association between a pair of items. We are not interested in the conventional association rule between the items, which may be called the direct association rule for the purpose of distinguishing from the indirect association ride. So the condition that a pair of items rarely occur together in the same transaction is of much significance when it is necessary to filter out those direct association rules, which can be found by some conventional association mining algorithms.

(2) is also required. It ensures the statistical significance of the bridge itemset. In addition, the relative frequent support threshold has a nice downward closure property, which is in effect to minimize the search space of the problem. Here, we take the quotient of support(A, xi) and support(A,B), not support(A,xi) used in the definition of indirect association in [14], because it can still be in effect when the common occurrence frequency of A and xi is very small. Sometimes, although the value of support(A, xi) is small, the value of support(A, &)/support(A,B) may be relatively large. This shows that the itemset of A and xi is relatively frequent comparing with the itemset of A and B. If we directly take support(A,xi) as the frequent support condition, we will miss some important indirect association rules with the small value of support(A,xi) resulting from some factual disadvantageous factors. If we can find out such indirect association rules, it is easy for us to determine those factors by the further analysis.

(3) is required. It guarantees that the bridge itemset consists of the items, which are dependent on the pair of items, A and B.

(4) is needed. Just as we take the support-confidence framework in mining association rules, we still apply this methodology in the field of indirect association mining. Here, we take the average of confidence as the standard form. 1x1 is the number of items in the bridge itemset.

Above all, we will need four input parameters: min-sup(s,, min-sup(n, min-conq,), min-dpd.

Definition 5. The closeness of between a pair of indirect associated items A and B via the bridge itemset X is defined as  d(A ,x i )+  d (B ,x i )  ..

c c(A, E )  I X = r'EX  It is of much use to calculate the overall closeness between a pair of indirectly associated items. One of its functions is to be used to rank the discovered rules according to the strength of their indirect association.

Definition 6. When a pair of indirect associated items A and B via the bridge itemset. X satisfies the following condition,  1x1  it is called the former greater support indirect association rule. Otherwise, the latter greater support indirect association: rule when the left item is less than the right item in the above formula and the equal support indirect association rule when the left item is the equal of the right item in the above formula.

We can use the terms in Definition 6 to describe an indirect association rule. and identify which item has the greater support with the bridge itemset. This can be taken as a classifying standard for the indirect association rules:  Definition 7. When a pair of indirect association items A and B via the bridge itemset X satisfies the following condition.

it is called the former greater dependency indirect association rule. Likewise, we also have the latter greater dependency indirect association rule and the equal dependency indirect association rule.

We also take this as another classifying standard for the indirect association rules for future research.



IV. THE IAM ALGORITHM  First of all, it is noted that in this version IAM algorithm, we just take A or B as the single item for the reason of simplification.

The IAM (Indirect Association Mining) algorithm is given in Figure I .

The algorithm proceeds in four phases: an initialization phase, a pruning phase, a bridge itemset calculation phase, and a ranking phase. The purpose of the initialization phase is to allocate the memory .needed. Initially, an itempair support value matrix M is constructed. Then it is updated by scanning the entire database by calling the function MatrixUpdateO.

The second phase is a process of pruning for the purpose of minimizing the search space of problem. The threshold value of pruning is min-sup(s). The third phase, the Bridge Itemset Calculation Phase, is the most important for this algorithm. In this phase, A and B, which are maybe indirectly associated, are firstly got by calling the function ItemMap().Then the bridge itemset can be calculated by' calling the' function BridgeFindO. And the bridge itemset X and two indirectly associated items A and B are saved and the closeness is inserted into a linked vector C if X is not empty. The last phase, a ranking phase, is mainly to finish the ranking operation according to'the closeness value in the linked vector C for the purpose of providing decision makers the most useful indirect association rules.

The complexity of our algorithm is discussed as follows: the Matrixupdate function requires a single scan over the     entire database. Let T be the transaction set. Assuming that the matrix update operation takes O(1) and the maximum number of a transaction is m, this operation takes at most O(m*ITI).

Lct n be the number of items, the pruning phase can be executed in O(n2). Let k be the maximum number of items in the bridge itemset. Then the complexity in the Bridge Itemset Calculatiun Phase is O(n'*k). With respect to the function VectorSortO, the complexity can he missed. Hence, the overall worst-case complexity of this algorithm is O(m*lTI+ nz+ n2*k).

A B X d(AX) d(B,X) EmplyCD D Computer D Recorder D 0.353 0.242 T V U  HiSdBox U Video U 0.330 0.252 Book U Ink U Pen U 0.200 0.353  Algorithm IAM(float min-sup(s,, float min-supp), float  {T is the transaction set) (6: is one transaction in the transaction set) ( X  is the bridge itemset) (support(A,B): is the support of items A and B) (confidence(A,B): is the confidence of items A and B} (min-sup(s,: is the support threshold of infrequent  (min-supm: is the relative frequent support threshold) (min-concF): is the relative frequent confidence  {min-dpd is the relative frequent dependence threshold} (M: is the matrix of the support value for all pairs of  (mi: is one element in the matrix M) ( C  is the linked vector of the closeness for all indirect  (I. Inifialization Phase}  For each transaction t, E T :  (2. Pruning Phase}  min-conb float min-dpd)  itempair)  threshold)  items A and B)  association rules)  M=malloc{[mi=O]); .. . .

MatrixUpdate(M,ti);  Aff 0.242 0.252 0.200  Ning Tan in [14], we also applied this algorithm on the same data. For the convenience of description, WI: record this algorithm as "TAN.

Firstly, we made a pretreatment on the data collected in the database. For one commodity, if the sale quantity in the second month is 0.25 times greater than the sale quantity in the first month, we can say that the sale quantity of that commodity go up, and take the sign (the name of this commodity followed by -U) to represent this situation. If the sale quantity in the second month is 0.25 times less than the sale quantify in the first month, we can say that the sale quantity go down, and take the sign (the name of that commodity followed by -D) to represent this situation.

Between the two situations, we take the sign (the name of the commodity followed by -E) to represent it.

Table 1 shows the parameters for IAM algorithm and TAN algorithm. It must be noticed that the mediator support condition in TAN algorithm, similar to the bridge support condition in IAM algorithm, is directly defined as an equation of comparing with the threshold of min-sup(n and there is not any confidence condition in TAN algorithm. Therefore, a threshold value of min-supe, with the form of percentage is given and min-conqn is not defined in terms of TAN algorithm. Table 2 and Table 3 show some sorted indirect association rules picked up from the results produced respectively by IAM and TAN algorithm according to the closeness in IAM or the afinity in TAN. In Table 2, c(c1oseness) is defined as the average value of d(A,X) and d(B,X), while in Table 3, Amafinity) is defined as the minimum value of d(A,X) and d(B,X).

Table 1. Parameters for IAM and TAN Alaorilhm Parameters I min SUR$, I min supR, I min conf,n 1 min dpd (1AM)Value: 1 0.01% I 50 I 10% I 0.1 (TAN)Value: I 0.01% I 0.5% I -  I 0.1 -  PruneMatrix(M,mk-sup(& {3. Bridge Itemet Calculafion Phase} For each element mi E M :  When mi # O : A=ItemMaufm;. 0). B=ItemMau(m. 1): . . .. ,_ . . ._ ,.

X=BridgeFind(M,A,B, min-supm, min-conqq,  W h e n X # O : C=VectorInsert(c(A,B)IX); Save(X,A,B);  min_dpd);  (4. Ranking Phase} VectorSort(C);  Fig. I The IAM Algorithm.



V. EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS To demonstrate the utility of the indirect associations, an  experiment was carried out using the data in the database of a supermarket. This experiment was performed on a 2.6G Pentium 4 machine with 256 main memory.

Moreover, for the purpose of comparing with the algorithm of indirect association pattern proposed by Pang-     indirectly associated via Necktie-U does not a p p  in Table 3. This is b e c k  &at mediator support condition in TAN algorithm cannot be satisfied, but the bridge support condition in IAM algorithm can be met. We feed back this tule onto the market analyst of the supermarket and make an analysis with collaboration with them. And we find the small value of support(Mdress-U, Necktie-U) or support(Lighter-U, Necktie-U) lies in the far distance in space between them caused by the division of Lady department and Gentleman department respectively located in different floors. From the results of thcse two comparable experiments, we can conclude that IAM algorithm can find more valuable indirect association rules than TAN algorithm, especially when the mediator support condition in TAN algorithm cnnnot be satisfied. .



VI. CONCLUSION  This paper proposes an algorithm of indirect association mining-IAM. When a pair of items, (A, B), which seldom OCUII together in the same transaction, are highly dependent on the presence of another itemset, Z, we can say that the pair (A, B) is indirectly associated via Z. In this paper, we fmtly give the definition of indirect association. And then, we provided a measure of dependence to estimate the correlation between frequently occurring items and a simple way to express the closeness between a pair of items. We also put forward two kinds of classifying standard for indirect association rules for further research. Then we presented the IAM algorithm and given the complexity analysis about this algorithm. Finally, we made an experiment in order to verify the utility of IAM algorithm.

For future research, there are several unresolved issues we need to address. How to reduce the complexity of the IAM algorithm is a practical problem. And we can make some extensions about this IAM algorithm. This first kind of extension is to update this algorithm for the purpose of discovering the indirect association rules among multiple itemsets rather than a pair of items. Another kind of extension is to upgrade this algorithm for mining higher order indirect association rules, but how to defne a higher order indirect association must be taken into consideration seriously. Other issues include how to choose the dependence function to suit for the specific situation, how to make certain all kinds of threshold values.

