The Research of Data Mining Based on Extension Sets

Abstract  Extension data mining is a new method that  is based on the extension analysis method of  Extenics. Extenics is a new disciplinary and a  new branch of artificial intelligence. Data  mining techniques have their origins in methods  from statistics, pattern recognition, databases,  artificial intelligence, high performance and  parallel computing and visualization. This paper  presents how to deal with multiple data formats  and unify data representation based on extenics.

Keyword: matter-element, databases, extension  data mining, association rules  .Introduction  Extenics was first brought out by the  famous researcher Cai Wen in 1983 in China, the  major goal of this subject is to solve the  incompatible problems through studying the  extension probability of things. Matter-element  is the logic cell of extenics and puts the matter,  the characteristics and their measure together  into consideration [1]  .

Data mining has gained popularity in the  database field recently, it has been mostly used  by statisticians, data analysts and so on. Data  mining techniques can be divided into five  classes of methods: predictive modeling;  clustering; data summarization and change and  deviation detection [2]  . Some of these techniques  are beginning to be scaled to operate on  databases.

This paper presents how to deal with  multiple data formats and unify data  representation based on extenics. Also a general  method of mining correlative matter-element  based on association rules is valuable and easy  to be implemented.

.Matter-element and Correlative  matter-element  In the real world, things are entity of quality  and quantity. The quantitative change and  qualitative change of one thing are interrelated  closely and interact on each other. Classical  mathematics consider only the quantity and  forms of objects, it studies quantitative relation  and spatial forms. As a result, classical  mathematics has its limitation in dealing with  contradictory problems, which is associated with  the qualitative change.

Extension theory can be used to describe  the thinking process associated with both  quantitative change and qualitative change, it  regards the objective world as a world of  matter-element [1]  . We use an ordered triad R=(N,  c, v) as the basic element for describing thing,  called matter-element, where N represents the  matter; c, the characteristics; v is the N?s  measure about the characteristic c; the  expression v=c(N) describes the relation  between quality and quantity. A matter has many  characteristic-elements, which can be described  by n-dimensional matter-elements:  R=  Definition 1 For a certain matter-element R=(N,  mm vc  vc vc  ,  2,2  1,1,N      c, v), if existing another matter-element R?=(N,  c?, v?) of the same thing that is closely relevant  to R, and the relevant degree of the two  matter-element is bigger than the predefined  valve value r, then matter-element R? is labeled  as the correlative matter-element of  matter-element R.

Definition 2 Existing the matter-element set  Wm={R1, R2,?, Rm}, Ri (i=1, 2,?, m) is labeled  as a n-dimensional matter-element that is  relevant to the specific problem.

. Extension method of data  processing  In this section, we will discuss the data  formats and representation based on  matter-element; relation operation and extension  method; E-R chart and matter-element chart.

1 data and matter-element  Relation database is a set of table, a table  has many fields, in the term of relation model,  table is also called relation, field is called  attribute. A relation S is a attribute  set{C1,C2,?,Cn}, S also can be looked as a  n-dimensional matter-element R=(N,C,V)},  C=(C1, C2, ?, Cn), V=(V(C1), V(C2), ?, V(Cn)),  V(Ci) Dom(Ci)., Dom(Ci) is called the value  domain of attribute,. A row on S is a  correspondingly map of R. Relation database q  is correspond a matter-element set Wm that is  consisted of many n-dimensional matter-element  Rn.

For example there is a customer relation in  bank database schema. This relation has three  fields: customer-name, customer-city,  customer-telephone. We can represent this  relation in a single structure in 3- dimensional  matter-element R=(N, C, V). In this case,  N=customer, C1 is customer-name, C2 is  customer-city, C3 is customer-tel.

We can give an instance as following:  Customer  Customer-name  a1  Customer-city   b1  R=  Customer-tel   c1  2 relation operation based on matter-  element  Suppose there is a relation database q= Wm  ={R1, R2, ?, Rm}, Ri (i, j=1, 2, ?, m) is a  n-dimensional matter-element, R0 is a n-  dimensional matter-element. Ri and Rj are tables  of q. Relation operations based on  matter-element are defined as follows:  1) Union operation: Ri Rj = {R|R0 Ri || R0  Rj }  2) Intersect operation: Ri Rj = {R| R0 Ri &&  R0 Rj }  3) Difference operation: Ri - Rj = {R| R0 Ri  && R0?  Rj } 4) Project operation: R0 is the n- dimensional  matter-element that contains the characteristics  we want to know. ?R0(Ri) or ?R0(Rj) represent that we find the R0 from Ri or Rj  5) Select operation: if a condition F is given for  rows of data table Ri or Rj, then F(Ri) or  F(Rj)={ R0 Ri  or R0 Rj&& R0 is satisfied  with F}  6) Joint operation: Ri Rj ={R|Ri R0&& Rj  R0, R0 is the n- dimensional matter-element  that contains the characteristics getted by the  combination of Ri and Rj.

In extenics, we can use the extension  methods of matter-element to correspond the  relation operation. For example, one  characteristic many matters [1]  have the project  relation operation function.

3 E-R chart and matter-element chart  In database model theory, now the  Entity-Relationship (E-R for shortly) chart is  widely used in database field, the following      chart is an E-R chart of order.

Figure 1. E-R chart of order  According to the definition of  matter-element and extension set [3]  , we can see  the ordering relationship as a matter-element set.

It includes three submatter-elements. We also see  the ordering relationship as a matter-element R  that N is ordering matter, its characteristics are  other matter-elements.

If we import three matter-element: R1=(N1,  C1, V1), R2=(N2, C2, V2), R3=(N3, C3, V3), they  respectively represent equipment, provider and  order form, and use the rectangle frame represent  matter-element, we can get the Fig 2 and Fig 3:  Figure 2. E-R chart of matter-element  Figure 3. Matter-element chart  We can see from the Fig 2 and fig3 that the  matter-element chart is simpler and the  description is more close to the real world, it is  easy to be transformed to relation database. It  composes some each other include and  non-intersect rectangles. Each rectangle is a  matter-element, each other non-included  rectangle is equal matter-element. In  matter-element chart, each rectangle is a relation  or a data table. Matter-element chart is easier to  be transformed to relation data model.

. Find the correlative matter-  element based on association rules  When we use the matter-element to  describe things, we will get much information in  the form of matter-elements. How can we find  useful and interesting information? When we are  confronted with many matter-elements, some  matter-elements are relevant to the useful or  interesting matter-element. We call these  matter-elements the correlative matter-elements.

We will discuss how to find these correlative  matter-elements subsequently. Details of  algorithm of finding correlative matter-element  and their application may be seen in reference  [5].

Association rules came from efforts to  discover useful patterns in customers transaction  databases. The very famous example is: 87%of  the customers that have bought beer have also  bought chips [4]  .

Suppose C {C1, C2,?, Cn} is  n-dimensional characteristics of class-thing N,  D={e1,e2,?,en} is a set of measure results.

Where ei represents the specific n-dimensional  matter-element that are obtained through  measuring the n-dimensional characteristics of a  certain case Ni of  class-thing N and ei  {R1,R2, ,Rn } 1 i N  R R1  R2  R3  R1  R2  R3order      Association rule is an implication formula  that is defined as A1 A2 An B1 B2  Bn, where Ai Bi 1 i n represent a set  of matter-element of different value of  characteristic Ci of N, and C(A1) ? C(A2) ? ? C(An) ? C(B1) ? C(B2) ? ? C(Bn)= , where C(Ai) C(Bi) represent the operation of  getting the characteristic of matter-element Ai  and Bi.

Support-degree is defined as following:  Sd A1 A2 An B1 B2 Bn  P(A1 ?  A2 ? ?  An ?  B1 ?  B2 ? Bn).

Confidence-degree is defined as following:  Cd A1 A2 An B1 B2 Bn  =P(B1 ?  B2 ? ? Bn | A1 ?  A2 ? ? An)  )(  )(    n  nn  AAAP  BBBAAAP  ??? ?????  1).Discretization. The characteristics can  generally be classified into two kinds: the  quantitative and the qualitative characteristics.

The quantitative characteristic should be  discretized before processing. Interval value, for  instance 0 ?10 ?, ?10 ?20 ?, ?20  ?30 ? and so on ,can be used to replace the  specific value of temperature character.

2) Find the frequent matter-element sets.

The appearance frequency of a certain  matter-element set is the number of the measure  result in D that contains it. If the appearance  frequency of a matter-element set is bigger than  or equal to min(Sd). We call it satisfies the  minimum support degree min(Sd), it is called  frequent matter-element set.

3) Obtain the correlative matter-element.

For every of the subset of frequent  matter-element L, if Sd(L)/Sd(s) min(Sd), then  output association rule ?s L-s?. we can draw  that those matter-element that are contained by  the two matter-element sets s and L-s are closely  related, compute the association value  SRiRj(Ri?L s Rj?s) and find the correlative  matter-element that satisfy the requirement.

JI RR S  ||  )(  D  RRP ji ? ,where P(Ri ? Rj)  represents the number of measure results that  contain both Ri and Rj |D| represents the number  of measure results in D. If SRiRj>r r represents  the valve value, and it can generally be set as 0.5,  then matter-element Ri is labeled as the  correlative matter-element of matter-element Rj.



V. Conclusions  In this paper, we have presented a new  method to deal with multiple data formats and  data representation by using matter-element, a  general method of mining correlative  matter-element based on association rules has  been given. Extension data mining is based on  mater-element and different from other  traditional methods, it has a good application  prospect.

Acknowledgements: The authors are  grateful to National Natural Science Foundation  of China (60272089) and Guangdong Provincial  Natural Science Foundation of China (980406)  for decisive support.

Reference  [1] Cai Wen. Extension theory and its application,  Chinese Science Bulletin. 44(17), 1999  [2].Usama Fayyad, Paul Stolorz. Data mining and  KDD: Promise and challenges, Future Generation  Computer Systems 13 (1997) 99-115  [3] Cai Wen. Extension set and non-compatible  problem, Advances Mathematics and Mechanics in  China (in Chinese), Vol.2, Beijing: International  Academic Publishers, 1990,1-21  [4] F. Bodon, L. Ronyai. Trie An Alternative Data  Structure for Data Mining Algorithms, Mathematical  and Computer Modeling 38(2003) 739-751  [5] LuQing, Yu Yongquan. Correlative Matter-element  and Their Application in Extension Detecting. Journal  of Guangdong University of Technology No.2 (2005).

