Network Information Content Security: A Framework for  Intelligent Analysis and Monitoring

Abstract- The security assurance of network is critical to the whole modern world. As the increasingly occurred common network security incidents, current network security approaches are not suflicient, To transcend these limits, we should synthetically analyze security related factors from various kinds of sources and visual perspectives. Therefore we present a general framework for intelligent analysis and monitoring the security of network information content in high-speed network. The system can intelligently gather and transform various channels of non-structured, semi-structured and structured data based on broadband network; carry on security assurance related characteristic seiections and topic identification; perform social network analysis of email and BBS. Fused analysis of technical, social, economic and political triggers to information security incidents. The system can help information security experts find the association rules in the results from various analyzing levels, and visualize sssoeiation patteras by their relational structures from Link analysis techniques and provide early warning to system administrators.

Keywords: content security monitoring; topic identification; social network analysis; rink analysis

I. INTRODUCTION In the aspects of the network and information content  security, there have been already many research results.

Some of these research results have realized commercialization. Among them the most famous ones are Symantec , Network Associates(NAI) , Trend Micro manufacturers etc[?1?21[31L41[51. Research fields involve html content filter, e-mail content filter, email virus inspection, commerce secret leak etc. These monitoring systems can write down a large number of network information faithfully and perform content filtering, analysis and trend prediction.

Based on semantic levels or rules. The aim of these researches is just intelligently discerning the incline of content theme. We think that only doing this is not enough, because, the security question found from the content monitoring system often have various kinds of social and management factors and have associations, which need intelligently collect related data and doing deep analysis on the content and linkage evidences.

With the more high-speed network and the more businesses dependent on it, and the more critical network information content security became to the businesses and governments. They need not only some methods or tools but also a platform to synthetically manage many kinds of security analysis tools and intelligently help the security  manager find the potential threats and make early warnings to prevent big damages.

Therefore our research is focused on design a framework for an intelligent platform which can synthetically analysis security factors with the aid of content analysis and relation identification methods, to monitor security events and accidents, and give early and more warnings for security potential problems.

The paper is organized as follows, section 2 is the system architecture, section 3 is the system realizations and main technology, section 4 is the summary.



II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE Our platform for synthetically analysis and monitoring  network content consists of three main parts, information sources, content analyzing and association analyzing. The system architecture is as follows(Fig.l).

The Information sources part mainly consists of the data caught by high speed network processing equipments from broadband network and the data automatically collected from Internet by crawlers. We use dynamic monitoring and automatic extraction technique, and ?fast data capture and - fast protocol analysis? module to intercept and recovery of the information from different sources of network multimedia data, And construct temporary data storage separately, and transfer the data to the content analysis modules. For the inconsistent problem of the network high speed and the limited processing ability, this part is designed with a CCDP (Centerized Collection and Distributed Processing) structure, to ensure the recovery and parse data in real time and save them for the analysis module1 and module2. And the distributed parts are the same design in the processing of several protocols to keep them simple ~d easy for dynamic load balance of the network flow demand and effective inspection. The ?network data auto collection? module use multi-agent technique, with different security content topic tracking and dynamic collection and extraction algorithms, which combines the dynamic relevance feedback technique form Web intelligent retrieval[?], to collect Web published insecurity specific information to the analysis module3 inside the ?content security analysis and monitoring module?. The collected information includes outside security information sites, world important network security event alarm centers, the major anti-virus software producers, the chief hackers technique forums, main OS  - 841 - 0-7803-897 1-9/05/$20.00 02005 IEEE    producers, and so on. The collected contents contain events of new network security such as associated personalities, occurrence time, type, location, equipment used, involved OS?s vulnerabilities, new virus, new type of attacks or .hacker?s organization communications, and new suggestions for security,.

The second part is information content analysis module, which mainly studies ?to set up ontology presentation to security features and concepts?. We use ontology fiame[?ol[?l, mainly setup 3 security domains for content security features representation. The first is for network security events related features; the second is for topic related content representation; the third is the communication pattern about the some security groups? sociological relations.

The data from the first part analysis will do module match with the security feature representation frame, in the second part, the matched content file will be classified to a standard relevant database. The match rules come from the third part for their relations.

The third part is relational analysis, this part mainly studies ?information content security relational model and relation visualization?. This part firstly uses different data mining techniques to do independent information analysis.

For example, it uses rough set algorithm to the data produced from IDS log[121, and reduce rules and analysis security events from inside or outside histories, from attacked types(such as DOS, back door?s attacks). from attacked objectives (such as business organization, government department), and from the attacked service(such as DNS, HTT?Fj, PC), and attack time, attack sources, attack features and so on to find latent regularities, to do trend predictions; By using Social network analysis techniq~es?~], to setup and monitor the network community module, to get the hierarchy structure for the components relations, the authority powers, latent controlling network, network security events and their relations with their components communication patterns.

Sometimes to present the different relations between components needs information support from outside.

The relation analysis module can support information security experts to use Iink analysis technique?? to find the relations between different levels of communities? group and security events, and io setup information syncretizing models, and represent them as knowledge rules, to deduce the consequences related.

111. SYSTEM REALIZATIONS AND MAIN TECHNOLOGY  In the system realization, we use AI technique combined with the principles and methods of social network analysis, to let the semantic based filtering, web document filtering template method, and security text content analysis work with the rule based fast filtering technique, to build an intelligent content security relation analysis system.

A. Dynamic monitoring and Information Automatic Collection We use centralized data collection and distributed parallel  processing technique, to insure fast protocols analysis, recovery and fast data acquisition. And according to the different systems, different data formats and different rules are build, to let the unified security related information stored in separated structured databases and unstructured text or semi-structured XML document databases (such as www pages, bbs correspondences, email data) for deep semantic analysis. To track the suspected targets, we established auto-collecting bio-information of the person or the related organizations. And use CW IWSK[14] and restraint based semi-structured auto-extraction algorithm to extracting named entity, social networks and contact information keep them in the related databases with the statistical inspection data (such as published articles, coauthors, shortest path relations and bad records and so on).

B. The Content Analysis For the construction of content security representation  frame model, real time maintenance and update, we use relevance feedback and knowledge reasoning technique from Web intelligent retrievaJ[5][8], and studies security feature lexical chains[ 131 extraction, relevance feature?s  - 842 -    construction, and dynamic model update related relevance feedback algorithm[5], both use convenient expert graphic interface and machine learning, which can ensure technical and methodological better research results, to provide valuable, refined and synthetic middle resuIt database and content security knowledge base. We also use segmentation system[ 151 for building content security ontology from Chinese text document with self-ieaming features. With the aid of these, we setup special HNC (Hierarchy Network of Concepts) semantic model[ 161 with domain, situation, and background frames, which can check text topic, inclinations, praise or denounce, for accurate and efficient Chinese text filtering and classification and we extended it with the social relational features.

C. Social Network Analysis and Visualization We propose a novel relational analysis based on web link  analysis and social network analysis technique to build a semantic web structure mining model, to detect the latent security evidences and characteristics. We introduce social network models for web BBS data and E-mail data, with the aid of the first part acquisition and the second part semantic detection, we can extract the relational information for the involved security event target personal, organization, potential, communities or social networks with the Hub and concentration measures, to expose unusual or unknown features by the regular detection techniques.



IV. CONCLUSION In order to protect confidential data in enterprise and  government, maintain the normal running of computer network, take precautions against and oppose attacks, ensure the spread and published network information secure to national economy and social lives. This paper designs a platfom for information content security analysis and relational analysis, so that the system can make all directions, real time, dynamic inspections and automatic alarms, to make decision-maker to know what happened and the related political, economic and social influences, and to support assistant decision information for security and effective  evidence for decisions.

