Behavior Prediction Based on Daily-Life Record Database in Distributed Sensing Space

Abstract? This paper proposes a behavior prediction system for supporting our daily lives. The behaviors in daily-life are recorded in an environment with embedded sensors, and the prediction system learns the characteristic patterns that would be followed by the behaviors to be predicted. In this research, the authors applied a method of discovering time-series association rules, which discovers frequent combinations of events called episodes. The prediction system observes behaviors with the sensors and outputs the prediction of the future behaviors based on the rules.

Index Terms? Ubiquitous Sensing, Human Monitoring, Knowledge Discovery, Daily Behavior Database

I. INTRODUCTION  In recent years, it has become possible to collect and accu- mulate various information on the behavior of people in daily lives. This is thanks to increasing sophistication of elements that make up residences, such as household appliances. By using these information and predicting or complementing behavior of the resident, various services and support to residents, for example energy conservation, providing relevant information and physical support, are believed to be possible without explicit and concise requests[1], [2].

Support in daily-life to people can be thought of as support towards behavior, in other words, activating machines or equipment such that people can behave easily and appropri- ately. Therefore, as a guideline to select and execute appro- priate support when collection of information or a variety of support is possible, we can link human behavior and appropriate means of support. This method seems easy to implement since we can recognize people?s behavior from accumulated data and suggest and execute the appropriate means of support.

However, simple correlation of recognition of behavior and appropriate support plans may delay initiation of support, therefore we might keep the person waiting for support or even be too late to provide support. In addition, it is better to be able to supply information and prepare support before specific behavior. To get around these problems, it is necessary to predict behavior of people by some method.

Activities in daily-life are often performed habitually, and most behavioral patterns are caused by other behavior or change in environment. Therefore, by observing daily lives, it  may be possible to find out behavior caused by other behavior or change in environment, and use the data for prediction.

In this paper, as a means to predict specific behavior and support people effectively, we will find relationships between activity and change in environment in a database containing behavior in daily-life, and use this data to propose and implement methods to predict occurrence of specific behavior.

The prediction is done fast enough to allow time for actual support. In addition, possibility and usefulness of daily-life prediction is evaluated.



II. BEHAVIOR PREDICTION SYSTEM  In this section, we discuss the elements of the behavior prediction system we propose in this paper.

A. Behavior Measurement Data for Prediction  To predict behavior in daily-life, the daily-life in problem must be observable. In this paper, we will use the Sensing Room[3], [4](Fig.1) that was designed in our research group to observe behavior in daily-life. The Sensing Room is designed like a furnished studio apartment. However, there are various pressure sensors present including on the floor, chairs and bed, and switch sensors used to detect openings and closings are attached to the refrigerator, drawers, and other furniture. By using these environmental sensors, we can detect behavior of the resident in daily-life without using visual aids, without any constraints and for prolonged periods.

The information gathered by environmental sensors can be obtained online, and since they are accumulated in a database, we can refer to data for any past arbitrary period.

B. Prediction for Resident Support  If we could predict beforehand the happening of a specific behavior using measurements of behavior in daily-life, it is possible to supply information or materials useful to that behavior(to be predicted), or robots that could support such behavior.

For example, if we can predict that a resident is leaving the apartment twenty or thirty seconds before he actually leaves the room, we can support the resident by checking the weather forecast and inform by voice or other means that rain is coming, or a robot can bring her/his briefcase to the    Fig. 1. Sensing Room  door. These supports are impossible if the support system recognizes that the resident is just about to leave or has left the room, and support is only possible if the system can predict beforehand that the resident will leave the apartment.

Previous research on prediction of human behavior in- cluded making a general model of behavior selection when choices are limited, for example, such as viewings of Web pages[5]. However, there are many different kinds of behavior in daily-life and it is difficult to classify all of them, and a number of behaviors can be performed simultaneously. Here, we discuss properties that are required in behavior prediction for support of daily-life.

? Use of Accumulated Data by Distributed Sensors Behavior prediction must be done based on output from environmental sensors. Environmental sensors are com- posed of a wide variety of different sensors.

? Prediction of a Specific Behavior We do not need to predict every type of behavior in daily-life, but only those specific types of behavior that need to be supported.

? Earliness of Prediction It depends on the behavior to be supported and the contents of the support, but in general if the prediction of behavior to be supported is done just before the behavior happens, the prediction cannot be used for support.

Therefore, prediction must be made significantly before the behavior happens, so that enough support could be done.

? Accuracy Range of Prediction It is difficult to predict behavior that will actually be executed, and on the contrary, some kind of support is favorable even if prediction of such behavior is with uncertainty. Therefore, upon tolerating some uncertainty in prediction, it is better to give information on reliability with behavior prediction.

Taking into account these properties, in this paper we define behavior prediction as follows. Behavior prediction is to satisfy prediction demand, and prediction demand is defined as ?the necessity to predict occurrence of certain behavior in a predetermined accuracy range for support. The prediction must be done before a certain time prior to its  occurrence.? Based on these definitions, behavior prediction is realized via two steps. First, knowledge of environmental change and behavior before execution of a certain behavior under prediction demand is compiled from data accumulated by environmental sensors. Second, occurrence of behavior is predicted based on this knowledge and is output along with information on its accuracy(Fig.2). In the rest of this paper, behavior that should be predicted are called ?behavior to be predicted?, time that should be left between prediction and actual occurrence is called ?degree of earliness?, and the time frame that is tolerated as errors in predicted occurrence time of target behavior is called ?acceptable temporal error.?  Fig. 2. Prediction System for Support

III. EXTRACTION AND APPLICATION OF PREDICTION KNOWLEDGE BASED ON DAILY-LIFE DATABASE  In this section, we discuss methods to gain knowledge for prediction based on a database containing information on daily-life, and methods to actually predict behavior using the information.

A. Predictor  In this paper, we use a predictor as a means to satisfy each prediction demand(Fig.3). Predictors exist for each prediction demand.

Each predictor outputs prediction of the corresponding demand behavior along with information on accuracy when the behavior(to be predicted) is thought to occur with higher than a predetermined probability after the post-prediction time (i.e. degree of earliness). The total output of the prediction module is the combination of all predictors.

To realize such a predictor, we use the following processes.

From the environmental sensor data in the daily-life database, we detect specific behavioral and environmental activity, represented as sensor output features, before the behavior(to be predicted). Next, we organize the set of output features and behavior to be predicted as knowledge on such behavior to be predicted. Then, the predictors try to locate the respective behavior(to be predicted) based on this knowledge during real-time measurements via the observation of the paired output features. From now on, we term these output features    as ?pre-behavior features?, and the relationship between pre- behavior features and the behavior to be predicted is termed ?prediction knowledge?.

Fig. 3. Prediction Based on Pre-Behavior Features  B. Extraction and Application of Prediction Knowledge  1) Detection and Recognition of Behavior to be Predicted: To extract prediction knowledge, it is necessary to detect at what point had the behavior(to be predicted) began in the ac- cumulated data. This detection does not have to be performed in real-time, and it is sufficient to use data accumulated after the behavior(to be predicted) happened.

In this paper, we detect behavior to be predicted based on a set of rules for each such behavior. For example, we determine that the resident has left the apartment when ?all the environmental sensors cannot detect the resident for 10 minutes or more.? Based on these rules, we can distinctively know when behavior to be predicted began in the accumulated data.

2) Extraction and Learning of Pre-Behavior Features: Since we could find when behavior to be predicted started in the accumulated data, we could extract the data preceding this behavior and extract the associated pre-behavior features. The problem here is how to decide what part of the data should be taken into consideration when pre-behavior features are extracted.

Needless to say, we cannot use those features of the period just before target behavior in any prediction. On the other hand, features that occur a long time before the behavior to be predicted generally have little correlation to the behavior.

In addition, if pre-behavior features are extracted over a large time frame, the temporal correlation between behavior to be predicted and pre-behavior features becomes unclear, and conditions for the acceptable temporal error may not be satisfied.

Therefore, taking into account the need for earliness and an acceptable temporal error in prediction, pre-behavior features extraction will be done in a fixed time frame that ends at a specified point of earliness before target behavior(Fig.4). This time frame will be called the period for analysis. Since the temporal error is considered to be equivalent to this period of analysis, the acceptable temporal error and period of analysis are set equal.

Fig. 4. Extraction of Pre-Behavior Features  3) Application of Prediction Knowledge in Real-Time Mea- surement: From the prediction knowledge obtained, each predictor monitors for the appearance of pre-behavior features in real-time measurement. When a pre-behavior feature of prediction knowledge is observed, each predictor gives an output that ?a behavior to be predicted will happen after the specified degree of earliness?. Ideally, behavior to be predicted should be predicted with an exact time prediction, and there should be no prediction failure or false alarms, but in reality it is difficult to get rid of such time errors, prediction failure or false alarms. Therefore, output prediction results would be accompanied with probability of behavior(to be predicted) occurrence and the acceptable temporal error.

C. Selection of Time-Series Feature Expression  Here, we discuss a few methods to describe pre-behavior features. In this paper, we focus on daily-life environment comprising of various sensors, and the data from the sensors ranges from multidimensional coordinate data such as the position of the resident in the room, to binary data such as whether the refrigerator door is open or not. From these data, it is necessary to extract only those appropriate features that are well correlated to the behavior to be predicted. Taking this point in mind, the following are discussions about methods to express time-series data.

? Time-series Data Comparison Method by Chiu et al[6].

It is possible to add weights to transitional parts in the time-series data, but since the data is limited to one- dimensional continuum values, it is difficult to express information from multiple sensors and to absorb the effects of temporal shifts.

? Hidden Markov model[7] Multidimensional data can be treated, but there are many problems. It is hard to treat data where the value rarely changes, expression of features of only the environmen- tal sensors that relate to behavior(to be predicted) is difficult, and expression of such features is not easy for    humans to understand.

? Time-series Data Mining Method by Das et al[8].

Time-series data is expressed by multiple events of many kinds, and features are expressed as episodes, or combination of multiple time-series events. We can express as features only the information from relevant environmental sensors. However, the expression is not unique but becomes a set of multiple episodes, and we need to convert time-series information into a set of events.

After comparing the above methods, we chose the time- series data mining method as a base method that can treat output changes in specific sensors appropriately.

Regarding the problem where there are multiple feature expressions, predictors that correspond to single prediction demands keep track of multiple features and check their occurrences. If more than one feature is observed, the feature that is most correlated to the behavior(to be predicted) outputs the prediction results. We treated time-series data as events such that all sensors are binary sensors or a set of binary sensors.

D. Applications of Time-Series Association Rule Method  The original method by Das et al. is a way of finding feature relationships between events without a specific goal.

To predict specific behavior, some changes are needed. We discuss the application of such refining changes to the method used in this paper.

1) Expression as Event Arrays of the Daily-Life Database: First, we need to express as event arrays time-series data obtained from the environmental sensors. In this paper, we presume a binary output sensor as seen in Fig.5, and the change in output was defined as an event. The following are examples of events.

Fig. 5. Example of Sensors in the Room and Corresponding Events (Elements shown with white letters have no sensors attached)  ? Floor pressure sensor event Resident stays / leaves each of the seven areas on the floor  ? Chair pressure sensor event Residents sits / leaves each of the two chairs  ? Appliance / furniture open / close sensor events Resident opens / closes appliances such as refrigerators, and furniture such as drawers  The event array in the daily-life database that express the events shown above is called S, and the duration is called TS .

2) Listing of Pre-Behavior Episodes: Next, we list episodes as candidates for pre-behavior features from the events in the daily-life database. The listed episodes are evaluated in the method described later, and some episodes are selected as pre-behavior features. From now on, for simplicity we will try to predict only one type of behavior.

The set of times where behavior to be predicted occurs in the daily-life database is defined as {ti}Ni=1, degree of earliness as Te, and period for analysis as Tw. Here, we gain a partial set of events in the daily-life database {si}.

If Subseq (S, t1, t2) is a subsection of S with t1 ? t < t2, then  si = Subseq (S, ti ? Te ? Tw, ti ? Te) All episodes that appear more than once in any partial set  of events are listed, where episodes are multiple events with different types that occur in a specific order.

For example, we take the partial set of events ?(A, ta), (C, tc), (B, tb)? , ta < tc < tb that are made up of types of events {A, B, C}. Here, (A, t) is an event that happens at time t and can be classified as type A. The episodes that are included in this set are these seven episodes: {(A) , (C) , (B) , (A, C) , (A, B) , (C, B) , (A, C, B)}.

The list of episodes derived like this are called {Epk}.

3) Calculation of Pre-Behavior Episode Occurence Rate:  We think of an event array S? where the ?prediction event? is added to an event array S, and the probability of calculating future episode occurrence. The prediction event is an imag- inary event that occurs at point of earliness earlier than the predicted behavior {ti ? Te}, and is classified as Epre. This expresses the point at which predictions should be performed.

In addition, the occurrence rate p (Epk) of an episode Epk in an event array S? is defined as the probability the Epk is included when a subarray with time frame Tw is taken from S?. Thus, using the time frame of S?, which is equal to the time frame of S or TS , and wt , an arbitrary subarray of S?  with time frame of Tw,  p (Epk) = ?  contains (wt, Epk) / (TS ? Tw) dt  contains (wt, Epk) = {  1, wt contains Epk 0, otherwise  Using this, we calculate the occurrence rate p (Epk) of the episode in S? in each predicted behavior.

Next, we add a predicted event type Epre after each episode in {Epk} to make a set {Ep?k}, and similarly calculate occurrence rate p (Ep?k). In addition, occurrence rate for an episode Eppre composed of only Epre is also calculated.

4) Generation and Evaluation of Behavior Prediction Rules: Time-series association rules (Epk ? Epre) can be obtained from Epk and Ep?k. The right hand side indicates prediction of behavior, and hence these rules could be termed prediction knowledge themselves. The accuracy of these rules, in other words the probability that when target behavior happens approximately time Te after episode Epk occurs, is  Acc (Epk ? Epre) = p (Ep ? k)  p (Epk)  This is calculated by occurrence rate of Epk and Ep?k, so the accuracy will be lower than the value calculated by the number of occurrence of episodes.

A set of behavior prediction rules can be generated in the above method, but rules will be generated for all listed episodes. Needless to say, some rules that have very low accuracy, or rules that are highly accurate but the left hand side is rarely satisfied are included. Therefore, evaluation and selection of rules is desirable. The J measure[9] shown in the following equation was chosen as the evaluation criterion.

J (Epk ? Epre) = p (Epk) {  p (Ep?k) log p (Ep?k)  p (Eppre)  + (1 ? p (Ep?k)) log 1 ? p (Ep?k)  1 ? p (Eppre) }  The J measure is a value in terms of information that shows how much ambiguity is removed in the phenomenon a specific rule governs. A larger J measure indicates the rule gives more accurate information.

5) Prediction Output Based on Application of Rules: Each predictor observes events that happen in real-time, and if in the last Tw period of time an episode that is in the left hand side of the prediction rule happens, this results in the output of a prediction. Therefore, when such prediction is output, in the last Tw period all events except the last type have been observed in sequence, and the last event has just been observed.

The episodes in the left hand side conditions were extracted from a time frame starting Te + Tw before the actual start of the behavior in the daily-life database {ti} and ending at Te before {ti}(The partial set {si}). Therefore, the predicted behavior is thought to happen in the time frame between Te and Te + Tw after prediction.

The credibility of the prediction output is given by the accuracy of the prediction rule. If multiple rules can be applied at the same time, the highest accuracy will be selected as output.



IV. EXPERIMENTS  In this paper, to demonstrate the validity of the proposed prediction method, prediction outputs were generated from prediction rules based on an actual daily-life database. The experiments are discussed in this section.

A. Experimental Environment and Conditions  In the experiments, prediction rules were generated and evaluated based on a daily-life database accumulated in the Sensing Room. The subject was a male in his 20s, and the experimental period was six days.

The behavior to be predicted was chosen to be ?leaving the premises?, since if such a prediction was possible in reality, various support could be implemented. Here, ?leaving the premises? does not mean leaving the Sensing Room, but rather leaving the living environment including the Sensing Room.

B. Experiment to Find Prediction Knowledge  1) Objectives and Outline: To confirm appropriate predic- tion rules can be generated, we attempted the generation of prediction knowledge for use in the prediction knowledge application experiment using part of accumulated daily-life database. We used the first four day?s activity of the database, and behavior(to be predicted) was observed eight times.

The degree of earliness for prediction knowledge was set at 15 seconds. This time margin is required to supply information when the resident is leaving. The period for analysis (and hence acceptable temporal error) was set at 10 seconds, since we think there is no problem in supplying information with this error.

2) Results: When we generated behavior prediction rules with these conditions, we obtained 1250 rules. The 10 rules with best J measures are shown in TableI.

The episodes that are in the left hand side of the rules were comprised only of events corresponding to the resident landing on / getting off floor sensors and a specific drawer to store his valuables being opened and closed. Thus, the event of adding / removing of load in a region of floor k is denotedFk,on, Fk,off , and the event of opening / closing the drawer is denoted D1,on, D1,off respectively.

TABLE I  BEST 10 GENERATED RULES TO PREDICT THE RESIDENT LEAVING  J-measure Rank Episode Accuracy(%) (?10?4)  1 D1,on 26 9.74 2 F5,on 9 7.74 3 F5,on, D1,on 28 7.65 4 F4,on, D1,on 58 5.18 5 F2,off , D1,on 92 4.60 6 F2,off , F5,on, D1,on 92 4.60 7 F4,on 12 4.56 8 F5,on, F4,on, D1,on 69 4.54 9 F2,off , F5,on 73 4.30 10 F2,on, D1,on 92 4.17  3) Discussion: Of the rules generated, most of the rules with high J measures were related events of the floor sensor and a specific drawer opening or closing. This may be because the resident?s habit of taking his wallet when he goes out was discovered as a feature where the resident moves to the front of the drawer, and opens it.

Fig. 6. Time When Prediction was Done Based on the Rules (Dotted line shows when the resident actually left)  In general, it was found that generated rules that are composed of conditions from one sensor have low accuracy, while conditions from two sensors have higher accuracy. This is because when conditions of two sensors are combined, we can separate behavior such as putting back his wallet in the drawer after he has returned, removing things from the drawer when he does not intend to go out, and behavior concerning other drawers and furniture near the chest of drawers.

The rules that concerned events other than floor sensors and the drawer and had low evaluation included rules concerning the opening and closing of the refrigerator door. One reason is that the refrigerator door is opened and closed at times other than when the resident is leaving, and does not happen as frequently as the floor sensor events.

In addition, no rules were generated concerning the chairs, since the behavior that the resident stands from the chair happens at a very early point away from when the resident leaves the room.

C. Experiment to Apply Rules and Output Prediction  1) Objective and Outline: To confirm that the discovered prediction knowledge can be used in prediction, they were applied to the two days? activities that were not used in finding prediction knowledge in the daily-life database, and prediction of behavior was attempted. The resident left the premises four times in this period. The rules used were the 10 best rules evaluated with J measures in the previous experiment, i.e. the rules in Table I.

2) Results: The time when prediction was done from the rules, the state of prediction when the behavior happened, and the evaluation of the prediction for each rule are shown in Fig.6, Table II and Table III, respectively. In each item, the rules are denoted in the order of evaluation in Table I.

Table II shows the time when the resident left the premises, what prediction rules were applied and at what time, and the best accuracy of the rules. When prediction was done due do occurrence of a different event, it is shown separately even if the time difference was less than one second.

TABLE II  PREDICTIONS AND THE ACTUAL BEHAVIOR OF THE RESIDENT  Rule Applied Accuracy Date Time Actual Behavior MAX(%)  1 22:31:06 1, 5, 10 92 22:31:07 2, 9 73  (22:31:27) Go Out ? 1 23:49:45 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10 92  (23:50:50) Go Out ? 2 15:48:26 1, 5, 10 92  15:48:26 2, 9 73 (15:48:50) Go Out ?  2 21:34:24 2 9 21:34:24 1,3,10 92  (21:34:39) Go Out ?  Table III shows application of each rule and how many times the prediction was correct. The number of applications is the number when the left hand side of the prediction rule was satisfied, and the number of correct prediction was the number of times the behavior occurred between 15 and 25 seconds after the prediction. For comparison, we show the accuracy calculated in the previous experiment.

TABLE III  SCORE OF EACH PREDICTION RULE  No. Applied Hit (Ref.)Accuracy(%) 1 7 4 26 2 34 3 9 3 4 2 28 4 2 1 58 5 3 3 92 6 1 1 92 7 22 0 12 8 1 0 69 9 4 2 73  10 4 4 92    3) Discussion: As seen in Table II, every occasion that the resident leaving the premises was predicted by a prediction rule. In addition, as Table III shows, the correctness ratio of each prediction rule was close to the accuracy. Thus, we confirmed that using rules that had high J measures could result in reasonable prediction.



V. CONCLUSION  In this research, we proposed and implemented a behavior prediction system for physical and information support in daily-life. In our proposed method, we find characteristic features prior to the behavior to be predicted, based on prediction demands from the daily-life database measured and accumulated from environmental sensors in the Sens- ing Room. Simultaneously, we can calculate the degree of correlation between pre-behavior feature and behavior to be predicted. Therefore, we can output a prediction of the occurrence of the targeted behavior with its accuracy by checking for the appearance of pre-behavior features. We used a time-series association rule method to find the features, and define as set of events the characteristic environmental sensor output changes which occur before behavior to be predicted. We attempted the prediction of when the resident leaves the premises using this method, and demonstrated that we could actually predict using the generation and application of prediction knowledge.

Future issues include the automatic location of appropriate feature extraction points. As a general rule, we pointed out that the earlier the event the less correlated the event is to the behavior to be predicted, but there might be some exceptions.

In addition, it is desirable to be able to automatically calculate what accuracy of prediction can be done at what point in time. Therefore, our method should be expanded so that early prediction with accuracy information can be done for ambiguous prediction demands.

Application of this method to support systems can also be considered. Possible milestones in the near future include predicting when residents leave the premises or start meals.

In case of the resident leaving, we can supply information about the weather, and if the resident is going to start a meal, information about drinks in the refrigerator can be supplied, for example. Using these support systems, we believe we can present a means of support that is helpful and not annoying to the end user, such as support by voice when probability of behavior to be predicted is high, and support by showing images[10] when such probability is low.

