Intrusion Detection System Based on New Association Rule Mining Model*

Abstract-Intrusion detection is a problem of great significance to protecting information systems security. Its techniques fail into two general categories: anomaly detection and misuse detection, which complement each other. This research focuses on anomaly detection techniques for intrusion detection. Presently, several approaches based on classical association rule mining have been proposed for intrusion detection. Because two shortages existed in classical association rule mining problem, namely every itemset is treated equivalently and a uniform minimum support and minimum confidence is used as weighing standard, many rules and uninteresting rules will be generated that causes low effectiveness of intrusion detection. Based on new association rule mining model proposed by Li etc. (2002) that can solve the two shortages at the same time, a new intrusion detection system was proposed. Because the interest of item as a degree is used and the mining algorithm is based on FP-tree, our preliminary experiment results show that the proposed system is more robust and efficient than that based on APRIORI.

Index Terms-Intrusion detection, Association rule, Network security, Data mining

I. INTRODUCTION  A long with the development of computer network technology, intrusion detection used to capture malicious activities occurring in computer network systems is  becoming more and more important. Intrusion detection techniques fall into two general categories: anomaly detection and signature recognition, which complement each other.

This paper focuses on anomaly detection techniques for intrusion detection. Today there are many commercial intrusion detection systems available that are used to collect system and network activity data and analyze the information to determine whether there is an attack occurring. These commercial implementations are generally restricted in their monitoring and analysis functionalities and more research is currently being conducted to improve these functionalities111.

Yet until now the problem of low detection rates is not solved and it shows that there exist no approach that can perform better than other approaches in all situations[24]. Therefore, we must develop techniques in order to improve the effectiveness of the intrusion detection system.

Presently, data mining methods such as hidden Markov model (HMM), support machine learning, artificial neural network, statistical techniques and expert systems have been used to build automatic anomaly detection systems that profile the normal system activities so that abnormal * Thiswork is partially SUDpOrted by NSFC Grant #60474022.

0-7803-9017-2/057$20.00 C2005 IEEE  Wu-ming Pan College ofSoftware Engineering  Sichuan University Chengdu 610065, China fluedpan@hotmail.com  activities can be detected by comparing the current activities with the profile[57 11-4, 20-22] Among these methods, several approaches based on classical association rule mining have been -proposed for intrusion detection. Since the goal of mining association rules is to derive multi-feature (attribute) correlations from a database table. It has been observed that program executions and user activities exhibit frequent correlations among system features. Audit data can be formatted into a database table where each row is an audit record and each column is a field (system feature) of the audit records. Lee and Stolfo extended the basic association rule algorithms to capture consistent behavior in program execution and user activities. The rules mined from audit data are merged and added into an aggregate rule set to form the user's normal profile. To analyze a user login session, frequent patterns are mined from the sequence of commands during the session and this new pattern set is compared with the established profile pattern set. Similarity functions are used to evaluate deviations to generate alarms in case of intrusive behaviors. These methods perform well in the latest DARRPA evaluations 5-71. However, two shortages exist in classical association rule mining problem, namely every itemset is treated equivalently and a uniform minimum support and minimum confidence is used as weighing standard1191. Many rules and uninteresting rules will be generated in the process of intrusion detection that causes its low effectiveness. Even though the essential features such as axis features in [5] are used and then the basic association rule mining algorithms are extended, the above problems still exist. Because new association rule mining model, (p-association rule mining, introduced in [19] can solve the two above shortages at the same time, a new intrusion detection system was developed based on it. Since the interest of item as a degree is used and the mining algorithm is based on FP-tree, our preliminary experiments show that the proposed system is more robust and efficient than that based on APRIORI.



II. OVERViEW ofNEW AsSOCiATIoN RULE MINING MODEL  Followings are the basic concepts of new association rule mining model, (p-association rule miningE'91. Let I be a set of all the items in a transaction database TDB.

Definition 1 Let (p be a function from P(J) to [0, + o0] which satisfy: for any two subsets X, Y of I, if X c Y then (p(X) < (p(Y). Then (p is called as a function of the degree of     interest on I, where (p(X) represents the degree of interest of X and (p(x) < (p(Y) represents that the itemset X is less interesting than Y.

Definition 2 Let qp be a function of the degree of interest on I and x c: i. The (p-support of the itemset X in TDB is defined as supp (X) (p(X), denoted as (p-supp (X).

Definition 3 An itemset X is said to be (p-frequent if its (p-support in TDB is at least 4 given minimum support. The set FI of p-frequent itemsets in TDB is:  FI = {Xc IlA - supp(X)>} Definition 4 A (p-association rule is an implication between  itemsets of the form X =>Y . Where X,YE FI and x n Y = ?p. The itemset X is called the antecedent of the rule and the itemset Y is called the consequent. The (p-support of a (p-association rule, denoted as (p-supp (X => Y), is defined as (p-supp (xU y). The (p-confidence of the rule, denoted as (p-conf(X => Y ), is defined as (p-supp (X U Y) /(p-supp (X).

Definition 5 The task of mining (p-association rules consists in generating all valid (p-association rules. i. e.

(p-association rules with (p-supp and (p-conf are at least minimum support and minimum conference respectively.

It is obvious that (p-association rule mining is a direct generalization of association rule mining. It can also be decomposed by two subproblems:  1. Find all (p-frequent itemsets in TDB; 2. Generate all (p-association rules.

Like classical association rule mining, the problem of (p-association rules mining can also be reduced to the problem of finding (p-frequent itemsets.

Definition 6 An itemset is a closed itemset if there exists  no itemset Y such that Y is a proper superset ofX and every transaction containing X also contains Y.

Because closed itemsets reserve all the information of itemset, we will use this property to simplify our problem.

Definition 7 A closed itemset is called as (p-frequent closed itemset if its (p-support is at least the given minimum support.

Definition 8 The task of mining (p-frequent closed itemset consists in generating all (p-frequent closed itemset from a transaction database.

Proposition 1 For every one (p-frequent itemset, there exists only one a closed itemset Y which is also (p-frequent satisfy thatXcY and supp(X)=supp(Y).

From this proposition, if all the (p-frequent closed itemsets  are mined, then we can obtain all (p-frequent itemsets according the function of degree of interest of itemset.

Therefore, we may only consider the problem of mining (p-frequent closed itemset. Because the amount of (p-frequent closed itemsets is less than (p-frequent itemsets, the effectiveness of mining will be enhanced greatly.



III. ARCHITECTURE ofINTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM  From the definition of (p-association rule mining, in order to use it to develop new intrusion detection system, we have to define the interest of items firstly, which is also a core task because it is close related to the effectiveness of the intrusion detection system. Generally, the interests of items are defined by users and experts according to their experiments, etc. The following is the architecture of new intrusion detection system based on (p-association rule mining.

Audit data  Fig. 1. Architecture of intrusion detection system  The concrete process of intrusion detection is: (1) Define the interest of items according to users and  experts.

(2) Build a profile of normal intrusion free behavior of     computer systems and networks. The algorithm of mining (p-frequent closed itemsets is used in this step to extract the profile. Hence the profile is represented as a typical sequence of events in the system.

(3) New arriving events are mined and the results are compared to normal profile. The anomalous deviations from normal behaviors are considered as potential intrusion. System will generate alert events to security administrator.

In this new intrusion detection system, all the data audited are formatted into a database table where each row is an audit record and each column is a field (system feature) of the audit records. We only consider the (p-frequent closed itemsets from the database that are used to construct normal profile. The algorithm for mining (p-frequent closed itemsets by the FP-tree method is as follows[191:  Algorithm (Mining (p-frequent closed itemsets by the FP-tree method)  Input: An audited database ADB, a minimum support threshold , and (p which only gives the degree of interest for every item.

Output: The complete set of (p-frequent closed itemsets.

Method: (1) Initialization. Let FCI be the set of (p-frequent closed  itemset initialized as ;, (2) Find out all frequent items. Scan ADB once, find out  F-list(4/lk) and obtain ID-list(E/lk) according to (p; (3) Recursively mining (p-frequent closed itemset. Call  Gen-(p-CSET(O,ADB, F-list(Ejlk), ID-list(4/lk), FCI).

Subroutine Gen-(p-CSET(X, DB, F-list(4/lm), ID-list(4/lm),  FCI) Parameters: (a) X: if DB is ADB, then X is Or, if DB is X-conditional  database[I9], then X if a frequent itemset; (b) DB: conditional database; (c) F-list(t/lm): Frequent item list in DB, im is the largest  degree of interest of item in DB; (d) ID-list(&/lm): Degree of Interest item list in DB; (e) FCI: (p-frequent closed itemsets be mined.

Method: (a) Let Y is a set of some (p-frequent items in ID-lista(4/lm),  where every item in it all appear in every transaction of DB. IfXuY is not a proper subset of an itemset in FCI of the same support, then insert it into FCI;  (b) Construct FP-tree ofDB; (c) If FP-tree only has one path, then we can directly  extract (p-frequent closed itemsets from it; (d) For every of the rest items in ID-lista(/lm), construct its  conditional database and calculate the local frequent item list of these conditional databases;  (e) For every of the rest items in ID-lista(,/lm), start at the last one item in ID-lista(4/lm). If aX is not a proper subset of an (p-frequent closed itemset be mined of the same support, then recursively call Gen-(p-CSET(aX, DBa, F-lista(@jlm), ID-lista(4/lm), FCI), where DBla is an a-conditional database with respect to DB, F-lista(/Ilm)  is its corresponding frequent item list, ID-lista(/lm) is its corresponding degree of interest item list.

Since this algorithm is based on FP-tree, which is more effective than APRIORI in [5], the intrusion detection system based on this algorithm is more effective than previous system based on APRIORI. Also it is robust because it uses interest of item as a degree to detect anomalous deviations and the interest of the same item in different systems or networks may also be different due to experts or users' experiences. Several tests have already been performed which suggested that the methodology is feasible. In addition, from our experiments in the network of our department, the results of proposed method in some aspects, especially time, is better than that method based on APRIORI.



IV. CONCLUSION  The popularization of shared networks and internet usage demands increases attention on information system security, particularly on intrusion detection. The use of new association rule mining model, (p-association rule mining, based data mining method to realize intrusion detections was proposed. It can overcome the two shortages existed in classical association rule mining problem that is used in intrusion detection system. Since the mining algorithm is based on FP-tree and uses interest of item as a degree to detect anomalous deviations, the effectiveness of intrusion detection is enhanced compared to that based on APRIORI. However, there is much remained to be explored, besides conducting more comprehensive experiments and evaluations in different systems or networks. Other future work should incorporate our method in real system for security task. Also the problem of how to use the method appropriately such as how to define the interest of items appropriately in real applications should be pursued firther.

