

Abstract?The Glory satellite program is underway at the Orbital Sciences campus in northern Virginia.  This program is under contract with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC).  The Glory satellite bus was previously used for the Vegetation Canopy LIDAR (VCL) program, a mission designed to measure the Earth?s vegetation coverage, depth, and topography by using short laser pulses from a LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) system. The Glory program is refurbishing the VCL bus that was in the middle of integration and test when the VCL program was shut down.

Many changes are being made to the VCL bus to configure it to serve the Glory science mission objectives.  The Glory science mission includes polar atmospheric aerosol measurements with cloud observation and total solar irradiance monitoring.

The Low Earth Orbit Satellite (LEO) is scheduled for launch in late 2007 with the intention of broadening the search for the causes of global warming.  The mission is intended to measure the composition of greenhouse gases, which little is known about currently, as well as solar effects on the environment using the following instruments: an Aerosol Polarimetry Sensor (APS), Cloud Cameras and a Total Irradiance Monitor (TIM).

The APS instrument is a multi-spectral polarimetric sensor designed for collection of visible, near-infrared, and short- wave infrared polarized radiometric data scattered from aerosols and clouds.  The APS is a continuous scanning, nadir-viewing sensor that makes along-track, multi-angle observations of Earth and atmospheric spectral radiance.

The cloud cameras are dual-band, imagers that employ a non-scanning, staring detector array that is akin to a star tracker, but Earth-viewing.  The cloud cameras provide  continuous cross-track coverage over a narrow swath centered on the APS along-track footprint using an optical imaging system.

The TIM is an active cavity solar irradiance radiometer that consists of four identical radiometer cavities to provide redundancy and help detect changes in instrument response caused by exposure to solar radiation and other orbital effects. It takes data continuously throughout the orbit and does periodic calibrations on the disc of the sun and of the redundant cavities to monitor the effects of aging.

Using a combination of heritage data and knowledge from the OrbView 3 and 4 programs as well as VCL, the Glory program is dedicated to a successful mission. This paper will describe the design differences at system and subsystem levels between VCL and Glory focusing on the science missions, as well as the heritage program influences that will be employed.

TABLE OF CONTENTS   1. INTRODUCTION..................................................... 2 2. MISSION OVERVIEW............................................. 2 3. INSTRUMENT AND SCIENCE DESCRIPTIONS......... 4 4. DIFFERENCES FROM VCL TO GLORY ................. 7 5. HERITAGE............................................................. 8 6. SUMMARY ........................................................... 10 7. REFERENCES....................................................... 10 8. BIOGRAPHIES...................................................... 10           1.  INTRODUCTION  Glory is the name of the phenomenon that gives colored diffraction rings around an anti-solar point.  These rings occur when the sun (or other light source) shines on a cloud deck, fog bank or similar substance with something between that causes a shadow as shown in Figure 1.  The glory is the resulting set of multi-colored rings that are similar to a corona.  Backscattered light rays that skim the edges of water drops cause glories.  This definition was the basis for naming the Glory mission, an Earth and Solar observing satellite.

Figure 1 - Glory Phenomenon   The Glory Satellite is a science mission designed to measure atmospheric aerosols and total solar irradiance (TSI) in an effort to determine their effects on global climate change.

The bus was originally designed to accommodate the Vegetation Canopy LIDAR (VCL) program.  The VCL program was shut down in October of 2000 due to payload technical, schedule and cost issues.  The bus was in the midst of an initial comprehensive performance test at the time of the shutdown, and as such was nearly complete.  In order to accommodate the new payload and mission  requirements, the electrical components require very little modification, with over 80% of the original equipment to be used in its current state.  Additionally the program will only require one new component design in order to provide the communications interfaces with the new payloads.

The key science activities are primarily during the sunlit portion of the orbit.  The spacecraft will be nadir pointing in order to support the APS and Cloud Camera Earth observing requirements.  The spacecraft bus is capable of performing maneuvers under reaction wheel (RWA) control, which will support the APS lunar calibration (in eclipse) and glint roll (in sun) mission requirements.  The third instrument, the TIM system, which monitors total solar irradiance, is placed on a gimbaled platform in order to track the sun while the bus remains nadir pointing.  The TIM system includes the instrument, electronics, fine sun sensor, gimbaled electronics and motors.

2.  MISSION OVERVIEW  The Glory satellite will be launched from the Western Test Range at Vandenberg Air Force Base (VAFB) aboard a Taurus 2110 launch vehicle (LV).  After the satellite has been placed into orbit, a 30-day on orbit checkout will begin.  Verification of initial insertion parameters will be made using the NASA Flight Dynamics Facility and the on- board GPS.  The orbit will be corrected to the desired eccentricity and altitude with the satellite?s monopropellant blowdown hydrazine system. Normal science operations will immediately follow a successful checkout and outgassing period.

The Glory satellite will be flown in a nominal 824 km sun- synchronous orbit with a 10:30am descending node.  The Glory launch is scheduled for December of 2007 with a 3- year mission lifetime.  This orbit and mission altitude provide for the minimum duration required to observe seasonal and regional trends as well as characterize the evolution of aerosols during transient climate events.

The spacecraft bus will use a majority of the existing VCL components, subsystems and software.  The bus is 3-axis stabilized with deployable, articulating solar panels, multiple computers, with X and S-Band radio frequency (RF) communication capabilities.  The structure is an octagonal cylindrical aluminum space frame as shown below in Figures 2 and 3.

S-BAND OMNI AND MAST  TIM SYSTEM  INSTRUMENT STRUCTURE  ASSEMBLY  APS INSTRUMENT  INSTRUMENT MODULE ASSEMBLY  SPACECRAFT BUS ASSEMBLY  CLOUD CAMERAS  GLORY OBSERVATORY FRONT ISOMETRIC VIEW (+X SOLAR ARRAY NOT SHOWN FOR CLARITY)    Figure 2 - Glory Spacecraft         Star Tracker  GPS Dual Antennas  TIM System  GLORY OBSERVATORY REAR ISOMETRIC VIEW    Figure 3 - Glory Spacecraft  The spacecraft bus components are mounted primarily on the core and propulsion plates. The propulsion plate is at the base of the cylinder and serves as the interface from the LV separation ring to the bus. The propulsion plate also houses the propulsion system, one of the 4 reaction wheels, and several other components. The majority of the Coarse Sun Sensors (CSS) are mounted in 8 sets of two around the circumference. The remaining bus components are mounted on both sides of the Core plate. The VCL layout has been left intact as much as possible to minimize changes to the wire harness. An added S-Band receiver is located in the space previously occupied by one of the two solar array drive assemblies (SADAs). Several bus components are mounted in the payload volume, as intended for VCL, and also applied to Glory. These components are the fiber-optic gyro, the star trackers and the Payload Interface Processor (PIP), which is a new component for Glory.

The Glory mission will launch on the heritage Taurus launch vehicle. It will be flown using Orbital?s MAESTRO  ground software from the existing Mission Operations Center in Dulles, Virginia. The ground communications will use the Universal Space Network?s (USN) site in Poker Flats, Alaska as the primary contact station.  USN sites in North Point, Hawaii and Perth, Australia will be used as backups for both the X-Band and S-Band passes. The TDRSS network will be used at the start of the mission to ensure a safe launch and transition to early orbit checkout.

3.  INSTRUMENT AND SCIENCE DESCRIPTIONS  The Instrument Module Assembly (IMA) and its suite of instruments and components are shown in Figure 4.  This is a new assembly replacing the payload module that was to go on VCL.  The IMA consists of the APS instrument, Cloud Cameras, TIM System, the Instrument Module Structure (IMS) and the bus components mentioned above.

-    Instrument Structure Assembly  Star Tracker Baffle  S-Band Omni Antenna & Mast  Cloud Camera  APS Instrument  TIM Instrument  System  GPS Antennas & Bracket  Harness Mouse Hole  LN200 Gyro GPS Receiver Box  ASC DPU Electronics   Figure 4 - Instrument Module Assembly  Aerosol Science  Aerosols are caused both by natural events such as volcanic activity or man-made aerosols caused by burning fossil fuels.  The global average of aerosols produced by human activities account for about 10 percent1 of the total atmospheric aerosols.  All aerosols play a crucial role in the  Earth?s climate and contribute to not only global warming, but cooling as well.  Aerosols have a short lifetime in the atmosphere but are quickly replenished.  Aerosols also play an important role in both assisting and inhibiting precipitation.  The uncertainty in the composition of the atmospheric aerosols make the effects on the climate uncertain as well.

The APS collects global aerosol data based on along-track, sub-satellite polarimetric measurements taken within the solar reflective spectral region (0.4 to 2.4 microns).

Measurements of spectral radiance are restricted to the sunlit portion of the orbit.  Clouds have a significant impact on the quality of polarimetric measurements.  This is the reason for the on-board cloud cameras that are used to distinguish between clear and cloudy scenes. Each of the cameras covers a different spectral band, but the mission can be accomplished with either of them. A pictorial representation of the APS instrument is shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5 The APS Science Instrument has a Scanning Mirror Assembly in the Along-Track Direction   The Glory mission will use the APS instrument to help understand the climate-relevant chemical, microphysical, and optical properties, as well as spatial and temporal distributions of human-caused and naturally occurring aerosols2.  Specifically, Glory will be used to assist in determining:  1. The global distribution of natural and anthropogenic  aerosols (black carbons, sulfates, etc) with accuracy and coverage sufficient for reliable quantification of:  ? The aerosol effect on climate ? The anthropogenic component of the aerosol effect ? The long term change of the aerosol effect caused by  natural and anthropogenic factors 2. The direct impact of aerosols on the radiation budget  and its natural and anthropogenic components 3. The effect of aerosols on clouds and precipitation and  its natural and anthropogenic components 4. Investigating the feasibility of improved measurements  of black carbons and dust absorption to provide more accurate estimates of their contribution to the climate forcing function    Solar Science  Total solar irradiance (TSI), in addition to the absorption and reflection of this radiation by the Earth?s atmosphere, determines the global average temperature of the Earth.  The intensity of the sun and the response of the atmosphere directly affects the climate.  Changes in either arena can dramatically change the global climate.  Solar intensity is a natural phenomenon whereas the composition of the atmosphere has been strongly influenced by the byproducts of modern industrial societies.  The average temperature of the Earth has increased by 0.5?C over the past 100 years.  It is important to understand whether this change in global climate is a result of modern industry or if it is an effect of the natural solar phenomenon.

One of the Glory mission?s goals is to measure TSI in such a manner that allows determination of the Sun?s direct and indirect effects on the Earth?s climate. This will be achieved by continuing the database of TSI measurements started on the ACRIM, SOHO and SORCE missions. The instrument is sensitive enough to see variations in the TSI from Sunspots and Solar Flares (shown in Figure 6).

http://umbra.nascom.nasa.gov/images/latest_eit_304.gif  Figure 6 - Solar Flares and Sunspots  The TIM instrument collects high accuracy, high precision measurements of total TSI using an active cavity radiometer that monitors changes in incident solar energy to the Earth?s atmosphere.  The TIM is designed to operate in a solar- viewing orientation, therefore it is mounted on a gimbaled platform that accommodates targeting independent of the spacecraft?s nadir viewing attitude. The TIM instrument that is flying on the SORCE mission is shown in Figure 7.

Solar Calibrator  Scanning Mirror Assembly Nadir Aperature  Motor Assembly         Figure 7 TIM Science Instrument   4.  DIFFERENCES FROM VCL TO GLORY   Modifications are being made to the VCL bus to configure it to meet the Glory mission requirements.  Some of the major changes include changing the orientation of the spacecraft, solar array repositioning for biaxial articulation, as well as the instrument structure assembly.  The requirement changes from VCL to Glory that had the largest impact are:  Mission Parameter Glory VCL  Orbit Altitude 824 km (+/-10 km) 400 km (+/-10 km) Orbit Inclination 98.67 degrees 69.0 degrees Sun Synchronous?

Yes, with 10:30am descending crossing (-15/+45 minutes) No  Solar Beta Angle Range (derived from above)  +7 to +31 degrees  -90 to +90 degrees (note, yaw maneuver effectively limits beta to 0 to +90 for thermal purposes)  Mission Life 3 years for science, 5 yearsfor bus 25 months (including 1 month checkout)  Flight Attitude Battery toward earth, solararray gimble forward, Sun on propulsion deck  (positive beta angles)  Propulsion deck toward zenith, Sun always on shear panel near transmitter and transponder, Battery in forward or aft direction depending on yaw manuever   The new orbit and vehicle orientation have changed the spacecraft environment and sink temperatures.  New solar array orientation and tracking also changed the local spacecraft environment and view factors.  The solar arrays must be maintained within specification limits, but are now exposed to a colder environment in eclipse.

Optimization of the array pointing has increased the spacecraft power generation resulting in an increased spacecraft and battery heat dissipation.  This new orientation was traded against the higher cost of upgrading the solar array cells to higher efficiency triple-junction cells. The  VCL payload went into quiescent mode over water while the Glory observatory operation is continuous in sunlight, and the instruments are not powered off.  Heater power demand is expected to be well within the 32W VCL heater power budget due to the higher overall average bus temperature.

There are several relocated and added bus components including new star trackers and star tracker electronics mounted on the instrument structural assembly. Cost for completion of the old Ball trackers was traded against the cost for new trackers (selected). A Payload Interface Processor (PIP) is required to accommodate the 1553 interface for APS and TIM, as well as several other mission unique payload interfaces. Several processor candidates were traded for the PIP, with the SCS-750 being selected for its combination of cost and features. A second S-Band receiver was added to improve reliability.  Lower cost, redundant GPS units were selected to replace the science- quality JPL BlackJack planned for VCL, which had not been completed on that program.

The most significant thermal hardware change will be to the battery thermal control design.  This is due to the battery radiator external environment and dissipation changes.  On VCL the battery radiator was in the velocity/anti-velocity vector with a better view to space. This resulted in a lower sink temperature for the battery.  The attitude change required to fly the Glory payloads caused increased earth albedo input and higher sink temperature for the existing radiator design. For Glory, the radiator was split onto two panels adjacent to the nadir panel (Figure 8). External header heatpipes will be used to transport the heat from the battery panel to the two adjacent radiator panels. In addition the saddle holding the battery will be improved for more efficient heat transport. This will decrease the ?T from the battery to the radiator from 25?C to 10?C. In addition a trade study was performed to assess whether it made more sense to buy a new battery or convince the review committees that it would be acceptable to fly an 8-year old battery. A new battery will be flown on the Glory mission.

Figure 8 Battery Heatpipe Configuration   Due to the higher LV loads on Glory, the propulsion tank brackets must be redesigned for improved strength. A stiffener may also be required for the propulsion deck, but analysis is still in progress. The stringers and plates are sufficient to handle the increased loads and payload mass.

The antenna placement for Glory is significantly different than for VCL. VCL had their payload nadir pointing and the X-band antenna mounted on the instrument deck facing nadir. For Glory, the X-band antenna is still nadir pointing, but mounted on the edge of the propulsion deck. The ?Y S- band antenna is marginally changed in location and orientation from VCL. The +Y S-band antenna will be mounted on a deployable boom for Glory in order to extend beyond the open APS Earth shield and to not impinge on the field of view of the APS cryoradiator.

There will be significant wire harness changes required for Glory. Many of these are to accommodate the new suite of instruments, however some are to correct problems in the VCL design and to improve the overall reliability for the Glory mission. One major change is incorporating an external fuse plug for the power switches. This change also allows an additional 12 field-effect transistor (FET) switches to be used instead of being ganged together as they were on VCL. Significant system engineering effort went into this decision as well as a trade on how to route the instrument harness and component location on the IMA.

The last major change required from VCL to Glory is the Flight SW on all the processors. The ACRIMSAT, VCL and OV-3 software started from a common baseline in 1997.

Since that time the codes diverged to some extent, even though the overall architecture is the same module-based design. The OV-3 code has had 3 more years of development since VCL was put into storage. It has been flying for more than a year at this point. Because of this, it was decided that it made much more sense to start from the  OV-3 baseline for the Glory mission. The sole exception to this is the ACS algorithms, which will be from VCL, as the VCL code has most of the elements to meet the Glory requirements, with minimal changes required. OV-3 is a highly agile platform that slews constantly, and thus less applicable from an attitude control viewpoint than VCL, which was also a nadir pointer like Glory. Using the OV-3 C&DH software does not require major changes either, in that most of the hardware components are common between the two programs, including the PIP software that will draw significant heritage from the OV-3 PIP baseline.

The overall cost trade between reuse of the VCL bus versus a new bus is not simple to resolve.  There are numerous things that would have to be done differently on a new bus, versus retrofitting the fully redundant VCL bus for Glory.

However, an educated estimate of the delta cost for a new bus over VCL refurbishment is on the order of $10M-$15M, or a third of a new bus cost. On a $200M program, including launch vehicle costs, this is a significant cost driver. Therefore it made sense for NASA to use an existing asset over a new procurement. Further, there is a significant reduction in risk for the bus portion of the mission since the majority of the hardware is built and has been shown to be flight worthy. Both cost and schedule risk has been mitigated.

5. HERITAGE  The Glory instruments have varied amounts of heritage.

TIM has the most direct, extensive heritage since it is a rebuild of the TIM instrument on SORCE, which has been flying for two years. The gimbal is new for TIM, but the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP) of the University of Colorado has heritage with the control electronics from a previous program. The Fine Sun Sensor is new as well, but has been in development at LASP for a significant time and is not considered a risk.

The Cloud Camera similarly has heritage as it is based on the Ball star tracker platform. This cloud camera is identical to the flight heritage star trackers with a different filtering scheme and focal length. The system has been flight qualified for the CALIPSO mission and will be flown soon.

The Glory units will be identical in manufacture to the CALIPSO units, although the data readout scheme and rate, and the filter bandwidth will be different for Glory.

The APS instrument has the least heritage of the Glory suite. It is essentially a new development, although it does use some heritage parts and circuits. Some of the optics and materials derive heritage from the EOSP mission. There is also some heritage for parts of the instrument drawn from the RSP airborne instrument, with flight heritage by Spectir.

The Glory bus has significant flight heritage in nearly all regards. As mentioned above, the flight software draws extensively from both the ACRIMSAT and OV-3 programs, with more than 6 years of successful combined on-orbit  Radiator Heatpipes  Header Heatpipes to transfer heat to radiator panels  Radiator Panel       operation. In actuality the control of the hardware elements extends even further back to the TSX-5 and STEP heritage busses. These have over a dozen years more on-orbit success for the Air Force. Figure 9 shows several of these heritage satellites.

The Glory hardware draws its heritage from the same series of satellites, namely the Defense Systems Inc. (DSI) and CTA Space Systems (CTASS) STEP bus architecture. TSX- 5 was an evolution from the STEP heritage, upgrading the electronics for radiation hardness. The TSX-5 mission is flying in a highly elliptical orbit that passes through the Van Allen belts. It has been flying for over 4 years in this environment. ACRIMSAT, OV-3 and VCL made only minor improvements to the TSX-5 designs.

The reaction wheels are built by Orbital and are flying on the OV-3 satellite. The propulsion system was assembled and tested by Orbital and is identical to the OV-3 system.

More than 75% of the bus components were built by Orbital at either the Dulles campus, or previously at the McLean or Germantown facilities. Orbital also manufactured the bus structure elements, including the aluminum honeycomb decks. The same methods were used on the extremely successful ACRIMSAT structure.

In terms of the purchased components, most also have flight heritage. The GPS receivers have more than 100 years of combined on-orbit satellite years of operations on the Orbcomm constellation alone. The LN-200S is flying on the TSX-5 mission, and flew briefly on QuikToms (launch vehicle problem). All of the RF transmitters and receivers are from L3-Conic and have significant flight heritage on both Orbital satellites and others across the industry. The Orbital-built antennas have extensive flight heritage. The torque rods are the industry standard units from Ithaco. The Solar Array Drive Assemblies (SADAs) are the standard Type 2 gimbals from Moog. Orbital has flown these same drives on our geo-synchronous satellites.

Figure 9 - ACRIMSAT, STEP-0 and VCL Satellites   The arrays are populated with single junction GaAs cells from Emcore, which was Tecstar when the cells were made and laid down on the panels. These cells are of the same vintage as those flying on the Orbcomm and GALEX satellites. The NiH2 battery is an SPV from Eagle-Picher. It is the same technology, although a smaller capacity, as the batteries flying on the Iridium constellation. The baseline star trackers are the ESA flight heritage Advanced Stellar Compass from the Danish Technical University (DTU).

This unit has more than 5 years on orbit with the Oersted satellite, and has flown on more than 8 missions to date with no known failures.

The Taurus launch vehicle has had 6 successful flights in various configurations. ACRIMSAT was successfully       launched on the same 2110 Taurus vehicle configuration in 1999 with the KOMPSAT satellite.

Orbital has flown numerous missions from the Mission Operations Center (MOC) in Dulles using the MAESTRO ground software for command and telemetry. The MOC is shown below in Figure 10. This software is hosted on Sun workstations running the Solaris operating system. The most recent missions are OV-3 and GALEX. Both programs are running smoothly and operating as planned. ACRIMSAT has recently converted over to using the MAESTRO system for operations as well. USN is supporting the GALEX mission, including X-band pass services at Hawaii and Australia. Glory will follow this proven path. USN has also supported most of Orbital?s geo-synchronous satellite launches and on orbit checkouts.

Figure 10 ? Orbital?s Mission Operations Center   6. SUMMARY   In the case of the Glory program, it is concluded that reuse of many components from the VCL program not only significantly reduces the cost of the Glory mission but helps to make something of what could be shelved for an indeterminate amount of time.  By employing existing resources and knowledge from a program that was very mature, the Glory program is doing its part to contribute to cost saving measures and maximizing benefit to NASA. The Glory program provides savings of nearly $15M over a ground-up bus design effort, while mitigating significant risk on the bus portion of the mission.

Glory is an ideal mission for earth sciences in the realm of climate change research. It draws from significant flight heritage elements in both the instruments and the spacecraft bus. It uses an existing NASA asset with minor refurbishment to save significant development costs. It uses a LV that has flown several NASA and DOD missions to date. The ground system employs flight proven hardware and software with a robust plan for backup coverage.

7. REFERENCES [1] NASA Facts, Aerosols, June 1999 [2] NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Glory Program Science and Mission Requirements Document, Greenbelt, Maryland, February 2, 2004   8. BIOGRAPHIES  Darcie A. Durham is an Engineer in the Advanced Programs Group at Orbital Sciences Corporation in Dulles, Virginia.  Currently she is supporting the Glory program in the Systems Engineering Division as well as supporting the Concept Exploration and Refinement  Program.  Her experience is both on hardware and paper study programs ranging from Crew Preference Items for Lockheed Martin to Crew Exploration Vehicle Design for Orbital Sciences Corporation.  She graduated with a B.S. in Aerospace Engineering from Texas A&M University.  Past experience includes flight certification of ISS hardware at Johnson Space Center in Houston and work with the Advanced Missions Architecture Group at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California.

Thomas J. Itchkawich is a Program Director working for the VP of Science and Technology Programs in the Space Systems Group at Orbital Sciences Corporation in Dulles, Virginia. Tom is currently managing the operations support for ACRIMSAT,  managing the Glory program at Orbital, and managing an internal ERP conversion in his spare time. He has successfully launched the MightySat I satellite on the Shuttle Endeavour, and the ACRIMSAT satellite on Taurus. He has supported numerous other programs at both CTA Space Systems and Orbital Sciences. In a previous incarnation he was the lead engineer for the Pegasus payload fairing from inception through design, fabrication, qualification testing, and the first four flights. A true Fighting Blue Hen, Tom graduated with a Bachelor?s of Mechanical Engineering from the University of Delaware. The first ten years of his career were spent at Hercules Aerospace working on composite rocket motor cases, including Titan IVB, Delta GEM strap-ons, and Filament Wound Case Shuttle boosters. Tom was part of the Pegasus Team that was awarded the National Medal of Technology, and the MightySat team that was awarded the Program of the Quarter by AFRL. He has several other published papers on composite structures and low-cost satellite missions.

