A Clustering Prediction Scheme for Wireless Cellular Network

ABSTRACT  A centralized collaborative system between nodes and BSs is developed, and a new prediction mobility scheme is proposed with Data Mining and Time Series techniques. Based on the mobility prediction, bandwidth is reserved for the paths with the maximum support or the best confidence rule, so that the handoffcalls' service can be guaranteed. This new approach belongs to the Direct Group Mobility (DGM) prediction scheme and is based on the Tree Path Construction Algorithm (TPCON) for each Base Station (BS). The nodes with DGM support provide the BSs with the important aggregate bandwidth information so that they can avoid the congestion for the handoff users' sake. For finding the most popular group path, based on TPCON, clusters are constructed according to the various flows ofthe group mobility over an area of mobile stations. We focus on the center oriented clusters that are very crucial for bandwidth prediction purposes. An adaptive clustering algorithm creates the chain of activated cells at each time. A Call Admission Control (CAC) algorithm is developed for each BS for minimizing the call dropping probability.

This study deals with the system behavior only at exceptional congestion time periods (periodical events).

Simulation results are provided.

KEYWORDS: Mobile computing, Mobile Database, Data Mining, association rules  1. INTRODUCTION  The process ofmoving from one cell to the other while a call is in progress , is called handoff3 If no channel is available to continue the service in the next cell then the handoff is dropped. It is evident, from the end user's point of view that it is better to have initial blocking of a connection attempt instead of an abrupt termination of an ongoing connection due to luck of resources during  Raj Acharya Computer Science and Engineering,  Penn. State University, USA 220 Pond Lab.,University Park, PA 16802  (acharya@cse.psu.edu)  handoff [1]. Many strategies have been developed that ensure handoff connections and have given priority over new call attempts, such as: the channel reservation schemes [2], the queueing of handoff request [1], the guard channel policy [3]. The availability of the wireless network resources cannot be guaranteed throughout the lifetime of a connection.

Many user mobility patterns have been developed for making prediction. In [4], a probabilistic prediction scheme for bandwidth reservation based on the Ziv- Lempel data compression algorithm for each individual user's movement has been developed. In [5], the mobile terminal with a data structure mechanism is responsible to make prediction for the next move. The quality of service (QoS), in cellular networks is mainly determined by two blocking probabilities. Call blocking probability (cbp) is the probability that a new connection request is not granted permission to enter the network. Call dropping probability (cdp) is the probability that a connection is violently ended during a handoff between cells, because of the target cell's luck of resources.

In the group mobility case, there is a common path for a group of users that tends to be repeated at a specific time of the day (periodical events, weekly sport games etc), while at congestion time period (rush hours) the mobile changes the direction of the remaining path This particular case needs careful consideration and study.

Before, during or after the end ofthe event many mobility users ask, bandwidth from the cell of the event, at the same time. This condition may create congestion and dropping of the internal calls. In this respect, a collaborative system between the wired and wireless part of the network is developed.

Data Mining [6] with the terms of itemsets, association rules, support and confidence provides us with the necessary tools to elaborate with the bandwidth allocation problem. In [7] the problem of clustering cells into a virtual system named Virtual Bottleneck Cell (VBC) system is examined and a heuristics clustering algorithm is proposed. Our work examines the bandwidth     reservation problem by using a collaborative system based on Data Mining methods. Additionally we can provide information of the time group mobility and of the aggregation of the group flows at some locations (aggressive points oftheflows) that will concentrate high demand of bandwidth in a time period.

A new method directly related to the Group Mobility (DGM) is developed. Our work based on DGM, introduces a new method of finding critical paths with the use of Tree Path Construction (TPCA) and the Adaptive Probabilistic Tree Clustering Algorithm (APTCA) Two CAC are developed, the predictive and the adaptive one.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The section 2 contains the Model Description. In sections 3, the DGM (with TPCON and APTCA) are described respectively.

Based on the above two efficient CAC algorithms and bandwidth reservation schemes are proposed in Section 4.

Simulation results are presented in section 5.

2. MODEL DESCRIPTION  2.1. Wireless Network Structure  In our model of the classical wireless/mobile network with a cellular infrastructure we consider a wired backbone and a number of base stations (BSs). A mobile resides in a cell, communicates with its current BS through another party, maybe a node connected to the wired network, or with another mobile. When a mobile moves into the adjacent cell, a handoff will enable the mobile to keep communicating with the new BS, probably without any difference. The BSs are supposed to be fully connected.

2.2. Data Mining Concepts (The Basics - Rules)  A Data Mining method is developed in order to predict mobility patterns by utilizing their previous history. For the DGM 2-itemsets are used. Let I = { i,, i2,i3,...,i,n} be a set of literals called items. Each item represents a cell.

The path is as an itemset or a large itemset (l-itemset), that is a set of items (numbers or letters). An itemset containing k items is called a k-itemset An association rule implies the form X=> Y, where Xcl, Ycl, and XnY = 0. [6]  Support of an itemset (string) stands for the number of times that an itemset or sub-itemset appears in the database. The task of mining association rules is essential to discover, strong associations rules in large databases. The prediction results are used to reserve bandwidth in advance of a connection with eventually, adjacent cells. For a rule that implies {A,B,C} => D, it  is necessary that both itemsets {A,B,C} and {A,B,C,D) are frequent. Then the confidence c of the rule is computed as the quotient of the supports for the itemsets c= sup(A,B,C,D) / sup(A,B,C). Strong association rules are rules with a confidence value c above a given threshold. A rule consists of two parts, called the antecedent and the consequent and it is denoted as A=*C, where A is antecedent and C the consequent condition [8]. More details on rules and partial order of rules are beyond the scope of this work  2.3. The Direct Group Mobility  2.3.1. Introduction Definition 1: A path is defined as an itemset or raw of the routing table of a BS. It has the form of a 2-itemset (1-itemr,, 2-itemm ). Branch paths are the itemsets that have one or more branch beyond some position of the itemsets. For the itemsets: abcde, abcdg, abcde after the 4rd position we have a branch.

Definition 2: Common subpath (cs) is the common part of the branch paths. The cs is the subpath "abcd". Restricted Support is the support given by the first same items that compose the cs. Extensive support is given by extension of the support operation beyond the first cs.

Example 1: For the two group paths "abcde" and "abcge" the extensive support can be 2 not only for a,b,c but also for e after the mismatch items d and g, while the restricted support contains the same support value (2) only for a, b, c items.

Definition 3: In a BS table there is a path connection when the first path or an 2-itemsetk (1-itemk, 2-itemk ) E BS; and the second path or an 2-itemset,, (1-itemm, 2- item,,)eBSi, have a common item: 2-itemk=1-item,, and both of them belong in consequence time period.

Lemma I: The worst rule from the side of the value of less confidence can be, when the antecedent condition has greater support (>> ms) and many branches.

Proof: This is due to the fact that the antecedent support and the rule support have the antimonotonicity property in the confidence function (conf(AnC)=sup(AnC)/sup(A).Since we have many branches sup(A=nC) has low value while sup(A) has higher value. - Example 2: We consider the following branch with the corresponding support (>ms): "abc" (sup: 80%),"abcd" (sup = 30%), "abce" (sup = 20%) , "abcf' (sup = 50%) (1st level branch). Cak.d = (supa5d / supabc) = 30/80 = 0.375, Cabx. = 0.25, Cabs = 0.625. The branch itemset "abce" has the the worst rule, while the itemset "abcf' has the best rule.

2.3.2. General Description of the DGM We use a collaborative system (cell-BS-node) with the  composition approach, in order to take the mobility trend     at special congestion times (periodical events) without taking into account the user mobility profile. The DGM based on the groups' move, can guarantee the service of handoff calls. The operations ofDGM are described.

When a mobile user goes from cell i (c;) into a cell j (c;) area, a message (uplink stream) is sent directly from cJ to its BS with the tuple: "arrival time, id cells (previous, target), #channel, duration previous cell". The itemset of a tuple will be a 2-itemset. This process continues to every subsequent cell until the end of the path for all the mobile users. The indication of congestion (IC),under the symbol c, can be added at the end of the tuple  The BS creates the preprocessing phase. It gathers the tuples according to their arrival time and distributes them into a predefined time period (dt, permanent or variable value). Periodically or at the end of the day it follows the phase of sorting and the tuples, having support values greater than the predefined ms, are transferred to the corresponding node. The aggregate tuples replaces all the analytical ones (in a BS).

The nodes compose the partial by the 2-itemsets of BSs,(pair of BSs) in order to track the group mobility.

They transform the tuples of their BSs routing tables, into nodes of trees and examine the continuity of the moves along the adjacent cells. Using the clustering algorithm the group trend(s) during the special event can be discovered. This information is sent to the BSs (downlink stream).

Example 3: For simplicity reasons, we suppose that the two input parameters are the start period 9 and the move direction from BS1 to BS3 (from left to right). Fig. 1 contains the routing tables of three BSs and the structure of actions that take place at the node.

(et) cds; ah,cd,ef per sp ls IC 10 100 ab c  10 90 bd c 10 30 & c  11 10 d c  BS2  psc spls lC 11 65 4 c 12 30 jkc 12 15 Idc *..

13 60g c 13 20 elc  cdLsiwmo,qr per sp WIs IC 12 20lkpc l2lix c12 10 pq c 12 5 cr c 14 10 lq c  Fig. 1 The structure of node finding the group trend  A group trend is noticed from cell a (BS,) to cell q (BS3) during the periods 10 to 14. From the TPCON and the APTCA we can take finally: a -+ b-+d--*j-+k-+-*lq (the path with the large itemset: "abdjklq"). After tracing the  route of the group, the information is sent back to the BSs by the downlink stream.

3. THE PROPOSED ALGORITHMS  3.1. The Tree Path Construction Algorithm (TPCON)  In order to find the group mobility trend the transformation of the routing table into tree(s) is needed.

According to the Tree Path Construction (TPCON) the path with the maximum support is considered as root.

The right branch of a tree includes the successor cells (no nodes) of a root node of a tree if we search BSs from left to right. For any BS there is a numerical order of the cells according to the function (ordo) (f.i. we define ord(g) = 1 and ord(h) =2 for the BS2). A path I follows the path2 if the nodes of path2 have the successor order (or 2- itemi=l-item+,+). If for a path m of a BS,, 2-itemsetm (1- itemm, 2-itemm ) the 2-itemm o BS, then we search if 2- itemm E BSp (where p.i) and BSp is adjacent to BSi (checkfor continuity). Based on this, an order of the paths is considered at the beginning for each BS so that for a node the path with smaller number (or predecessor path) will take the position of the left child while the next number (or successor path) will take the right position (f.e the path "gj" will take the left child position of the "jk").

Independent node is the node that can not be connected to any root node of the set S of trees of a BS and it has not branches (f.i. the path or node "dh" can not be connected to any node of BS I).

Example 3: "jk" node is successive of"dj" (root node).

In the next Lemma given the tree node a condition for left or right child is defined: Lemma 2: A subpath or row in a BS (1 -itemsetj (1-itemj ,2-itemj ) ) may belong to a tree with root node 2-itemseti (1 -itemi ,2-itemi)) for the positions: (1) left child: if ord (1-itemj ) < ord (2-itemi), (2) right child: if ord (1-item.

) > = ord (2-itemi) Example 4: For the 1st BS with the a,b,c,d,e,f cells the order of paths is: ab ->1, bc->2, cd->3, de ->4, ef->5 or similarly: a->l, b->2,c->3,d->4,e->5,f->6 . The tree, from the 1S" BS routing table (Fig. 1) starting from the path with the maximum support (It row) and the path is created with successors cells. The right branch is: ab-> bd ->de because d is successor cell of b etc. For the BS2, the "gk" will probably be the left child of the tree with root "dj" since ord(g) > ord(j). The "kl" will probably be the right child of the tree with root "dj" since ord(k) > ord(j) (Fig. 2).

The pseudocode of the TPCON is as follows:     From the routing constructed.

BSI [a, b. c, d, e, f] (1,2, 3o,4,5, 6)  tables of the three BSs (Fig. 3) according  BS2  [1,2.3.4,5.6]  to the TPCON, the corresponding trees are  i BS3 I (m.n,o,p.qr] I (1,2,3,4.5,6] i  I 1  Fig. 2 The Tree Path Construction Algorithm   TPCON /H T1, T2, ... Tn the tables of BS,, . . .,BSn 11 2-itemseti (I -itemi, 2-itemi )is the root subpath of the BSi 11 2-itemset, (l-itemj, 2-itemj ) is any row j of Table (T1), BS1 (1< k < n) I the order of selected BSs is the order of Tl,.. Tn for each BS1 tree { create the order of cells (a-> 1, b->2 etc)  take the path with the maximum support as root node previous path (node) = root node while (not end of the rows) { read the next row of the routing table  if ( the next path is successor of the previous path) the next path takes the right child position  if ( the next path is predecessor ofthe previous path) the next path takes the left child position  if ord(l -item j )< ord (2-items) search for the probable left tree child if ord( 1-item j )> ord (2-items) search for the probable right tree child if ( the next path can not be connected to any node of the tree)  the next path create independent root node if 2-itemm o BS; (of row m of Ti)  search the adjacent BSs in order to find continuity } }  ;1s b' I  1"trcee 3'dtrec  I  I  I    The most popular group trend is: the 1 st l-itemset "a b d j k p q r", among LI ("abdjkpqr"), L2 ("abdelq"), L3 ("abdjklq") because: For Ll("abdjkpqr"): for conf BS. BS2: conf (dj, bd) = 65/90 =0.72, for confBS2. BS3 conf (kp, jk) = 20/30 =0.66.

For L2 ("abdelq"): for confBsl. BS2: conf (el, de) = 20/30 =0.66, for conf BS2. BS3 conf (lq, el) = 10/20 =0.5. For L3("abdjklq"): for conf BSI. BS2: conf (dj, bd) = 65/90 =0.72, for confBS2. Bs3conf (lq, ki) = 10/15 =0.66  The stronger confidence: (1) for conf 1s. BS2 (max (0.72, 0.66, 0,72) = 0.72 ). Hence the LI or L3 will have be the most popular group itemset for BS I and BS2. (2) for conf BS2. BS3: max (0.66, 0.5, 0.66) =0.66. Hence LI or L3 will be the most critical path for BS2 and BS3.

Finally LI is the most critical path since it has more items.

3.2. The Construction of the Probabilistic Tree  In Fig. 2 we can see that each node of the tree includes not only the support (as it has been taken from the Fig. 1), but also the confidence according to the direction ofmove (from left to right , BSI ->BS2->BS3). With this information we can consider the probabilistic aspect of the group mobility. Each node holds the percentage of the users that follows the move from left to right. For the node "dj" the 72% of users comes from the previous node "bd" (Fig. 2).

3.3. The Construction of Clusters  Our work is based on the agglomerative hierarchical Clustering [9]. The objective function is based on the maximization of the system's utilization while satisfying the required QoS. The agglomerative procedures start with n singleton clusters and form the sequence by successively merging clusters[10]. Working in this way we start with one singleton cluster and form the sequence of the next ones. The most natural representation of hierarchical clustering is a corresponding tree (dendrogram), which shows how the samples (cells) are grouped. In our case the time domain defines the sequence of the nodes that constitute the dendrogram. In Fig. 2 we see that according to the time domain how can we take the sequence of cells a BSI-> b BS1-> d BSI -> i BS2 etc .

The group mobility motion can be considered by a sequence of clusters (or subclusters) that have the size of a multiple of a cell (such as: cluster with 3,5,6 cells).

Following the sequence of the nodes from Fig. 2 we can define the order of aggregation of cells and the creation of the final cluster into the three defined BSs. The cluster policy focuses on the aggregation and the deaggregation  of cells according to each congestion time duration. In each time only a part of the clusters (subcluster or cell) are activated. So, at period 10 the first two cells a and b will be activated, at lIthe d and j cells until the last time period 14 when the last 1 and q cells are activated.

Two are the basic categories of clusters: centralized and decentralized ones depending on the group mobility trend.

In the former the mobile groups have increased trend while in the latter the mobile groups have decreased trend. The centralized clusters starts from various cells (starting cell), moving through a series of cells (route cells) and they are addressed (ends up)to a common cell (aggressive point of the flows or the last cell) that will concentrate the high demand of bandwidth for a time period. The congestion periodfor the route cells is small comparing to the congestion duration time of the last cell. At the last cell the periodical event ( like football game). will take place. For the centralized clusters the prediction of the location and the duration of the sequential congestion cells with the last cell are both important.

For the centralized cluster we can notice two or more starting cells (seeds) (in different BSs) from which the group flow can start the move at the same or another time.

The Fig. 3 contains a centralized cluster with threeflows and with end cell is e. Due to limited space the metrics in Clusters are not included in this work.

Fig. 3 Flows of group mobility  3.4. The Adaptive Probabilistic Tree Clustering Algorithm     The Adaptive Probabilistic Tree Clustering Algorithm (APTCA) is based on the TPCON apd the probabilistic tree, and it contains two phases: the creation and the separation. The first phase contains the join operation with the neighboring cells while the second phase contains the separation of cells starting from the first in coming ones(like queue). The first connected cell to the cluster is also the first that is separated (serviced), according to a FIFO fashion (queue). The creation of the cluster can be done: Clu i.tl = {cl i.tl }= Ca(for the ISt cluster) (1) Clu .t2 = {ClU i.t } U {Cl i.t2 } (for 2nd cluster) etc (2) Where: cl i : is the cluster-cell that is added to the cluster-body  at tl,for flow i, Clu j.tl: is the cluster (set of cells) for all the connected  cluster-cell atti  Searching the tree of nodes the addition of paths (and the cells) can be done according to the confidence value.

For centralized clusters we have increasing value of confidence while for the decentralized ones we have decreasing values of confidence of the nodes to follow. It is evident that the evolution of the cluster is to give us the most popular group path of the cells. More details are not provided here due to space limitations.

4. THE PREDICTIVE AND ADAPTIVE CONNECTION ADMISSION CONTROL (CAC) FOR GROUP MOBILITY  Two are the kinds of the CAC provided: the cooperative and the autonomous CAC. The first is most effective than the second one since it focuses on the update for the upcoming congestion directly to the last node.

The cooperative CAC: When the BSs meat congestion they send a message (time, BS, #cell ) directly to the node. The message consists the key with which probabilistic tree is searched. If the key is included in the tree the node sends first a message directly to the BS with the last node of the flow (with the probable time of the congestion)in order to inform it for the forthcoming aggregation of hand of calls and second to all the intermediate BSs. In Fig. 3 the node sends the information (arrow X) direct to cell e after receiving the upstream message from a, f and j cells for the upcoming congestion.

The autonomous CAC: The node sends the congestion information (time,BS,#cell) to each BS in series. The CAC is executed by the BSs. Each BS informs the next BS for the upcoming congestion chain. In case that the last cell (BS) is not informed about the arrival of any  flow, then at this cell the reservation policy will not work well (chain problem).

The CAC will operate when the cdp exceeds a threshold (thl, adaptive) or remain under a threshold (th2, predictive). For the predictive CAC, in order the cdp to be less than the thl, all the available channels are offered for partial reservation and local requests are dropped in favor of handoff users. The adaptive CAC is activated only when cdp>th2  5. SIMULATION  The problem of simulation is that because the users move from cell to cell it is not easy to predict the exact reserve bandwidth for each cell at a certain time. For this reason, a sampling method is used so that bandwidth can be reserved for a user at a specific time. For our experiments, we assume the uniform mobility behavior of the users. This means that a user follows a cyclic pattern within one day period. We use time sub-periods during a day, for several weeks, (in order to find periodical events) and examine the mobility of each user. The path is generated as follows. (1) select two nodes in the graph randomly as original and destination nodes. (2) whenever the mobile user leaves the current cell, it moves to a neighboring cell, which is closest to the destination. (3) the favorite group path is selected according to TPCON and APTCA. We consider a coverage area that consists of 20 base stations, each having 6 neighbors on average.

The average distance between two BSs is I mile.

Among the cells within a path, mobile users can have a new call request with equal probabilities. During a call, the mobile may stay at the original cell or move along the path. If a call does not terminate when the mobile reaches the end of the path, it will stay at the end cell of that path.

Call requests are generated according to a Poisson process with rate X (calls/cell/s). Call duration is the same for all calls and exponentially distributed with mean value of 120s.Two cases of mobility are considered: low user mobility(<40 miles/hour), and high user mobility( from 40 to 70 miles/hour). Two flows are considered that they go towards a common (last) cell. Two scenaria are developed below:  1. All the kinds of users (scenario 1). Due to the high load (2 flows) we have increased values of cdp and cbp (Fig.

4). At the congestion time the local users calls of the critical routes' cells are dropped (due to lack of available channels) so that the handoff users are serviced. In Fig 5 we have the case of service according to CAC (predictive) where the cdp<0.20. In Fig. 6 the CAC (adaptive) is activated only when cdp>0.30).

2. Users with branches and extensive support (scenario 2).

The Fig. 7 shows adaptive autonomous CAC with extensive support, where the last node is not updated for the 2nd flow arrival (chain problem). On the contrary in Fig. 8 the last node is informed for the two flows arrival and prepare the bandwidth reservation so that the cdp is less than the cdp of the Fig.7.

6. CONCLUSION  The innovation of our work lies on the development of a mobility prediction scheme based on the Data Mining concepts and the cooperation between the wired and the wireless part of the network aiming at the aggregate temporally prediction. The TPCON and APTCA offers the ability for each BS to change the service priority in favor ofthe handoff users.

