Emergent Intertransaction Association Rules for Abnormality Detection in Intelligent Environments

Abstract  This paper is concerned with identifying anomalous behaviour of people in smart environments. We propose the use of emergent transaction mining and the use of the extended frequent pattern tree as a basis. Our experiments on two data sets demonstrate that emergent intertransaction associations are able to detect abnormality present in real world data and that both short and long term behavioural changes can be discovered. The use of intertransaction associations is shown to be advantageous in the detection of temporal association anomalies otherwise not readily detectable by traditional "market basket" intratransaction mining.

1. INTRODUCTION  Population ageing is a modern phenomenon that sees a grow- ing proportion of the global population becoming aged 60 years and older [1]. An expected consequence of this trend is an increase in the number of people choosing to age at home in order to maintain an independent lifestyle for as long as possible [2].

To help accommodate this growing number, we seek to  create an intelligent environment that is capable of providing both cognitive support to its occupant and assistance in the event of an accident or a significant change in a person's normal behaviour. This work, the first of a two stage process, aims to identify the existence of anomalous behaviour that may require further investigation in the absence of a repre- sentative abnormal data set. We propose the use of emergent intertransaction association rules as a novel approach to this problem.

Intertransaction association rule mining [3] is an extension of the intratransaction association rule mining problem [4] to include the discovery of relationships, or itemsets, span- ning transactions in one or more arbitrary dimensions. In our application, we wish to find the temporal associations among state-change sensor events recorded in the homes of two volunteer subjects [5], [6]. The emergent intertransaction associations are defined as those rules that display strong growth in a database of new observations given some historical data set. Discovery of such rules indicates the presence of new or unexpected increases in the frequency of behaviours and signals the need for further investigation or intervention by an occupant's supervisor or guardian.

2. RELATED WORK Our work is similar to Jumping Emerging Patterns (JEPs) [7] and Emerging Patterns (EPs) [8] which seek to find those itemsets that display significant growth between sets of data.

Emerging patterns can be used in the detection of trends and have application in classification problems due to their ability to find the discriminative features between classes of data. The difference between the EP mining problem and our work is that the former is concerned only with finding those itemsets that exhibit strong growth whereas we are interested in retaining the associative relationship among the items in our rule base.

A good example of the application of data mining to the  detection of abnormality is given in [9]. Here association rules and frequent episodes [10] are used to build a set of audit data and guide the design of a classifier for the detection of intrusive and malicious behaviour in a network environment.

In our work, we chose to employ intertransaction associations rather than frequent episodes in order to retain some of the temporal ordering of associated events.

Another approach is to identify unusual patterns in data using domain specific measures of unexpectedness based on a set of beliefs. Here, unexpectedness is both a measure of how the patterns in some new data affect the degree of belief the system has in a set of soft beliefs and the discovery of patterns that violate user defined immutable beliefs [11].

The work of [12], [13], for example, looks at the discovery of unusual patterns where unexpectedness is defined as a logical contradiction in beliefs. Our work, in contrast, looks for previously unseen patterns and significant growth in the frequency of known patterns. We do not consider the affect that new data has on existing patterns nor do we impose assumptions on what constitutes expected behaviour.

3. EMERGENT INTERTRANSACTION ASSOCIATION RULES  Multiple concurrent activities and unexpected interruptions in activity make the recognition of human behaviour as precise sequences of events difficult given the low level sensor data available to us. In our system intratransaction associations function as a model of the events that are expected to occur in close temporal proximity while the intertransaction associ- ations capture the larger context in which the intratransaction events occur. The temporal component of the rules also pro- vide us with a predictive element that can be used to forecast     growth (rIDBH, DBN) = fol sup(rIDBN) sup(rI DB11)  the events we expect to see in a future interval given events already observed.

A. Intertransaction Association Rules Intertransaction association rules are implications of the form X X Y with the properties [14]  XCE,YCE (2) 30? E X (3)  3ad E Y,d > 0 (4) XnY=0 (5)  where E - {a0,a?,...ad,...a'} is the set of all possible extended items formed by assigning an offset d to items that occur relative to some transaction Ti in a sliding in- tertransaction window of size w as it is passed over a database DB while forming the extended transaction set. The database DBR- (T1 T2 . .. TN) is said to consist of transactions Ti (1 < i < N) such that Ti (x) E I V items x in Ti where I is the set of all items I ={a, a2,.. . ai, ... .amA} found in DB.

The support measure for an association rule r is calculated  as sup (r) = N where ITxyI is the number of extended transactions containing all items in X U Y and N is the number of transactions in DB. The confidence of a rule is calculated as conf (r) -e1 where ITxI is the number of extended transactions containing all items in X. We refer to the intratransaction items {al,a? ...a, .... aM1} as intraitems and the extended transaction items {al, a , .... ad,.. . aw } as interitems.

As an example, the rule Ao, Bo, C1, D3 X- E3 implies that  if we encounter A and B in the current transaction interval, C in the next, and D three transactions from now, then E will also occur three transactions from now. If A, B, C, D and E map to the event descriptors "kitchen sink cold water on", "kitchen sink cold water off', "dishwasher open", "dishwasher closed" and "dishwasher on" respectively then one possible interpretation of the rule may be that it is normal to open the dishwasher, close it again and then turn the machine on shortly after having used the cold water faucet in the kitchen sink, presumably to rinse the dishes.

B. Discovery of the Emergent Intertransaction Associations The discovery of emergent intertransaction associations seeks to find those rules that display significant growth in a database of new observations DBN over a historical data set DBH. We say that an association rule r is emergent when its growth, the ratio of its support in DBN to its support in DBH, is greater than or equal to some threshold a and a minimum support threshold a on DBN has been met. We have adopted Equation 1 [8] as the growth function for this work.

if sup (rIDBH)=) 0 and sup (rIDBN) = 0 if sup (rIDBH) = 0 and sup(rIDBN) 0O otherwise  (1)  Association rule mining on a database populated with many frequent items can become computationally expensive, especially at the lower support thresholds where exponential growth in the number of rules present may result in a compu- tational explosion. In our application, it is reasonable to expect that our historical data set will be larger and contain a much greater number of associations than will be present in the new data set. It is impractical, therefore, to find the complete set of association rules for both DBH and DBN and then compare these sets to find the emergent association rules when the rules in DBN are expected to be a subset of those in DBH.

We instead employ the Extended FP-Tree (EFP-Tree) [15],  an extension of the Frequent Pattern Tree (FP-Tree) [16], [17], as an intermediate representation of both DBH and DBN.

The EFP-Tree is a tree structure of descending frequency ordered intraitem nodes that contain zero or one interitem FP- Tree subtrees where the frequency ordering of the subtrees is conditioned on the intraitem parent node. Items are placed into the EFP-Tree such that the frequent items of an arbitrary extended transaction can be restored by traversing the tree.

Intertransaction association rules are retrieved from the EFP-Tree structure using the pattern growth property, a divide and conquer approach, to recursively find the complete set of intertransaction associations without the need for candidate generation.

Item constraints [18] are applied to the mining of DBH so that only a desired subset of rules are extracted. This provides us with the ability to "query" DBN on the historical frequency of only those associations found to be frequent in DBN.

Simple examples for the historical database and the new observations database are given in Table 1 and Table 3 respec- tively. Table 2 shows the extended itemsets that are retrieved from the historical database using a sliding intertransaction window of size w = 2. The extended items retrieved from the new observations database are shown in Table 4. Mining the extended transactions in Table 4 with a minimum support of a = 0.5 reveals the associations Do X- Eo, Ao =X D1, Ao =X~El and AoD, =X E1. We summarise the support of these associations in the new and historical databases with their corresponding growth values in Table 5.

C. Minimal Emergent Rules Only the set of minimal emergent rules were sought in this work. This was to prevent the discovery process from returning an overwhelming number of rules, the majority of which would be unlikely to offer any valuable information not already present in the minimal set. Finding the set of minimal rules was achieved by ordering the mined associations by ascending rule length and discarding those rules known to contain emergent association subsets using previously detected     TABLE 1: HISTORICAL DATABASE Trans. ID Time Items  100 1 A B E 200 2 E 300 3 A D 400 D4BC I  TABLE 2: EXTENDED TRANSACTIONS RETRIEVED FROM THE HISTORICAL DATABASE IN TABLE 1  Time Extended transaction items I AO Bo Eo E1 A2 D2 2 Eo A1 D1 B2 C2 D2 3 AODoB1 C1 D1 4 Bo Co Do  emergent rules. An emergent association q is said to be non-minimal when 3 {r, t} such that r (t) C q (t = 0) where  = rd1+t d2+t di+t dz+t} is a known emer- gent rule whose intertransaction offsets {d,, d2, * . . di, . . . dz} have been incremented t intervals. For example, if r is an emergent rule C0, D2 =$ E2 and q is the rule AOIBo0,C1 D3 =* E3 then q is also known to be emergent because r (1) c q holds true.

Although we applied filtering as a post process, the EFP- Tree offers an opportunity to move the filtering process into the tree mining algorithm so as to guide the mining of both DBH and DBN.

Only those associations whose frequency were queried in the historical data set are included in the reported rule counts in Section 4.

Only the associations Do =X Eo, Ao X: Di and Ao0 El from the discovered rules in Table 5 are minimal emergent.

AoD1 =X E1 is considered to be non-minimal as it is a superset of both Ao => D1 and Ao => E1.

4. EXPERIMENTATION AND RESULTS  We have applied our method of emergent intertransaction rule discovery on the real world data described in [5], [6]. This data set comprises state-change sensor event logs recorded over a period of sixteen days in the homes of two volunteer subjects, a working professional and an eighty year old retiree. A total of 77 and 84 sensors were installed in the apartments of the first and second subject respectively. Both participants were living independently at the time the data was gathered.

The event logs were discretised into transactions of five  minute intervals and the unique sensor IDs were removed to reduce the information known about each event to include only the room in which the sensor was installed, the appliance or item of furniture it was attached to, and its state. For example, as we are only interested in a subject's general use of a chest of drawers and not the precise drawer that is opened, several sensors attached to a chest of draws are reduced to the events Bedroom/Drawer true and Bedroom/Drawer false.

The sixteen days worth of event logs from each subject were  divided into two weeks, each week containing eight days of events. Each week was in turn used as the historical database  TABLE 3: NEW 013SERVATIONS DATABASE Trans. ID Time Items  100 I A B- 200 2 D E 300 3 A  1 400 14 1CDE  TABLE 4: EXTENDED TRANSACTIONS RETRIEVED FROM THE NEW OBSER- VATIONS DATABASE IN TABLE 3  Time Extended transaction items 1 AO Bo D1 E1 A2 2 Do Eo A1 C2 D2 E2 3 Ao C1 D1 E2 4 C0 DO EO  DB to find the emergent rules present in the other. Discreti- sation of the event logs from the first subject transformed the log data into two databases of 287 and 375 transactions from the first and second week respectively. The event logs from the second subject were discretised into databases of 440 transactions from the first week of data and 319 transactions from the second.

A. Observations on the Working Professional Data Set Intertransaction association rules from the first subject were mined using a raw minimum support threshold of a = 8 for both weeks of data. This support level was chosen to balance the quality and the quantity of the discovered associations, providing us with an ample number of rules for analysis while remaining resistant to noise.

Association rules discovered in DBN were classified emer- gent if a minimum growth of 6 = 5 was measured.

1) Week One: Mining the first week of data lead to the discovery of 101 emergent intertransaction associations from 1,808 investigated rules. Examining the context of each rule revealed the existence of four distinct groups of associations.

The first group was found to relate to a flurry of kitchen  activity on the third day of the event logs. Here the subject appears to be triggering the sensors on a variety of kitchen appliances and furniture over an unusually long period, be- haviour that results in significant growth in kitchen related as- sociations. Manual examination of the emergent rules and the log data did not, however, reveal any discernible behavioural trends aside from the unusual length of the activity and the frequency of the events therein.

The second set of rules highlight significant growth in  kitchen door associated events. Inspection of the event logs reveals repeated opening and closing of the door on day four of the data. Although it is possible that these readings were caused by the subject frequently entering and leaving the kitchen, we believe that the length of the activity and the regularity with which the readings occur suggests that a momentary glitch with the sensor has been detected.

Analysis of the emergent rules from the third group shows that is is unusual to observe the medicine cabinet and the foyer door being opened or closed in adjacent transactions.

This discovery is attributed to insufficient historical data;     TABLE 5: SUMMARY OF THE INTERTRANSACTION RUILES DISCOVERED FROM THE EXTENDED ITEMS IN TABLE 4  discretisation of the event logs resulted in the foyer door and the medicine cabinet events being predominately grouped into adjacent intervals in the first week and into single transactions in the second. We see from the event logs that it is quite normal in both weeks of data for the subject to walk through the foyer door shortly before opening the medicine cabinet.

The last set of emergent rules features the subject both flushing the toilet and using the bathroom medicine cabinet in a single interval. These two events occur normally one or two intervals apart in the historical data set but not in the same transaction. This behaviour does not appear to be due to any unusual circumstances and again suggests that a larger historical data set is required.

2) Week Two: Only 46 of the 2,437 intertransaction associations tested from the second week were identified as emergent. Inspection of these rules again revealed four groups of contextually related associations.

The first group is a set of two single events revealing that  the bathroom door is being opened and shut significantly more often in the second week than in the first. This innocuous new behaviour is evident over several days of data and is confirmed through manual inspection of the event logs.

Twenty four rules associating use of the microwave with use of the fridge, the freezer and the kitchen cabinet within a single transaction period make up the second group of associations.

The historical data shows that while we can expect some of these kitchen based events to occur within a single interval, the use of the microwave in addition to two or more of these events all within a single transaction is unusual. Examination of the event logs showed that meal preparations appear to be a more involved process in the second week than in the first.

The third set of emergent rules suggest that it is abnormal  for the hot and cold water faucets in the bathroom to be turned both on and off in adjacent intervals. It appears that in the first week the hot and cold water is used in shorter sessions and that these events normally occur within a single transaction. The event logs suggest that the subject does appear to be spending more time in the bathroom and is opening the water faucets more frequently than in the first week. It remains conceivable, however, that this phenomenon is caused by a sensor aberration and not a change in behaviour.

Although the rules in the final set of emergent associations highlight no apparent abnormal behaviour, they do document significant growth in the number of times the bedroom jew- ellery box is opened and the bedroom light switch is activated in contiguous transactions.

B. Observations on the Retiree Data Set The minimum support threshold for mining the first week of data was reduced to a = 6 in order to provide us with a sufficient number of rules for analysis not otherwise available at higher support levels. The support level for the second week was again set to a = 8 and a minimum growth measurement of 6 = 5 was required for both weeks.

I) Week One: Of the 1,061 intertransaction associations tested, 72 were classified emergent. The emergent rules were again grouped into sets of related associations.

The first of these groups reveal that the subject is watching more television in the first week than in the second. The log files confirm that interaction with the TV is common in the first week yet it is rarely seen in the second.

A second group of associations highlight an anomaly cen-  tered around the repeated opening and closing of the kitchen door one and two intervals after it had previously been opened or closed. Delving into the event logs reveals a considerable increase in the number of times the door is opened in this week relative to the historical data set. It appears that the subject is carrying out activities that require frequent access to the kitchen over several days of data and that this is not due to a sensor malfunction as was previously discovered in Section 4-A. 1.

The next group of emergent rules highlight an unexpected  behaviour prevalent on the first and sixth day. We see from the log data that the bathroom door is frequently opened and closed over a fifteen minute interval on these days yet the historical data suggests that the bathroom door is normally left open or shut for periods of time outside the span of the intertransaction sliding window.

A bevy of emergent rules covering significant growth in the  relationships among a variety of objects in the kitchen make up the final set. Emergent rules highlight growth between use of the microwave and the garbage disposal unit, the repeated opening and closing of the kitchen door and repeated access to the fridge and microwave. We found it difficult to locate any anomalous behaviour in the log files as all these events also appear in close proximity in the second week. This suggests that we do not have sufficient historical data to account for all the combinations of intervals and events found here.

2) Week Two: The presence of four distinct groups of as- sociations were once again identified amongst the 23 emergent associations discovered from the 758 that were tested.

Two single events from which we learn that the subject  accesses their study drawer more frequently in the second week than in the first makes up the first group of emergent associations. Inspection of the logs confirms this find, the study     drawer being opened and closed in seven transactions in week two but only twice in week one.

The rules in the second group imply abnormal behaviour  in the form of the shower faucet being repeatedly turned on and off taking place on the first day of this week. Although it is possible that these rules were found due to some new behaviour, the frequency and regularity of the readings over a period of fifteen minutes suggests the possibility that they were the result of an error with the sensors.

The next unusual behaviour is a repeated toggling of the  light switch in the butler's pantry on day seven. The emergent rules show that the light switch in the butler's pantry is being turned on for several minutes and then turned off again in a cycle that is repeated several times every few minutes. The expected behaviour associated with the butler's pantry is to see the light switch activated for several minutes up to an hour at a time with longer periods of time passing before the light is turned on again. A single rule in this group highlights frequent use of the microwave twenty five to thirty minutes after the cabinet inside the butler's pantry has been accessed.

It is difficult to verify whether these patterns are caused by a new behaviour or not without querying the subject.

The final emergent rules present five new associations  related to the use of the kitchen cabinet. The first three of these rules show a new association between the cabinet and the microwave, the latter of which is frequently being opened and closed twenty five to thirty five minutes after the cabinet has been accessed. The last two rules show the closing of the cabinet door, the use of the cold water faucet and the opening and closing of the fridge all within a single transaction is an unexpected but frequent occurrence in the second week. None of these rules suggest a new behaviour that we need to be concerned about.

5. CONCLUSION This work has introduced a method for the mining of emer- gent intertransaction association rules and demonstrated their application through the discovery of behavioural changes and sensor aberrations present in the state-change sensor event logs from the homes of two volunteer subjects.

Experimental results show that emergent associations are able to be applied to the discovery of short term abnormalities and to detect changes that occur in a subject's behavioural patterns over a span of several days. Both intratransaction and intertransaction anomalies were detected, attesting to the benefit of incorporating temporal associative relationships into the mining process.

[2] E. D. Mynatt, I. Essa, W. Rogers, "Increasing the opportunities for aging in place", In: Proc. 2000 Conf Universal Usability, Arlington, Virginia, USA, 2000, pp. 65-71.

[3] H. Lu, L. Feng, J. Han, "Beyond intra-transaction association analysis: mining multi-dimensional inter-transaction association rules", In: ACM Trans. Information Systems, Vol. 18, No. 4, 2000, pp. 423-454.

[4] R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski, A. Swami, "Mining association rules between sets of items in large databases", In: Proc. ACM-SIGMOD 1993 Int'l Conf Management of Data, Washington, District of Columbia, USA, May, 1993, pp. 207-216.

[5] E. M. Tapia, Activity Recognition in the Home Setting Using Simple and Ubiquitous Sensors, Masters thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003.

[6] E. M. Tapia, S. S. Intille, K. Larson, "Activity recognition in the home using simple and ubiquitous sensors", In: Int'l Conf Pervasive Computing, Vol. 3001 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2004, pp. 158-175.

[7] G. Dong, J. Li, X. Zhang, "Discovering jumping emerging patterns and experiments on real datasets", In: Int'l Database Conf Heterogeneous and Internet Databases, Hong Kong, China, 1999, pp. 155-168.

[8] G. Dong, J. Li, "Efficient mining of emerging patterns: discovering trends and differences", In: Int'l Conf. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Diego, California, USA, 1999, pp. 43-52.

[9] W. Lee, S. J. Stolfo, K. W. Mok, "Adaptive intrusion detection: a data mining approach", In: Artificial Intelligence Review, Vol. 14, No. 6, 2000, pp. 533-567.

[10] H. Mannila, H. Toivonen, A. I. Verkamo, "Discovering frequent episodes in sequences", In: Proc. Int'l Conf. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Montrdal, Canada, 1995, pp. 210-215.

[11] A. Silberschatz, A. Tuzhilin, "What makes patterns interesting in knowledge discovery systems", In: IEEE Trans. Knowledge and Data Engineering, Vol. 8, No. 6, 1996, pp. 970-974.

[12] B. Padmanabhan, A. Tuzhilin, "A belief-driven method for discovering unexpected patterns", In: Int'l Conf Knowledge Discovery and Data Mininlg, New York City, New York, USA, August, 1998, pp. 94-100.

[13] B. Padmanabhan, A. Tuzhilin, "Unexpectedness as a measure of interest- ingness in knowledge discovery", In: Decision Support Systems, Vol. 27, No. 3, 1999, pp. 303-318.

[14] A. K. H. Tung, H. Lu, J. Han, L. Feng, "Efficient mining of inter- transaction association rules", In: IEEE Trans. Knowledge and Data Enigineering, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2003, pp. 43-56.

[15] S. Luihr, G. West, S. Venkatesh, "An extended frequent pattern tree for intertransaction association rule mining", Technical Report 2005/1, Department of Computing, Curtin University of Technology, 2005.

[16] J. Han, J. Pei, Y. Yin, "Mining frequent patterns without candidate generation", In: ACM SIGMOD Int'l Conf Management ofData, Dallas, Texas, USA, May, 2000, pp. 1-12.

[17] J. Han, J. Pei, Y. Yin, R. Mao, "Mining frequent patterns without candidate generation: a frequent-pattern tree approach", In: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2004, pp. 53-87.

[18] R. Srikant, Q. Vu, R. Agrawal, "Mining association rules with item constraints", In: Int'l Conf Knowledge Discovery and Data Minin1g, Newport Beach, California, USA, August, 1997, pp. 67-73.

