2006 1 st International Symposium on Pervasive Computing and Applications

Abstract Considering some employees in the department  abuse their privilege for personal gain through the local network and the host computer, in this paper, we present a multi-agent based intrusion detection system named MAJIDS (multi-agent based intelligent intrusion detection system). The learning agent module in this model can self-adjustingly learn network based audit data and host based audit data with more than one technique of data mining, such as the artificial neural network, the association rules and so on. The learning agent can produce rules, and the detection agent can detect audit data according to these rules and response to them. A lot of experiments indicate that this system has very high self-adapting ability, intelligence, and expansibility. Now MAJIDS has been applied to several security departments and has received good reputation.

Keyword: intrusion detection, artificial intelligence, data mining, multi-agent  1. Introduction  The detection is an important element of the computer network security. As a hacker's attack methods become wiser and wiser, and more and more computer safety commissions are done by in-house employees, people's requirement upon computer safety gets more and more intense when they enjoy lots of convenience brought by computers.

The intrusion detection is essentially a data analysis process on network-based data or host- computer-based data; it can real-timely detect intrusion actions based on network or host computers. The network Intrusion detection system is a reasonable supplement on firewall, it can real-timely monitor data stream in network. The research on an intrusion detection system is an important matter in the computer security field, and it has great theoretical significance and practical importance.

Extensive researches have been done in this field [1-5] [12-13], and they have been mainly designed for  network audit data. The paper[ 14] is designed for Linux operation system. Papers [6-1 1] give some agent-based intrusion detection system models. These models are short of certification of modules, agents in the model are short of efficient management and sufficient intelligence, the communication among the agents is too fixed and cannot be extended All these problems limit the realization of Agents in the IDS. So the purpose of the model that we proposed is to make the system more extensible, more intelligent and more easily managed.

In this paper, we present a self-adapting intelligent intrusion detection system model, then we introduce data mining techniques and multi-agent techniques into the system, and the experiments prove that the system has very high intelligence, self-adapting ability and extensibility.

2. Data mining techniques in a intrusion detection system  Intrusion detection is essentially to extract, integrate, and analyze security audit data, then to discover abnormal data or behaviors, at last to respond to these audit data [15]. An universal intrusion detection system process is shown as follows.(Figure 1)  Figurel An universal intrusion detection system process  2.1 Data mining techniques in intrusion detection  With the computer network develops continuously, various data and attack modes of network emerge in endlessly, increasing with great speed. So it is hard to analyze a mass of audit data with common methods, So     2006 1 st International Symposium on Pervasive Computing and Applications  it has a very strong adaptability for data mining techniques applied to intrusion detection.

Data mining techniques being applied to intrusion detection has some advantages as follows.

1.Data mining techniques can analyze and process mass intrusion detection data resource, especially adapt network-based intrusion detection system [16].

2.1t has high practicability. We can get a very visual conclusion through the data mining's analysis on the intrusion detection data, such as IF-THEN, and store them with rules repository.

3.1t has a low fail-to-report rate. When a new attack manner appears, which never appeared before, and could not be responded with a traditional method; but through data mining techniques, we can soon discover the attack. So it reduces probability of fail-to- report to a high degree.

4.Data mining techniques has high intelligence.

Many techniques and methods of data mining, such as artificial neural network, Bayesian network and association rules, can auto adjust their limits, self- adapting learning data resource, after several learning, they can converge the problem, then get their results.

2.2 Multi-Agent systems  A Multi-Agent system is created on the basis of an agent, which is an abstract and kernel concept. A Multi- Agent system is a very important aspect in the computer science field currently. Some people consider that a single agent is like an individual member, while a multi-agent system simulates the whole human society.

A Multi-Agent system is a system whose agents are loosely coupled, but cooperate together, and it has good flexibility and capability. It embodies the development direction of the soft intelligence techniques in the distributed environment. Besides, it has the character of interaction, sociality, cooperatively, adaptability and distributing, etc. it has the character of data distributing and scattering, its computational process is asynchronous, concurrent and parallel, and each agent has incomplete problem solving capability [17].

Knowledge Query and Manipulation Language (KQML) is a kind of communication language for agents. At the same time it is a descriptive protocol for the information and knowledge exchanging. The following example is a typical message. KIF (Knowledge Interchange Format) is a kind of language which expresses knowledge on content of messages, and it expresses knowledge based on one grade predication logic.

{ ask-one :sender DetectAgent :content Normal(AuditData) :receiver LearningAgent :reply-with AuditContent  language KIF :ontology Monitor-mode }  3. The Architecture  3.1 Framework of MAIIDS model  Considering the weakness of that concentrative intrusion detection data processing becomes a bottleneck of network security, and an agent is very effective and autonomous, we build an intrusion detection system with distributed detection methods, Agents with detection functions are distributed to every corner of network. As a result, it can monitor real-time data preferably, and self-determiningly make decision and response. Moreover, invalidation of some local function unlikely affects whole system. It can not only protect outer invading, but also protect inner intrusion.

At the same time, we have cognizance of that the agent is a self-determining computing entity, so the action of agent is absolutely determined by agent itself according to its inner state, therefore it has weakness of confusion, and it is short of holistic conception and holistic control management on network. Consequently it is necessary to manage Agents efficiently and plan as a whole, besides, from the role of practicability, network systems currently adopt forms of delaminated structure management, so systems must inosculate with fact, delaminated protect, manage from up to down and feedback information. Figure 2 as follows shows the framework of our MAIIDS model.

Figure2 Framework of MAIIDS model  Now we explain four important components of this model.

1.Agents. It includes detection agent and learning agent, the detection agent runs in a detection host computer with a mode of autonomy. It answers for collecting special network data packages, system audit data and log information of application, integrates abnormal detection and misuse detection, then analyzes and detects at low level, reports their detection result to their domain manager. The learning agent, according to     2006 1 st International Symposium on Pervasive Computing and Applications  the knowledge repository and log repository in the domain, learns data in these repositories with some appropriate data mining algorithm, then updates knowledge repository.

2.Domain manager. It monitors and controls the state of its detection agents and learning agents, offers content query and locator function for cooperation in detection agents and learning agents, and it extract report information from agents at a low level, and at last it submits its result to administrator center. Some domain managers wholly take charge of the network data detection; others answer for the host data detection.

A domain manager could also be designed as an agent.

3.Administrator center. It is the mutual interface between the system and the administrator, it has friendly interface and convenient manipulation. It takes charge of monitoring and controlling process of the domain manager, and gathers reports of domain managers. The administrator center has a power of collecting data in whole network system range. At the same time ,it produces reports after more extracts on results of collecting, then our administrator can clearly understand the result of the system running and detection, and carry through man-made adjusting and control. Besides, the administrator center answers for application and deletion of domain, for example, if we want to add a host intrusion detection, we can apply a domain about a host intrusion detection at the administrator center.

4.Knowledge repository. It storages rules and domain security strategy in a domain .Log repository, storages data ,system logs and application logs of collecting and analysis of detection agent, it is a low level database.

3.2 Self-study process of MAIIDS  An important role of MAIIDS model is that the learning mechanism is introduced into the IDS. So when the system runs, learning agents can adopt appropriate data mining algorithms to constantly adjust and extend knowledge repository. This mechanism make the IDS automatically adjust and dynamically adapt practical network environment, enhance the function of the detection. How it runs was shown in figure 3.

Learning Agents carries through studying sufficiently with every fit data mining algorithms. For example, we introduce association rules learning techniques and decision tree techniques into learning agents. And according to the result of learning, the system will adjust or create a model of knowledge repository, at the same time it will send message to domain manager to notify the knowledge repository has been updated. After the manager received updating messages, the domain broadcast the event of updating to all detection agents in the domain. After that, the domain manager and the related detection agents extract  new rules and models from domain knowledge repository. In the precondition of not stop running and not interrupting detection, they dynamically update their own detection engine and knowledge repository.

At the necessary time, the domain manager even reports new detection rules and models to other manager by cooperation relation, so that other domains reduce repeated learning and rapidly update knowledge repository.

Figure3 How learning agent runs  In the model of MAIIDS, our learning agents adopt data mining techniques to study, and sufficiently exert predominance of variant data mining techniques.

Learning agents models with data mining techniques is shown as follows.(Figure 4)  Atl4ficial Neutral Network Agentl  _ updating  kiowledge repository  Association Rules Agent2  updating1earng  knowledge repository  Figure4 Learning agents with data mining techniques  3.3 Cooperation of learning agents  In the model MAIIDS, we use several learning agents with data mining techniques. We now explain the validity of the learning agents applying to audit data.

Leaning agents work as a filter in a chemical experiment. In order to filter the bad impurity of some liquor, we utilize filter paper, but we need other filter method at the same time. For example, we first use filter paper, then we add a reagent into the liquor, at last we use pyrogenetic reaction or distillation to filter the bad impurity.

One learning agent may incur high error rate, so we use several learning agents. Learning agents cooperate and communicate each other when they work.

2006 1 st International Symposium on Pervasive Computing and Applications  For instance, they communicate as follow. Figure5 shows this process.

(subscribe sender Learning agentl receiver Domain manager content "Normal data with Potential  errors/The rules" ontology Learning-Mode  ) (propose  sender manager receiver Learning agent 2 content "Get the data/Get the rules" in-reply-to Learning-Mode  )  Figure5 Communication of Learming agent with Domain Manager Agent  4. Experiment data analysis  We have done a lot of experiments on data analysis. These experiments are done in SQL Server 2000. We download KDD CUP 99 data from the website about KDD data (http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/). This is the data set used for The Third International Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining Tools Competition, which was held in conjunction with Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. The competition task was to build a network intrusion detector, a predictive model capable of distinguishing between "bad" connections, called intrusions or attacks, and "good" normal connections. This database contains a standard set of data to be audited, which includes a wide variety of intrusions simulated in a military network environment. The data set has 494,021 items; it is shown in table 1.

tablet KDD CUP 99 Data  Protocol type Tcp Tcp Tcp Tcp Tcp Tcp  service flag  http http http Private Private Private  SF RSTR SF REJ REJ SO  ... Intrusion type  ... Normal.

... Back.

... Back.

... Neptune.

... Satan.

... Neptune.

This data set has 41 attributes, which include 34 numerical variables and 7 flag variables. The last attribute represent corresponding intrusion type, for instance, 'Normal' shows that this datum is a normal network action, 'Back.' shows that it is a back door datum or bad datum.

After learning these data with hash-pruning based association rules algorithm[18], which is an improving algorithm on traditional Apriori algorithm, we can get frequent four item sets, {service= http protocol_type= ' tcp ' , flag= ' SF Intrusion-type= ' normal. ' },the minimum support degree is 0. .At this time ,if we set a minimum confidence degree as 0.80,we can get strong association rules { service=' http' A protocol_type=' tcp' =>flag= ' SF ' A Intrusion-type=' normal. ' },its confidence is 0.91 .We reduce the minimum support degree to 0.01,so we can get such association rules as {service= ' http ' A Intrusion type= ' back.

=>src_bytes=54540}, its confidence is equal to 0.96.

We can see from this experiment that hash-pruning algorism is a high efficient association rules algorism.

After learning mass of intrusion detection data by using hash-pruning algorism, we can get efficient association rules, so the system can detect and respond the network data or host data.

However, when we only use the hash pruning algorism, the experiment produces a lot of errors. For example, some normal records are reported as intrusion records.

This data set can also be learned with artificial neural network techniques and decision tree techniques, and produce corresponding rules repository. For example, we learn sample swatch of this data set with ID3 algorithm of decision tree techniques [19], first we do some proper reduction on all attributes, and then we can get a decision tree (see Figure 6).

Ni.

Figure6 A decision tree from the sample data  We can get rules from this decision tree,{ service 'http' = intrusion_type=' Normal.' }, {service 'private' A protocol type =' tcp'=>intrusion type  'Neptune.'} and so on.

The rules get by learning agents can be  transmitted into rules repository, then detection agents and domain manager can detect and respond the audit   ty    2006 1 st International Symposium on Pervasive Computing and Applications  data according these rules. So these agents are very intelligent and efficient.

In our experiment, we not only use the hash- pruning based association rules algorithm, but also use the ID3 algorithm to learn the data.

Figure7 shows that the number of errors in different algorithms when they learn the same sample.

M-Agent represents multi agents in this figure, AR- Agent represents the only association rules agent with hash pruning algorithm and ID3-Agent represents the only decision tree agent with ID3 algorithms.

---M-Agent -W-AR-Agent  ID3-Agent  Quantity of learning sample  Figure7 Recorder errors  We can conclude from our experiment that we can reduce errors by several learning agents. They learn layer upon layer, filtrate layer upon layer. And the experiment indicates that this method is very feasible and efficient.

If we discover that ID3 agent has higher fail-to- rate than association rules agent, we put ID3 agent into a lower layer and association rules agent into a higher layer, which make our system more efficient.

We could adequately reduce errors in learning process through several learning agents, while the process incurs a little more running time. However, the experiment improved this exchange is very efficient and valid. Figure 8 shows the time of running of several agents. It indicated that the running time of the multi agents is approximately equal to or even less than the summation of the running time of the association rules agent and that of the ID3 agent.

Xo 30000  = 20000 y, 15000 ? 10000 E 5000 4.)  0ID3-Agent AR-Agent  *E M-AgentI  NU ?g NUD CS a?N  Quantity of learning sample  Figure8 time of running of learning agents  5. Administrator Center  The administrator center of the MAIIDS is the bridge of the system and administrators, that is, it is the console of administrators. The console is graphical, which enables a security operator to perform several tasks in the context of a given intrusion detection system.

The most important tasks are the learning of learning agents with data mining techniques and the detection of detection agents. The result of learning and detection can be visualized in the statistics and report module. One can deploy a new domain or free an existent domain, whose type is host-based or network- based.

All the parts of the MAIIDS are coded in c#.Net.

The console has a friendly interface, such as the figure 9. After the users login, the agents automatically start and hide themselves. For the host-based domain, they begin to real-timely monitor the users' operators. If some violation appears, they will interdict the users from continuing operating. At the same time the audit data will be uploaded real-timely. The agent part is also coded in c++, which has a high efficient.

Figure9 Administrator Center  6. Conclusion and future work  The MAIIDS model has favorable extensibility. If we want to add a detection agent on host audit data or some network audit data, we need only to apply a domain at the administrator center. Tasks of the detection are assigned to learning agents and detection agents. The intelligence of MAIIDS is embodied when the system could self-adaptingly learn audit data with data mining techniques.

We could conclude some significant conclusions from our experiments. Firstly, multi agents could efficiently reduce errors in learning process. Secondly, when one agent failed to learn audit data, the other   -.5 (Z) C.) C)  4-) C/I C) 4-)  4.

(Z)  C) --Q  rA)    2006 1 st International Symposium on Pervasive Computing and Applications  agents could work norrmally. Besides, if one agent (e.g.

ID3 agent) has higher fail-to-rate than other agents, we deploy it in a lower layer, which bring us more efficient learning results.

The computer security is always the focus of people's attentions, so it is very valuable for an enterprise or corporation to design an intrusion detection system which can not only keep outer intrusion but also prevent inner from intrusion.

MAIIDS embodies intelligence, extensibility, and distributed character of intrusion detection.

In the future, we plan to extend this work along the following dimensions:  1.We did not consider the balance between the system efficiency and the system cost. High efficiency always need high system cost .We will do more work on reducing the system cost.

2.We believe distributed IDS with data mining techniques is an importance area in information systems.

We will continue to research distributed intrusion detection system, and combine it with data mining techniques, including association rules and artificial intelligence, in order to make it more intelligent.

Acknowledgements  The authors thank the anonymous referees for their valuable and constructive comments.

Reference [1] Guy Helmer, Johnny S.K. Wong, Vasant Honavar, Les Miller and Yanxin Wang. "Lightweight agents for intrusion detection". The Journal of Systems and Software 67 (2003) page 109-122 [2] Moon Sun Shin, Eun Hee Kim and Keun Ho Ryu.

"False Alarm Classification Model for Network-Based Intrusion Detection System". IDEAL 2004, LNCS 3177, page. 259-265, 2004. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004.

[3] Tadeusz Pietraszek. "Using Adaptive Alert Classification to Reduce False Positives in Intrusion Detection ". RAID 2004, LNCS 3224, page. 102-124, 2004. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004 [4] Ricardo S. Puttini, Jean-Marc Percher , Ludovic Me.

"A Modular Architecture for Distributed IDS in MANET ".

ICCSA 2003, LNCS 2669, page. 91-113, 2003. Springer- Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003.

[5] Oleg Kachirski, Ratan Guha. "Effective Intrusion Detection Using Multiple Sensors in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks ". Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS'03) 0-7695-1874- 5/03 [6] Yanxin Wang and Smruti Ranjan Behera "Towards the automatic generation of mobile agents for distributed intrusion detection system ". Journal of Systems and Software, Volume 79, Issue 1, January 2006, page 1-14.

[7] Vaibhav Gowadia, Csilla Farkas and Marco Valtorta "PAID: A Probabilistic Agent-Based Intrusion Detection system ". Computers & Security, Volume 24, Issue 7,  [8] D. Dasgupta and F. Gonzalez "CIDS: An agent-based intrusion detection system ". Computers & Security, Volume 24, Issue 5, August 2005, page 387-398 [9] Jinqiao Yu and Y.V. Ramana Reddy "TRINETR: An architecture for collaborative intrusion detection and knowledge-based alert evaluation " Advanced Engineering Informatics, Volume 19, Issue 2, April 2005, page 93-101 [10] Serge Fenet and Salima Hassas "A distributed Intrusion Detection and Response System based on mobile autonomous agents using social insects communication paradigm " Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, Volume 63, May 2002, Pages 1-18 [11] M. Zaki and Tarek S. Sobh "A cooperative agent- based model for active security systems " Journal of Network and Computer Applications, Volume 27, Issue 4, November 2004, Pages 201-220 [12] Hee Suk Seo "Network security agent DEVS simulation modeling" Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, In Press, Corrected Proof, Available online 6 October 2005.

[13] Johnny S. K. Wong and Armin R. Mikler "Intelligent mobile agents in large distributed autonomous cooperative systems" Journal of Systems and Software, Volume 47, Issues 2-3, 1 July 1999, Pages 75-87 [14] S. Jha and M. Hassan "Building agentsfor rule-based intrusion detection system " Computer Communications, Volume 25, Issue 15, 15 September 2002, Pages 1366- [15] Donghai Han,Chao Wang and Qun Lee. "Intrusion detection system instance analysis". Tsinghua university press ,Peking,2002.

[16]Jiawei Han and Micheline Kamber "Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques ".China Machine Press,2001.

[17] M.J.Woolgridge "Agent-based software engineering." IEEE Trans on Software Engineering, 1999.144(1) [18]Xiaodong Zhu and Cheng Zheng. Research on hash pruning algorithm of association rules. Journal of Anhui University(Natural Sciences), 2005,29(4), 20-23.

[19]Tom M.Mitchell. "Machine Learning" 300 340,McGraw Hill, 1997.

