

Abstract?Frequent Set Mining (FSM), an important phase of  Association Rule Mining, is the process of generating frequent sets that satisfy a specified minimum support threshold. This paper explores FSM in temporal data domain or FTP mining and proposes an efficient algorithm for the same. Existing algorithms for FTP mining are based on Apriori?s level wise principle. In conventional or transactional data domain, Apriori has been proven to suffer from the repeated scans limitation and has been succeeded by several algorithms that overcome the setback. The proposed algorithm eliminates Apriori?s repeated scans limitation in temporal domain, requiring only two overall scans of the original input. Experimental results demonstrate the significant improvements in execution time of the proposed algorithm as opposed to the Apriori based one.

Index Terms?Apriori principle, Association mining, Frequent set mining, High level knowledge, Knowledge engineering, Multimedia data mining, Sequences, Temporal support, Tree data structures.



I.  INTRODUCTION ata Mining is the non-trivial process of extraction of previously unknown and potentially useful information  from huge databases [12]. The advent and growth of internet has resulted in an enormous increase in the amount of multimedia data such as images, video, text etc. available these days.  There is an imminent need to discover useful information from them. The process of discovering high level knowledge and information from multimedia data is referred to as Multimedia Data Mining (MDM) [1], [2], [3]. It differs from conventional data mining in the presence of data specific properties such as temporal for audio/video data and spatial for static images. Conventional data mining algorithms do not incorporate data specific properties in the mining process and mined knowledge and hence are not suited for multimedia data. MDM primarily concentrates on adapting existing or evolving new algorithms to mine information from multimedia data.

Association Rule Mining (ARM), Data Classification and Clustering, a few of the existing data mining techniques find   This work was supported in part by the All India Council for Technical  Education, AICTE, under Grant 1-10/NDF(PG)/NIT(TRICHY)/2003-2004.

N.P. Gopalan is with the Department of Computer Applications, National  Institute of Technology Tiruchirapalli, Tamil Nadu INDIA 620 015. (e-mail: gopalan@nitt.edu).

B. SivaSelvan is with the Department of Computer Science & Engineering, National Institute of Technology Tiruchirappali, Tamil Nadu INDIA 620 015. (e-mail: siva.selvan@gmail.com).

immediate application in the domain of multimedia data.

Classification and Clustering are used for class determination or grouping of video/image inputs [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. ARM could be employed to establish relationships among the constituents of the multimedia input [1], [4], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. Reference [2] discusses various knowledge types that can be mined from video data. The generated associations can be employed to perform video classification and hence determine the nature of the movie; such as being romantic, tragedy, comedy, etc. Amongst the above mentioned techniques, Video Association Mining (VAM) is a relatively new and emerging research trend.

FTP mining, a key step of VAM is the research focus of this paper. The proposed algorithm eliminates the repeated scans limitation of Apriori based FTP mining algorithm [6], [7], [10] and requires only two overall original input scans. Frequent and Infrequent single patterns are identified by the first scan.

Various possible patterns? temporal count is generated by the second scan, which updates the m-ary tree constructed at the end of first scan.  A simple tree traversal subject to the minimum support threshold generates the complete frequent temporal patterns.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses association rules and frequent set mining in transactional domain. FSM in temporal domain, our research objective is discussed in Section 3. Section 4 presents the proposed m-ary tree based algorithm and establishes the significant reduction in number of repeated scans. Performance analysis of the proposed algorithm in comparison to Apriori is carried out in Section 5. Section 6 summarizes our research work and concludes with future research directions.



II.  FREQUENT SET MINING (FSM) ARM is the process of identifying frequently related items  in a transactional database. It is employed in market basket analysis to forecast sales, evolve efficient shelf space and other management strategies [11], [12]. An Association Rule is an expression of the form X?Y, where X & Y are item- sets. An item-set is basically a collection of items. The above rule is interpreted as the presence of items in X implying the presence of items in Y. Support and Confidence are two statistical parameters that govern ARM [12].

Two phases of ARM are (i) Frequent item-set or set mining and (ii) Rules Generation. The latter is a relatively less complex and straightforward phase compared to FSM.

Research over the years has primarily focused on this phase  An m-ary tree based Frequent Temporal Pattern (FTP) mining algorithm  N.P. Gopalan, and B. SivaSelvan  D      resulting in efficient algorithms for FSM. Algorithms differ in their methodology, data structures employed and number of input scans required. Reference [13] provides a detailed survey of algorithms for FSM. Apriori, the first algorithm for FSM is based on a level wise principle and candidate set generation logic [11]. It is based on the anti-monotonic property of set theory, which states that ?Every subset of a frequent set is also frequent?.

Apriori first constructs frequent 1 item-sets or L1 subjecting candidate set C1 to the minimum support threshold. Higher level candidate sets Ci are constructed from previous level frequent sets Li-1. Frequent sets at a particular level are generated by subjecting the corresponding level candidate set to the support factor. This process is iterated till no further new candidate sets can be generated. The level wise principle results in repeated input scans overhead and hence is a time consuming strategy. Algorithms that have evolved for FSM primarily overcome this setback of Apriori.   Frequent Pattern (FP) growth adopts a pattern growth approach to FSM process and requires only two overall original input scans [14]. The first scan identifies frequent 1 item-sets and the second scan grows a FP tree whose nodes represent items and arcs denote reordered transactions. FP and other algorithms for FSM are not suited to FTP mining as they result in loss of temporal property because of transaction reordering or requirement of several repeated input scans [13]. Algorithms that do not incorporate temporal properties violate the basic requirement of MDM. FTP mining discussed in next section is the process of generating frequent patterns subject to temporal property and finds application in VAM to identify frequently occurring events in video data. It is also employed for summarization, classification and prediction [6], [7], [10].



III.  FTP MINING OR FSM IN TEMPORAL DOMAIN The process of mining frequent patterns in temporal  domain, FTP mining is a crucial phase of VAM, which is the process of discovering associations in a given video. In the context of video data, one can establish associations between the various objects in a frame that are representative of a scene. Associations can also be established at higher levels of abstraction such as relationships between director, movie type, movie plot, etc. A real time application of the generated associations would be to predict futuristic events based on the occurrence of a certain sequence of events frequently.

