

Abstract - The paper proposes a new fuzzy object-oriented which words can have ambiguous meanings [13, 16, 22]. This web mining algorithm to derive fuzzy knowledge from object can be thought of as an extension of traditional crisp sets. As data log on web servers. Each web page itself is thought of as a to the object concept, an object represents an instance with class, and each web page browsed by a client is thought of as an several related attribute values and methods integrated instance. Instances with the same class (web page) may have different quantitative attribute values since they may appear in together. They have widely applied in the fields such as different clients. The proposed fuzzy mining algorithm can be databases, software engineering, knowledge representation [8, divided into two main phases. The first phase is called the fuzzy 9], geographic information systems, and even computer intra-page mining phase, in which the linguistic large itemsets architecture [17, 21].

associated with the same classes (pages) but with different In the past, web mining is usually performed for inducing attributes are derived. The second phase is called the fuzzy inter- association rules and sequential patterns from log data. In this page mining phase, in which the large sequences are derived and paper, we will try to generalize it and propose an object- used to represent the relationship among different web pages. oriented fuzzy mining algorithm to derive linguistic Experimental results also show the effects of the parameters used knowledge from quantitative object log data on web servers.

in the algorithm. The browsed pages recorded in a log are used to analyze

I. INTRODUCTION users' browsing behavior. Since each web page has several quantitative attributes, the object-oriented concepts are used  Due to the vast amounts of data in websites, data mining here to process them and to form both intra-page association has recently been used for World-Wide-Web applications to rules and inter-page browsing patterns. The proposed help provide better web services to users. Web mining can be algorithm is divided into two main phases, one for linguistic divided into three classes: web-structure mining, web-content intra-page association rules, and the other for linguistic inter- mining and web-usage mining [12]. Web-structure mining page browsing patterns. Two apriori-like [4] procedures are analyzes web structures from hyperlinks in web pages, web- adopted to find the two kinds of knowledge. Experiments are content mining focuses on information discovery from sources also made to show the effect of the proposed algorithm.

across the World Wide Web, and web-usage mining emphasizes on automatic discovery of user access patterns I. REVIEW OF RELATED MINING APPROACHES from web servers.

In the past, several web-mining approaches for finding In the past, Agrawal and his co-workers proposed several sequential patterns and user-interested information from the mining algorithms based on the concept of large itemsets to World Wide Web were proposed [6-7, 10-11]. Chen and find association rules in transaction data [1-4, 14, 18-20].

Sycara proposed the WebMate system to keep track of user They divided the mining process into two phases. In the first interests from the contents of the web pages browsed. It could phase, candidate itemsets were generated and counted by help users easily search data from WWW [7]. Chen et. al. scanning the transaction data. If the ratio of an itemset mined path-traversal patterns by first finding the maximal appearing in the transactions was larger than a pre-defined forward references form log data and then obtaining the large threshold value (called minimum support), the itemset was reference sequences according to the occurring numbers of the considered a large itemset. Itemsets containing only one item maximal forward references [6]. Cohen et. al. sampled only were first processed. Large itemsets containing only single portions of the server logs to extract user access patterns, items were then combined to form candidate itemsets which were then grouped as volumes [10]. Files in a volume containing two items. This process was repeated until all large could then be fetched together to increase the efficiency of a itemsets had been found. In the second phase, association rules web server. Many researches about this topic are still in were induced from the large itemsets found in the first phase.

progress. All possible association combinations for each large itemset  Recently, the fuzzy and the object concepts have been were forned, and those with calculated confidence values very popular and used in different applications, especially for larger than a predefined threshold (called minimum complex data description. Fuzzy set theory was first proposed cofdec)weeotptasascito rls by Zadeh and Goguen in 1965 [24]. It iS primarily concerned ArwladSiatpooe h pirAlmnn wit quniyn an resnn usn naua language i approach to mine sequential patterns from a set of transactions      [3]. Five phases were included in this approach. In the first derive linguistic knowledge on that site. Only the log data phase, the transactions were sorted first by customer ID as the with .asp, .htm, html, jva and .cgi are considered home pages major key and then by transaction time as the minor key. This and used to analyze the mining behavior. The other files such phase thus converted the original transactions into customer as jpg and .gif are thought of as inclusion in home pages and sequences. In the second phase, the set of all large itemsets are omitted. The number of files to be analyzed can thus be were found from the customer sequences by comparing their reduced.

counts with a predefined support threshold. This phase was Many fields exist in a log schema. Among them, the fields similar to the process of mining association rules. Note that date, time, client-ip and file name are used in the mining when an itemset occurred more than one time in a customer process. Besides, the attributes to be handled can be obtained sequence, it was counted only once for this customer from the log file or other files. For example, the attributes may sequence. In the third phase, each large itemset was mapped to be the quantities of the items to be sold in a web page, the item a contiguous integer and the original customer sequences were prices, the browsing time for a page, paying by credit cards or transformed into the mapped integer sequences. In the fourth not, among others. Their attribute values may be binary or phase, the set of transformed integer sequences were used to numeric. Binary values may be thought of as a special case of find large sequences among them. In the fifth phase, the fuzzy values. In this paper, the attributes in each page (class) maximally large sequences were then derived and output to are assumed to be numeric, fuzzy concepts are used here to users. process them and to form linguistic terms. Since each web  As to fuzzy mining, Hong et al. proposed a fuzzy mining page has several attributes, the fuzzy object-oriented concepts algorithm to mine fuzzy rules from quantitative data [15]. are used here to process them and to form both fuzzy intra- They transformed each quantitative item into a fuzzy set and page association rules and inter-page browsing patterns.

used fuzzy operations to find fuzzy rules. Cai et al. proposed The proposed fuzzy object-oriented web mining algorithm weighted mining to reflect different importance to different can be divided into two main phases. The first phase is called items [5]. Each item was attached a numerical weight given by the fuzzy intra-page mining phase, in which the linguistic users. Weighted supports and weighted confidences were then large itemsets associated with the same classes (pages) but defined to determine interesting association rules. Yue et al. with different attributes are divided. The phase can find out then extended their concepts to fuzzy item vectors [23]. Many the linguistic association relation within the same pages. Each related researches are still in progress. large itemset found in this phase can then be thought of as a  composite item used in phase 2. The second phase is called the fuzzy inter-page mining phase, in which the large itemsets from the composite items are obtained to get linguistic  A primitive object-oriented data is called an object or an browsing relations among different web pages. Both the instance, each inheriting its characteristics from a super object, linguistic intra-page association rules and linguistic inter-page called class. A class defines the basic structure of objects with browsing patterns can thus be easily derived by the proposed common properties, including attributes, default values, and algorithm at the same time. The details of the proposed methods. The roles of classes and instances in an object- algorithm are described below.

oriented data set are like those that schema and tuples play in a relational database [21]. Thefuzzy object-oriented web mining algorithm.

A simple structure of a class is shown in Fig. 1, which INPUT: A set of w pages (classes) with m attributes, a set of includes at least three major components: the class name, the log data, each with some browsed pages and their attributes and the methods. The class name is an identifier attribute values, a set of membership functions, a used to identify a class, the attributes are used to represent the predefined minimum support value a , and a characteristics of a class, and the methods are used to predefined confidence value A.

implement the operations and functions of a class. OUTPUT: A set of fuzzy intra-page association rules and  class nlame inter-page browsing patterns.

attribute I STEP 1: Select the transactions with file names attribute 2 including .asp, .htm, html, jva .cgi and closing  connection from the log data. Denote the resulting a ttribIu te n log data as D.

method I STEP 2: Form an object-oriented browsing sequence Dj for  inmessage method2 response each client cj by sequentially listing his/her n.

browsed pages with their attribute values, until a  m ethodm ~~~~~~~closing connection symbol iS met.Fig. 1 Structure of a typical class.



IV. THE FUZZYOBJECT-ORIENTED WEB MINING ALGORITHM STEP 3: Transform the quantitative value v(l) of each item  In this section, an algorithm is proposed for discovering attribute Is.Ak in the i -th client's browsing sequence both linguistic intra-page association rules and linguistic inter- (i) page browsing patterns from quantitative objected-oriented D intoa fuzzy set fjk represented as: web log data. Quantitative log data in a web site are used to     tjk +tjk2+ + jk count, = yK ~+ + + fi)ciit.~ jj R jkl R jk2 R jkp )=1  using the given membership functions, where i = 1 where n is the number ofbrowsing sequences.

to n, Ij is the ] -th web page (class), <. < w, Ak iS the (d) Calculate the support of s as: k -th attribute, 1< k < m Riki is the 1 -th fuzzy region supports= countsI n, of attribute ) is ' fuzzy membership (e) If support S larger than or equal to theJAk, Jjkl jk predefined minimum support value , put s in value in region Rjkl/, and p is the number of fuzzy Lr+i.

regions for I.A STEP 12: If L,l is null, then do the next step; otherwise, set rkeg10S fo r = r + 1 and repeat STEPs 10 and 11.

STEP 4: Set the membership value Jk1 of each fuizzy region STEP 13: Each large itemset found so far is then thought of as R in a browsing sequence D as the maximum of a composite item and is put in the fuzzy inter-page  large 1-sequence (L1).

all jk) values ifmore than one RJk/ appear in D. STEP 14: Set z = 1, where z is used to represent the number of  STEP 5: Calculate the scalar cardinality of each fuzzy attribute composite items in the inter-page browsing region Rjkl in all the browsing sequences as its sequences currently being processed.

count. That is: STEP 15: Generate the candidate set CZ+1 from Lz in a way  n  count jkl = fj) similar to that in the aprioriall algorithm [4].

1=1 Restated, the algorithm first joins L' and L'  STEP 6: Calculate the support of each attribute region Rjkl as: Z z s upp o rtjkl=countjkl/ n* under the condition that z - I items in the twospot=count. I n,  where n is the number ofbrowsing sequences. sequences are the same and with the same orders.

STEP 7: Check whether the supportjkl of each fuzzy region Different permutations represent different  Rjkl is larger than or equal to the predefined candidates. The algorithm then keeps in Cz+i the minimum support value a. If supportjkl satisfies sequences which have all their sub-sequences of the condition, put Rjkl in the set of large 1-itemsets length z existing in C04.

(L1). That is, STEP 16: Do the following substeps for each newly formed  I = {R,klsupporfkl 2a, 1<l<p, 1<k<m,j1.<w} fuzzy (z+1)-sequences s with composite items (sl,  STEP 8: If L1 is null, then exit the algorithm; otherwise, do the s2 s , SZ+1) in C' I: next step. (a) Calculate the fuzzy value of s in each client's  STEP 9: Set r = 1, where r is the number of items in the browsing sequence data D as: itemsets currently being processed. f (i) = i  STEP 10: Generate the candidate set C,+ by joining Lr in a w s1t 2 r v+lr+ r ,, ~~~~where fs(i) iS the membership value ofway similar to that in the apriori algorithm [4] J except that the two (r - I)-itemsets to be joined must composite item sj in Di. If the minimum operator have the same classes (pages). is used for the intersection, then:  STEP 1: Do the following substeps for each newly formed (r () = +I (i) +l)-itemset s with items (sI, s2 ... sr+I) in Cr+i: j=1  (a) Calculate the fuzzy value of s in each client's (b) Set the membership value fs(o)Of s in each browsing sequence Di as: browsing sequence D as the maximum of all  fi) = fj1 )Afs(2A ... Afsj fs(i) values if more than one combination of s where s(i) is the membership value of the appear in Di.

fz r * i (c) Calculate the scalar cardinality of s in thefuzzy region sj in D, and all the fuzzy regions incsoemeune siscut s must appear in the same transaction. If the n minimum operator is used for the intersection, counts = f(i) then: i=  (i) M+ (i) where n is the number ofbrowsing sequences.

j=1 (d) Calculate the support of s as:  (b) Set the membership value fi) of s in each supports= countsI n,s (e) If supports is larger than or equal to thebrowsing sequence Di as the maximum of all predefined minimum support value , put s in jG()value s if more than one s appear in Di. L+  (c) Calculate the scalar cardinality of s in all the STEP 17: If L+1 is null, do the next step; otherwise, set z = z browsing sequences as its count. That iS: ?1 andrepeat STEPs 15 and 16.

STEP 18: Derive the fuzzy intra-page association rules for any     large q -itemset s with items (s1, s, ..., sq) q 2, from the large itemsets L2 to L, using the following TABLE 1 substeps: THE OBJECT-ORIENTED BROWSING SEQUENCES FORMED  (a) Form all possible association rules as follows: Client Browsed Browsed web pages with their attributes.a) For all posAsibl asocato rulesas=follows ID web pagessIA Ast l A t+1 A A q St = ito q. 1 1111 (12.A1:2,I2.A2:11,I2.A3:7), (I5.A2:5,I5.A3:16), (b) Calculate the confidence values of all 2, 5, 4, 3 (I4.AI:13, I4.A3:6), (I3.A1:10,I3.A3:14)1b)Calculatetheconfidence values of all (I4.A1:16, I4.A3:5), (I2.A1:1, I2.A2:10,I2.A3:6),association rules by: 2 4, 12, 4, 3 (I4.A1:O, I4.A3:5), (I3.A:1,1I3.A3:12)  E R (i 3 I1, I4 (I.A1:7, I1.A2: 10, 1.A3:1,1.A4:3), (I4.A1: 10, I4.A3:7)confs = i=1 ,=1Z (fQ)A A fjl'2A fjSI)A AfS;)) I4 12,13,14, 12,3 I.A4: .5),(I43.41:3,33.A3 J5,  (c) Output the rules with confidence values larger (I2.A1:2, I2.A2:15, I2.A3:5), (I3.A1:13, I3.A3:15, I3.A4:5) than or equal to the predefined confidence 5 14, 12, 13 1(4.A3:7), (I2 1 1, I2A2 10), (I3.X1 1, I3.A3: I0, threshold A 6 I4, 13, 15, I2 (I4.A1:12), (I3.A3:15, I3.A4:6), (I5.A2:8, I5.A3:4),  STEP 19: Derive the maximally large inter-page sequences 4, 3, 5,I2 (I2.A1:2,I2.A2:19,I2.A3:7) from the large sequences L2 to Lz as the browsing2a Zems Membership value Low Middle Highpatterns.

After STEP 19, the two kinds of fuzzy intra-page 1 association rules and inter-page browsing patterns are found from the given set of quantitative object-oriented web transactions.



V. AN EXAMPLE 0 1 6 11 Quantity  In this section, an example is given to illustrate the Fig. 2 The membership functions used in the example.

proposed fuzzy object-oriented web mining algorithm. This is a simple example to show how the proposed algorithm can be The scalar cardinality of each fuzzy attribute region in all used to generate fuzzy intra-page association rules and inter- the browsing sequences iscalculated as count value. The page patterns for clients' browsing behavior according to the support of each fuzzy region iS caculated as its count divided log data in a web server. Assume each web page has four the support of each fuzzy region iS then checked against quantitative attributes, represented as Al to A4, which keep the predefined minimum support value a. Assume in this each client's related information to a web page. For example, example, a is set at 402. The large fuzzy regions are shown the attributes may be the quantities of the items to be sold in a i Table 2 TABLE 2 web page, the item prices, the browsing time for a page, THE SET OF LARGE 1-ITEMSETS L, FOR THIS EXAMPLE paying by credit cards or not, among others. Their attribute Itemset Support values may be binary or numeric. Binary values may be (Ih.A7Low) 0.73 thought of as a special case of fuzzy values. Also assume the (Ih.A2.High) 0.77 browsing sequences after STEP 2 are shown in Table 1, where (I,.AHMidd1e) 0.587 lj.Ak:vjk represents that the page Ij is with the selected attribute (I .A4Middle) 0.43 Ak and Ak s quantative value is Vjk. (I4.A 7High) 0.8  Assume the fuzzy membership functions for the (I4.A3.Middle) 0.57 quantitative attribute values are shown in Fig. 2. In the example, all the four attributes are assumed to be with the In this example, the five 2-itemsets found are shown in same membership functions for simplicity. Note that attributes Table 3 with different membership functions can also be managed in a THE LARGE ITEMSETS AND THEIR SUPPORTS IN L similar way. The quantitative values of the item attributes in Itemset Support each customer sequence are transformed into fuzzy sets. Take (Ik.A7Low, I,.A2.High) 0.67 the item attribute I2.A1 in the first customer sequence as an (I.A7Low, kI.A,.Middle) 0.57 example. The value of the attribute Al in Item '2 is 2, and is (Ih.A .High, I2.ASMidd1e) 0.53 converted into a fuzzy set (0.8/Low + 0.2/Middle + 0.0/High) (I .A ,High, I.A4Middle) 0.43 according to the given membership functions. This step is repeated for the other transactions and item attributes. In this example, only the 3-itemset (Ih.A,.Low, I,.A2.High,  12.A3.Middle) is large. No 4-itemsets are formed and L4 is null.

STEP 13 then begins. Each large sequence found so far is thought of as a fuzzy intra-page composite item and is put in the fuzzy inter-page large 1-sequence ( L1 ). Cl is first     generated from L1 . There are totally 169 candidates generated The section reports on experiments made to show the in c, .Their supports are then calculated and checked against effects of the parameters on the proposed algorithm for the predefined minimum support value 0.4. In this example, linguistic intra-page association rules and linguistic inter-page' browsing patterns. They were implemented in JAVA on athe twenty-four 2-sequences shown in Table 4 are large and bent 2.6G hzypers cmpu ter it GB ory.

kept in L' ~~~~~~~~~Pentium-IV 2.6GHz personal computer with I GB memory.kept in 112 There were 100 object-oriented web pages, and each web page TABLE 4 had four quantitative attributes. Data sets with different  THE INTER-PAGE LARGE SEQUENCES INL2 numbers of customers were run by the proposed algorithm. In Sequences Support each data set, the numbers of browsed web pages in customer  [(I.A,.Low), (I~.A.High)] 0.57 [Ih.A Low), (I4.A7.High)] 0.43 sequences were first randomly generated. The web pages and [(I2.A7 High), (I,.A,.High)] 0.6 their attribute values were then generated.

[(I.A,.High), (I,.A,.High)] 0.47 Experiments were first performed to find the relationships  [(I2.A,.Middle), (I,.A,.High)] 0.43 between numbers of rules or patterns and minimum supports [(I2.A,.Middle), (I,.A .High)] 0.43 when the minimum customer number was set at 800, the  [(I2.A7Low, I2.A2.High), (I,.A,.High)] 0.53 minimum confidence was 0.3 and the average number of[(I.A7.Low, I.A,.High), (I4.A7.High)] 0.4 [(I2.A Low, Ik.A,.Middle), (I,.A,.High)] 0.43 object-oriented web pages browsed by a customer was 12. The [(I2.A Low, Ik.A,.Middle), (I,.A .High)] 0.43 results for both kinds of intra-page association rules and inter- [(I.A,.High, I2.A,.Middle), (I,.A,.High)] 0.4 page browsing patterns are shown in Fig. 3.

[(I,.A2.High, Ik.A,.Middle), (I4.A .High)] 0.4  [(I2.A .Low, I,.A2.High, Ik.A,.Middle), (I,.A,.High)] 0.4 [(I.A .Low, I.A,.High, I2.A,.Middle), (I4.A .High)] 0.4 -- Lingguistic intra-page rules Lingguistic -inter-page patterns  [(I4YA High), (IS.A, Low)] 0.43 2500 [(I.A High), (I .A,.High)] 0.47  [(I4.A 7High), (I2.A,.Middle)] 0.43 2000 [(I4.A7.High), (I .A7.Low, I .A,.High)] 0.4  [(IJ.A ,High), (I .A,Low, Ik.A,.Middle)] 0.43 5 1500 [(I.A7 High), (I.A,.High, I.A.Middle)] 0.4  [(I,.A .High), (I.A .Low, I.A.High, AMiddle)] 0.4 1000 [(I4.A, High), (I .A,.High)] 0.67 E 500  50[(I,.A,.Midd1e), (I,.A,.High)] 0.43 X  The large 3-sequences are shown in Table 5 and kept in 0035 0.045 0.055 0.065 0.075 0.085 0095 L No candidate 4-sequences are formed in this example. Miniimum support L , is thus null and STEP 18 then begins. Fig. 3 The relationship between numbers of rules or patterns and minimumsupport values.

TABLE 5 It can be observed from Fig. 3 that the number of rules or THEITER-PGELAGESQUENCESIN3 patterns decreased along with the increase of the minimum  Sequences Support support value. It was consistent with the property of data [(I,.A .iLow), (IJ.A,;High), (I,.A.High)] 0.47 mining. Note that the browsing patterns in Fig. 3 do not  [(I2.A,.Middle), (I,.A .High), (I,.A,.High)] 0.43 include LI . The number of linguistic inter-page browsing [(I .A .Low, I .A2.High), (I .A .High), (I .A .High)] 0.41[IA,L,IA,ih,IA,Hg)I.AHg)04 sequences was much larger than that of linguistic intra-page  [(IhA,.Low, IhA3.Middle), (I4.A,.High), (I3.A,.High)] 0.43 association rules when the minimum support was smaller than[(I2.A2.Low, k2A .Middle), (I .A .High), (I .A .High)] 0.43 [(ILA,.Highig1,IA;Middle),(I .A High),(I1.A High)] 0.4 about 0.04. This was because the attribute number existing in  a web page was less than the page number in the experiments.

This situation usually occurs in real applications. LinguisticLinguistic intra-page association rules with confidence yg  values larger than or equal to A.are derived from the large intra-page association rules are internal relations within a web itemsets L2 to Lr, In this example, r = 3. Assume the page and linguistic inter-page browsing sequences are external confidence 2 was set at 0.8 in this example. There are nine relations among web pages.At last, the execution time for linguistic intra-page rulesrulesderiv and outpu ter-aesers. from the large and linguistic inter-page patterns with the minimum support  The maximally large inter-page sequences fromthe larger. value set at 0.05 along with different numbers of customers for sequencesL to L are then found as the browsing patterns, an average number of 10 quantitative object-oriented web In this example, z = 3. There are fifteen large browsing pages in a client's browsing sequence and a minimum sequences are derived. After STEP 19, the two kinds of confidence value set at 0.3 is shown in Fig. 4. It is obvious linguistic knowledge are found from the given set of from Fig. 4 that theexecution time increased along with the quantitative object-oriented web log data. .........increase of customer numbers. Besides, finding linguistic  inter-page browsing patterns spent much more time than finding linguistic intra-page association rules. This wasVI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS because the number of web pages was usually larger than that     proposed algorithm. Engineering, Vol. 10, 1998, pp. 209-221.

[7] M. Young, The Technical Writer's Handbook, Mill Valley, CA: University Science, 1989.

LingLuistic intra-page ruLles Linguistic inter-page patterns [8] C. Clair, C. Liu and N. Pissinou, "Attribute weighting: a method of applying domain knowledge in the decision tree process," The Seventh  2000 - 1998, pp. 259-266.

U 1500 /' [9] P. Clark and T. Niblett, "The CN2 induction algorithm," Machine  Learning, Vol. 3, 1989, pp. 261-283.

E 1000 [10]E. Cohen, B. Krishnamurthy and J. Rexford, "Efficient algorithms for  500 predicting requests to web servers," The Eighteenth IEEE Annual Joint o; _______;_____,_____________________ Conference on Computer and Communications Societies, Vol. 1, 1999,  400 600 goo 1000 pp. 284-293.[11]R. Cooley, B. Mobasher and J. Srivastava, "Grouping web page Numberofcustomers references into transactions for mining world wide web browsing  patterns," Knowledge and Data Engineering Exchange Workshop, 1997, Fig. 4 The relationship between execution times and customer numbers pp. 2-9.

[12]R. Cooley, B. Mobasher and J. Srivastava, "Web mining: information and pattern discovery on the world wide web," The Ninth IEEE International  VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, 1997, pp. 558 -567.

[13]A. Famili, W. M. Shen, R. Weber and E. Simoudis, "Data preprocessing  This paper has proposed a new fuzzy object-oriented web- and intelligent data analysis," Intelligent Data Analysis, Vol. 1, No. 1, mining algorithm, which can process quantitative web-server 1997, pp. 1-28.

logs to discover linguistic intra-page association rules and [14]W. J. Frawley, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro and C. J. Matheus, "Knowledge linguistic inter-page browsing The proposed fuzzy discovery in databases: an overview," The AAAI Workshop on Knowledgemgu1st1c mter-page Drows1ngpatterns. 1e proposeDiscovery in Databases, 1991, pp. 1-27.

algorithm is divided into two main phases. The first phase is [15]T. P. Hong and J. B. Chen, "Processing individual fuzzy attributes for called the fuzzy intra-page mining phase, in which linguistic fuzzy rule induction," Fuzzy Sets and Systems, Vol. 112, No. 1, 2000, pp.

large itemsets associated with the same pages but with 127-140.

[16]A. Kandel, Fuzzy Expert Systems, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1992, pp. 8-different quantitative attributes are derived. The second phase 19.

is called the fuzzy inter-page mining phase, in which the large [17]T. D. Kimura, "Object-oriented dataflow," The Eleventh IEEE itemsets derived from the composite items are used to International Symposium on Visual Languages, 1995, pp. 180- 186.

represent the relationship among different web pages. Both the [18]H. Mannila, "Methods and problems in data mining," The International linguistic intra-page association rules and the linguistic inter- Conference on Database Theory, 1997, pp. 41-55.[19]R. Srikant and R. Agrawal, "Mining quantitative association rules in large proposed algorithm at the same time. An example has also Management ofData, Monreal, Canada, 1996, pp. 1-12.

been given to illustrate the algorithm in detail. Experimental [20]R. Srikant, Q. Vu and R. Agrawal, "Mining association rules with item  proposed algorithm. The numbers of linguistic intra-page August 1997, pp. 67-73.

association rules are often smaller than those of linguistic [21]K. Won, "Object-oriented databases: definition and research directions," usually less than the web page number in real applications. 1990, pp. 327-341.[22]Y. Yuan and M. J. Shaw, "Induction of fuzzy decision trees," Fuzzy Sets Finding linguistic inter-page browsing patterns thus spends and Systems, 69, 1995, pp. 125-139.

more time than finding linguistic intra-page association rules. [23]S. Yue, E. Tsang, D. Yeung and D. Shi, "Mining fuzzy association rules manage other different mining problems. Man and Cybernetics, pp. 1906-1911.[24]L. A. Zadeh, "Fuzzy sets," Information and Control, Vol. 8, No. 3, 1965,  pp. 338-353.

