

Abstract - The paper discusses different aspects of the dynamics of low- and middle-scale systems are collected in development of perception-based decision making systems. These many problem areas. For example, in weather forecasting, systems are based on inference procedures transforming human knowledge contains relationships between changes of associations extracted from the time series data bases into values of a few atmospheric variables such as temperature, generalized-constraint inference rules. Different types of simple wind direction, wind velocity, humidity etc in limited number and composite perception based constraints are discussed. of meteorological stations but the history of monitoring of Various measures of association between time series in the these variables can contain terabytes of information. Thepresence of perception based constraints are considered: . . polm .i association rules, association rules with perception based diagnostcs of problemsarlsingin drilling and exploitation of frequencies, correlation rules, and local trend associations based petroleum wells usually takes into account the information on on moving approximations. Finally, the methods of dozens of measured variables for neighbor wells of an oilfield transformation of these associations into the inference rules that but the amount of information describing the change of these can be used in perception based reasoning are proposed. variables in time and in space is huge [20].

Recently, various methods of time series data mining

I. INTRODUCTION (TSDM) were developed [2, 9, 13, 15, 19]. The goal of data  Computing with Words and Perceptions (CWP) proposes mining is the analysis of large observational data sets to find a new methodology of development for knowledge based unsuspected relationships and to summarize the data in novel decision making systems [21-24]. Generally speaking, human ways that are both understandable and useful to the data owner knowledge is a collection of perceptions formed as a result of [12]. TSDM methods can support human decisions in time observations, measurements, experience, common sense, series domains but the modeling, extraction and processing of authority opinion, religion, rumor etc. Below are some perceptions relevant to decision making problems and for examples of perceptions: Mexicans wear sombreros; Russian mimicking human inference procedures, require developing girls are beautiful; Consumption of alcohol causes both (i) methods of perception based time series data mining alcoholism, When the temperature is high the density is low, (PTSDM) and (ii) problem-specific methods of CWP.

etc. Perceptions about frequency, possibility, true, intensity of Various approaches to modeling perception based patterns properties, strength of relationships between elements of in TSDB domains which can be integrated within the considered systems are important components of human framework of PTSDM were considered in [6]. In order to knowledge and decisions. Most of perception based assertions translate perceptions in CWP model, it is necessary to are plausible and have partial truth but experts can operate precisiate perceptions and to represent them in a unified with them when making decisions. The basis for plausible prototypical form (protoform) [23]. The important components assertions are perception based frequencies and probabilities of such associations are perception based constraints which of events [22]. define fuzzy constraints on time series relevant to a considered  In problems related with analysis of time series data bases problem. The concepts of generalized constraint and (TSDB) in economics, finance, meteorology, Earth sciences generalized-constraint language were introduced recently in etc perceptions are defined on time series domains: It is very [23]. Fuzzy association rules were studied in [10, 11].

unlikely that there will be a significant increase in the price of Fig. 1 shows a possible architecture of perception based oil in the near future [21]; The market continues to show decision making system integrating TSDM, PTSDM, CWP steady improvement; Inventory levels remain at very low and expert knowledge in decision making problems related levels [18]. Such perceptions often describe behavior of with analysis of systems whose attributes change in time and systems changing in time. Usually these systems are low- or in space. In this paper, we discuss new types of associations middle-scaled, i.e. include no more than tens or hundreds useful for decision making which can be defined between elements, but TSDB containing results of measurements of perception based patterns in time series domains. These changing system attributes can contain gigabytes or terabytes associations are further transformed in generalized-constraint of information. Currently, a large-scale TSDB which describe  This work is partially supported by the IMP project D.00322 and N.01516.

inference rules to be used in perception based decision making map fuzzy perceptions on the time domain. Fig. 2 depicts an systems (PDMS). example of the transformation of fuzzy perception high level  of oil production defined on the range of time series values (Fig. 2b) into a fuzzy constraint defined on the time domain  Measurements System Expert Knowledge (Fig. 2c) for the given time series of oil production values (Low- or middle-scale) (Fig. 2a). Such transformation of the fuzzy set from one  TLres ------ Perceptions KB - domain into another is defined by the extension principle of(Large-scale)(verbal) Zadeh. It is an example of constraint propagation defined by perception which plays a role of a simple constraint. Time series together with a fuzzy constraint defined on the time domain by fuzzy perception will be called fuzzy time series or  / | / constrained time series. More complicated situation can arise as a result of aggregation of simple constraints in composite  / |Presiciated p/ ones or in constraint propagation during inference procedure associations [23].

"Interesting and Problem solving, - y a) b)y useful" information - Decisions 12  10 10  Fig. 1. General scheme of perception based decision making in problems 6 5 related with analysis of systems described by time series 4  2 t  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II m we consider different types of simple perception based 20t 1 08 06 04 02 0 constraints that can be defined on different TSDB domains. m c) We discuss how these constraints can be aggregated in 1 composite constraints and how the latter define constrained 0.8 time series. In Section III we discuss different types of 0.6 associations between perception based patterns in TSDB and 04( consider conditional associations in the presence of perception 0.2 based constraints. These associations can be extracted from TSDB or from human perceptions. Association rules, 5 10 15 20 coffelation rules and local trend associations based on moving approximation (MAP) transform giving the possibility to Fig. 2. Example of the transformation of the perception high level of oilproduction: a) a time series of oil production values; b) constraint defined onmeasure associations between time series or time series a range of oil production values; c) fuzzy constraint induced on the time patterns in the presence of crisp or fuzzy constraints are domain.

discussed. The methods of transformation of associations in generalized-constraint inference rules used in perception based Generally, composite constraints can be defined by some inference procedures are proposed in Section IV. We relation R(A,B ....) where A, B, ... are simple constraints. This introduce also a method of generation of association rules relation can be defined by logical connectives, by temporal from human perception based frequencies. In Conclusions we relations or by spatial relations between events satisfying discuss the obtained results and further directions of research. some constraints. Below are three examples:

II. PERCEPTION BASED CONSTRAINTS Days of winter months with high level of oil production in well Human perceptions in problems related with analysis of N and low level ofgas production in well M; (1)  time series can be represented by words whose meaning is Stable level ofwater production in some wellfollowed by a defined on the following domains ofTSDB [6]: rapid increase ofwater production in this well; (2) * absolute or relative position on time scale, periodic or Rapid increase ofwaterproduction in neighbouring wells. (3)  seasonal time intervals etc (in June 2006, nearfuture, end ofthe day, one-two weeks, several days); In (1) verbal connectives with and and can be replaced by  * range oftimneseries values (highprice, very low speecl) logical connective and which will act point-wise onrange of tmseivaushgprmembership values of fuzzy sets induced on the time domain a set of time series shape patters (slowly decreasing); by simple constraints: 1) days of winter months; 2) days with  * a set of time series, attributes or system elements and high level of oil production in well N; 3) days with low level of relations between them (new wells, highly associated); gas production in well M. A fuzzy constraint will be called  * a set of possibility or probability values (very probable). point-wise (pw-) constraint if in each time moment a degree of Most of such perceptions can be represented as fuzzy fulfillment of this constraint can be determined. The time  sets defined on a corresponding domain. Reasoning procedure domain serves here as a universal domain for comparing and of CWP should be able to operate with perceptions defined on aggregation of pw-constraints.

all of these domains. To simplify these procedures one can     Perceptions followed by in (2) and neighbouring in (3) can |A C Bl IA ) BI be precisiated by temporal and spatial relations respectively s= supp(R) = , c = conf(R)= , (5) [14]. Temporal relations can describe partial ordering of D A events and their occurrence within a time interval [9, 19]. where IAnBI is a number of transactions containing items A Such relations can include the temporal relationships of and B together and IDI is a total number of transactions in the Allen's interval logic [3, 13]: before, meets, overlaps, database D. Association rules are usually not causal but contains, starts, equals etc. Spatial relations can describe associative, i.e. B takes place together with A but may not be absolute position, relative position, distance, direction etc. caused by A. Fuzzy association rules are studied in [10, 11].

Perceptions Stable level and Rapid increase in (2) and (3) The extension of association rules and association give examples of window-wise (ww-) perceptions which are measures on TSDB may be done as follows. We suppose that based on the analysis of time series values in some window of all time series considered in a problem have the same number time points. Precisiation of such perceptions can be done by n of time points. Suppose A and B are crisp point-wise approximation of time series values in considered window W constraints (simple or composite) and JA and JB are the by a linear function f = at + b and by the definition of corresponding sets of indexes where these constraints are perceptions Stable and Rapid increase as fuzzy intervals fulfilled. Then according to (5), support and confidence defined on a set of slope values. A fuzzy perception of such measures are defined as follows: type will define a fuzzy set of windows, for example as follows: /Rapid increase (W) = /lRapid increase (a). J JB IJArB  Fig. 3 depicts an example of fuzzy ww-constraint given pp(R) N conf(R)= IJA (6) by perception several days and represented by fuzzy interval where N= n. If A and B define fuzzy sets of indexes Aand JB defined on a domain of the length of time intervals. This then fuzzy cardinality can be used in (6): constraint is not fixed on the absolute time domain and can be N considered as a fuzzy window which can move along time sUpp(R) =- (,U, (i) A,UB (1)) (7) points. For any interval of days, a degree of fulfillment of this N j= constraint can be determined. A calculation of a composite N constraint aggregating pw- and ww-constraints like several E (HIA (i) A ,IB (i)) days with high level of oil production needs to apply fuzzy conf(R) = (8) interval arithmetic. N  i=l where A in (7) and (8) denotes some t-norm, e.g. min.

SEVERAL DAYS  1 / \ Generally in association rules (4) it is supposed that A and 0.8 _ / \ _ B are sets of items (bought together in the market model). In 0.6 / \ -time series domains, A and B can denote some composite 0.4 _ / \ _ constraints composed from time series patterns and conditions.

In this case, association rules can de written as follows:  0. 2 3 4 5 6 7 89 10o If Cond then A > B, (s,c). (9) Fig. 3. ww-constraint given by a fuzzy interval several days

III. ASSOCIATION RULES For example, condition Cond can be given as Cond= Days ofwinter months and association rule can relate time series A. Association rules with support and confidence measures patterns A= High level of oil production in well N and B =  The basic framework of the association rule mining in DB High level of gas production in well M. Condition Cond in is formalized as follows [1, 8]. Let I = til, i2,.., m be a set of conditional association rule (9) serves as a filter applying distinct literals called items and D = T1, T2, . . ., Tn} be a fuzzy constraints on time points where the association database of transactions or baskets of items such that Ti c I. between time series patterns A and B is looked for.

Association rules have the form For windows-wise crisp constraints the support and  confidence measures are defined by (6) where N denotes the R: A > B, (s,c), (4) number of windows considered in the model and JA JB are the  corresponding sets of windows where these constraints are where A (-- I, B a-- land A rfxIB3= 0. E.g., for the market basket fulfilled. For constraints defining a fuzzy set of windows thewhere~~~~~~~~~~ ~ ~ ~8wiltrnsorton B= .Eg,frth aktbsedata, A and B usually denote some groups of items bought (7), (8) will transfo to together, e.g. A= tbeer, vodka] and B= tsalt cucumber, chips}. supp(R) = I) ANB (WkD,supp(R) (I'A (Wi J W For evaluating the significance of the association between A N j= and B, the measures of support s and confidence c are used. N These measures are defined as follows: L(HiA(Wi ) A/JB(Wi))  conf(R) = N=  i=l     For constraints defining a set of fuzzy windows we obtain: In the following section we discuss how association rules  1 N n can be transformed into generalized-constraint inference rules.

supp(R)= ENn E>(uAi(j)A uBi(J)),  i=1j=1 C. Association rules based on correlation N n In [4], a method was proposed for generation of E E (PAi (j) A ABi (I)) association rules of the following type:  conf(R) = i=lj=lN n R: If Cond then A associated with B, (W) i=lj=l where Cond is a crisp constraint on time series, and  where Rtjj) denotes membership value of a time point j in a association is calculated as a correlation coefficient between fuzzy window W, corresponding to the constraint A, n is a constrained time series A and B describing some parameters of number of time points andN is a number of windows. the analyzed system. W is a significance of the rule given by  The method of generation of association rules for fuzzy set the values of correlation coefficient and t-test [16]. Below is of windows with fuzzy perception based patterns Quickly an example of such association: increasing, Slowly increasing etc, defined on a domain of slope values of linear approximations of time series was If Oilproduction(Well-T]O])= High then considered in [7]. This method was applied to the analysis of a Oilproduction(WelliT25) is highly associated with system of indicators of Mexican economy. For example, the Gasproduction(Well-T03), (W).

following association rule was generated:  For a given condition Cond the set of highly associated IfRetail Sales Slowly Decreasing then Imports is Slowly time series forms an association network of wells of the Increasing, s=0.34, c= 0.70. oilfield. The comparison of such association network with  spatial and geological information about the oilfield gave B. Association rules with perception basedfrequencies interesting information about the rock properties.

Expert knowledge relating different objects or properties This approach can be generalized on fuzzy conditions of objects can be considered as a set of perceptions about which will define fuzzy constraints on time series A and B. In existing associations between them. In precisiation of such this case instead of a crisp correlation coefficient, a granular perceptions experts can evaluate perception based frequency correlation coefficient studied in [17] can be considered.

of such perceptions on some qualitative scale containing grades like very often, sometimes, many, most etc. D. Local trend associations.

Consider perceptions in the balls-in-box example of A time series (y, t) is a sequence (y,, t), ieI = ( .n), such Zadeh [23]: A box contains balls of various sizes and weights. that t < ti+1 for all i = 1,.., n-1, where y, and t, are real valued Most are large. Many large balls are heavy. Such perceptions time series values and time points, respectively. A time series can be transformed in a form of an association rule. Each ball (y,t) will be denoted also as y. A window W, of a length k>1 is can be considered as a transaction containing an attribute A if a sequence of indexes W= (i, i+ 1.., i+k- 1), ie { 1,...,n-k+ I1.

it contains a large ball and an attribute B if it contains a heavy Denote YW. =(Yi Yi+lt**,Yi+k-) the sequence of ball. Then from ball-in-box perceptions, the following association rule can be extracted: corresponding values of time series y. A sequence J = (WI,  W2,...I W,k+l) of all windows of the length k, (1 < k < n), is A iB, (s,c). (10) called a sliding (moving) window.

A function f= a,t+b, with parameters {a,,b I minimizing The support, s, and confidence, c, values of the rule are given the criterion by perceptions as follows: i+k-I(f i+k)-1 2|A nB| Q(.fi, YWi ) ,= i (tj ) yj J2 = at +b c-= many, J=i J=i  |A| is called a linear (least squares) approximation of yW . A  =AnBJ JAnBJ |A| transformation MAPk(y, t)= a, where a = (al, ..., aflk+l) is asX= = = manyXmost, sequence of slope values of linear approximations of time series (y,t) in sliding window of size k, is called a moving  where |X|, JA and A 0 B denote respectively a number of approximation (MAP) transform of a time series y [5]. The balls in a box, a number of large balls and a number of heavy slope values a= (a, ..., afnk+l) are called local trends.

balls. The value of support s =manyx most can be obtained Suppose y = (yl,...,yn) and x = (xl,..., xn) are two time as areply on a query [23]: Whatfraction of balls is large and series, and MAP.(y) = (a,,, -, am)a, MAPk(x)= (aal,_--, a,m), heavy?< Here x denotes a product oftzzy numbers. 'c{2 ni,m' k .Afnto  The association rule (10) can be written as follows: If a ball is large then it is heavy, (s= many x most, c=many).

m For a constrained association rule (13), a corresponding Z ayi * axi inference rule will have a form (14):  COSSk(y,X) = i=1 m 2 m 2 IfCondthenA =rB, (s,c) (13)  ayi axj IfCondthenA->B isrP(c,s). (14) i=1 j=1  is called a measure of local trend associations [5]. Coss equals B. Association rules with perception basedfrequencies.

to cosine of the angle between two vectors of slope values Association rules with perception based frequencies can MAPk(y) and MAPk(x): cossk(y,x)= cos(4(MAPk(y),MAPk(x))). be transformed into inference rules similarly to association A measure of local trend associations takes values near 1 or -1 rules with measurement based frequencies. For the ball-in-box if the sequences of normalized local trends of two time series example the formulae (12) gives the following rules (complete have similar absolute values with the same or opposite sings, and simplified: respectively. The application of this measure to the analysis of associations between time series is considered in [5]. large ball -X heavy ball isr P(many x most, many).

As a measure of local trend association it can be large ball -> heavy ball is P(many), considered a correlation coefficient or Euclidean distance between normalized local trends. Generally a measure of local where P(many) is a perception based evaluation of the rule, trend associations will be denoted as mltak(y,x). e.g. P(many)= very possible.



IV. TRANSFORMATION OF ASSOCIATIONS IN GENERALIZED- CONSTRAINT INFERENCE RULES C. Correlation rules.

How to transform correlation rules into inference rules? A A. Association rules. correlation coefficient is usually considered as a measure of  In data mining it is underscored that association rules linear dependence between variables. The higher the value of corr(A,B), the better the relationship between A and B can be  A > B, (s,c) (11) expressed by a linear function B = aA+b. For corr(A,B) > 0.5 and corr(A,B) < -0.5 we have respectively a > 0 and a < 0.

usually do not describe causal relationships between A and B. These considerations can be used for the transformation of Nevertheless they can be used in perception based inference. correlation rules into inference rules as follows: A confidence measure c evaluates frequency of occurrence of B in transactions containing A. So, if A happens then B A is Increasing -> B is Increasing isr PH1(corr(A,B), t), happens with a frequency c. It seems clear that for decision A is Decreasing -X B is Decreasing isr PDD(corr(A, B), t), making based on the analysis of association rules, usually the A is Increasing -> B is Decreasing isr PID(corr(A,B), t), specific numerical value of c is not important. Does the confidence value, e.g., c = 0.64 of association between beer and chips, mean that the value 0.64 will be used by the store where Increasing and Decreasing describe time series linear manager in decision making (e.g. with the probability 0.64 shape patterns and P(corr(A,B),t) is a perception basedthese items will be located in neighboring shelves)? We do not evaluation of the rule depending on the values of the think so. Really, the numerical value of confidence for a correlation coefficient and t-test. In a generalized form the specific rule is transformed, implicitly or explicitly, in some above rules can be written as follows: qualitative, perception based evaluation useful for decision maker as a result of comparison of this value with confidence 15  wih A ISIDA-X BISIDB isr P(corr(A,B),t), (5values of the other rules or as a result of its comparison where IDA and IDBmean Increasing or Decreasing shape some selected level of confidence values etc. Numerical ..

evaluation of confidence value can be retranslated into a perception based evaluation "Sufficiently high ", "High" IfCond then A is IDA-> B is IDB isr P(corr(A B) t) (1) "Low" etc and such perception based evaluation can be used to make decisions. Usually, the support value s is also taken into account in such perception based evaluation of the Nt htIcesn rDcesn hp atrsiinto account in scantecedents and in consequents of rules (15) and (16) can havesignificance of the rule. So, we can suppose that association different explicitations. q . o c' d1fferent expl1cltatlons. ~The first one can be crisp but therule (11) can be transformed into an inference rule second one can be a fuzzy perception based function [7].

A -B isrP(s,c), (12) D. Local trend associations.

Local trend associations similarly to correlations can be i.e., B happens when A happens, with a perception based transformed into the rules like(15), (16) with some difference.

evaluation P(s, c) of probability, possibility, true or utility of First, local trend associations are evaluated on a given set of the rule depending on confidence and support values, where a window sizes W] and hence the properties of A can be parameter rin isr specifies amining ofP(s,c) [21]. propagated on B within the intervals of considered sizes.

Second, the value of local trend association evaluates the Lecture Notes Artificial Intelligence, vol. LNAI 3789, Springer-Verlag, similarity of local trends of two time series. For this reason, if Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 514-523, 2005.simiat o[8] S. Brin, R. Motwani, and C. Silverstein, "Beyond Market Baskets: we know the slope value for A then we can make some Generalizing Association Rules to Correlations," Proc. ACMSIGMOD propositions about the slop value of B. For example if A and Conf, Tuscon, USA, pp. 265-276, May 1997.

mlta(A,B) can be evaluated as Quickly increasing and Positive [9] G. Das, K.I. Lin, H. Mannila, G. Renganathan, and P. Smyth, "Rule High, respectively, then B is Quickly increasing with higher discovery from time series," KDD, pp. 16-22, 1998.

possibility than '.is Slowlyincreasing. We can write such [10] M. De Cock, C. Cornelis, and E.E. Kerre, "Elicitation of fuzzypossibility than B iS Slowly increasing. We can write such association rules from positive and negative examples," Fuzzy Sets and inference rule in the form Systems 149(1), pp. 73-85, 2005.

[11] D. Dubois, H. Prade, and T. Sudkamp, "On the representation, A is IDA->BisIDBisP(mlta(A, B), I RI),measurement, and discovery of fuzzy associations," IEEE Trans. FuzzyA is IDA -< B isIDB isr P('mlta('A,B),|W'~'~), Systems, vol. 13, pp. 250-262, 2005.

[12] D. Hand, H. Manilla, and P. Smyth, Principles of Data Mining, MIT where IDA and IDB take values like Quickly increasing, Slowly Press, Cambridge, 2001.

decreasing etc. Like for correlation rules, IDA can be crisp but [13] F. Hoppner, "Learning temporal rules from state sequences," IJCAI IDB can be fuzzy. Workshop on Learningfrom Temporal and Spatial Data, Seattle, USA,pp.25-31,2001.

CONCLUSIONS [14] E.Ju. Kandrashina, L.V. Litvinzeva, and D.A. Pospelov, Representation of Knowledge About Time and Space in Intelligent Systems, Moscow:  A set of effective time series data mining algorithms have Science, 1989 (in Russian).

beenrecentlydevelopedfrextracting informa n from l[15] M. Last, Y. Klein, and A. Kandel, "Knowledge discovery in time seriesbeen recently developed for extracting information from large- databases," IEEE Trans. SMC, Part B, Vol. 31, 1, pp. 160-169, 2001.

scale TSDB, interesting and useful for data owner. Often, [16] B.W. Lindgren, Statistical Theory. Fourth Edition. Chapman-Hall, 1998.

these TSDB describe results of measurements of a limited [17] W. Pedrycz, and M.H. Smith, "Granular correlation analysis in data number of attributes of low- or middle-scale systems changing mining," Proc. IEEE Int. Fuzzy Systems Conf, Korea, pp. 111-1235 - III- in time. Human knowledge about system dynamics and about 1240, 1999.

[18] Retail Expert Predicts 4 Percent Holiday Sales Increase,relationships between system elements usually iS given as a http://retailindustry.about.com/library/holiday/03/blh_wu091903.htm collection of perceptions. To model perception based [19] H. Toivonen, "Discovery of Frequent Patterns in Large Data knowledge bases and perception based reasoning procedures Collections," PhD Thesis. University of Helsinki, Finland, 1996.

related with dynamics of such systems it is necessary to [20] L. B. Sheremetov, I. Z Batyrshin, D. M. Filatov, "Perception Based develop models of computing with words and perceptions Hybrid Intelligent Systems in Petroleum Applications," NAFIPS'06.develiiop osdrdpolm ehd fpreto ae This volume.specific for considered problem. Methods of perception based [21] L.A. Zadeh, "From computing with numbers to computing with words - TSDM should support these models of CWP. In this work it from manipulation of measurements to manipulation of perceptions," was shown that perceptions describing low- or middle-scale IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems - 1: Fundamental Theory and systems can have sufficiently complex structure. They can be Applications, vol. 45, pp. 105-119, 1999.[22] L.A. Zadeh, "Toward a perception-based theory of probabilisticdefined on different domains of TSDB, they can be point-wise reasoning with imprecise probabilities," Journal of Statistical Planning or window-wise, crisp or fuzzy. Also several different types of and Inference, vol, 105, pp. 233 -264, 2002.

associations in TSDB can be considered. Some methods of [23] L.A. Zadeh, "Precisiated Natural Language (PNL)," AI Magazine, vol.

aggregation of simple constraints in composite ones were 25, pp. 74-91, 2004.

discussed in this work. Also the methods of transformation of [24] L.A. Zadeh, and M. Nikravesh, "Perception-based intelligent decisionsystems," AINS; ONR Summer 2002 Program Review, UCLA, July 30 -association rules in generalized-constraint inference rules have August 1,2002.

been proposed. The future directions of research are twofold: (i) further development of methods for modeling of complex structure of perception based knowledge and inference procedure and (ii) development of efficient algorithms of PTSDM.

