THE STUDY ON LOCAL STRUCTURE REPRESENTATION AND LOCAL  CONSERVED STRUCTURE DISCOVERY

Abstract: Local region conservation has been studied for many  years because biologists believe that local conservation could be highly related to protein functions.  The concept of local region conservation comes from a motif, a fragment with biological or functional meaning.  Besides, structure-based identification of homologues often succeeds where sequence-alone-based methods fail, because in many cases evolution retains the folding pattern long after sequence similarity becomes undetectable.  Thus, prediction of protein function from sequence and structure is a difficult problem, because homologous proteins often have different functions.

Alternative methods include inferring conservation patterns in members of a functionally uncharacterized family for which many sequences and structures are known.  The researches show that sequence conservation could be discovered that their corresponding residues in 3D space are a compact region and close to ligand.  But the question is that is it possible to discover compact regions via protein structure analysis; therefore, our motivation is find out a local structure representation and apply the concept of mining frequent itemset to discover local structure conservation.  In the experiments, we use enzyme classification to discover local structure conservations, which we can easily identify the connection linked by detected local structure conservations and substrates.

Keywords: Protein structure mining; Local structure representation;  Neighborhood residues sphere; Protein structure comparison  1. Introduction  As protein function is activated in specific region of protein structure especially in local structure; therefore, local structure comparison plays an important role in detecting local structure similarity.  Proteins with the same function should share similar local structure and provide binding area to contact with small molecule in order to activate their functions and these local structures are  functional areas.  In the past, molecular biologists examine lots of functional protein structures to understand the relationships between functionalities, amino acid sequences and protein structures [2], [15], [16].  These studies not only help molecular biologists understand more details about functional proteins but also provide helpful information while encountering unfamiliar proteins. With the help of fast computing machine and delicate algorithms, research staffs can mining more useful sequence and structure from hand-made protein database and further applied the mined knowledge in protein function prediction, active site prediction and other structure based researches.

With the fast growth of Protein Data Bank (PDB) [3], protein functional analysis has become more important.

Moreover, protein structure comparison among mass protein structure data is widely applied on protein structure analysis.  According to researches and observations, protein function is highly correlated to its three-dimensional (3D) structure and researches are especially focused on special structure fragments which may connect to protein function or overall framework support [4], [5], [6].  Local structure similarity [14] can tell us similar local structure that may highly relate to protein function.

Currently, there are two major directions to analyze protein function; one is sequence-level analysis, and another is structure-level analysis.  Mining the conservation area related to possible binding area is a hot issue to infer protein function from protein sequence or protein structure analysis.  In sequence-level analysis, sequence alignment can be applied to detect conservation among protein sequence although the conservation is rough area [4].  They try to map sequence conservation region into their corresponding 3D space to link the relation between sequence, structure, and function [20].  Now, the question is that could we discover local structure conservation related functional area, and how to discover.

In structure-level analysis, the binding area of      protein-ligand complex [8], [17] is widely used to identify protein functions via local structure comparison.

Scientists first find protein pockets and voids [5], [6], which are possible binding regions of protein function.  These regions can be further investigated in ligand docking and proved that discovered local structure conservations are conserved for protein function.  Because homologous proteins may have different functions, it is hard to detect via sequence-based identification if evolution keeps the folding pattern far from sequence identity.  Therefore, structure-based identification of homologues would succeed because of structure conservation for keeping protein functionality [21].

1.1. Motivation  In this study, our motivation is to discover local structure conservation via protein structure analysis.

Therefore, we will discuss on local structure representation for structure conservation discovery and related miming approaches or algorithms.  Based on the most believed assumption that proteins of same function share common local structure, we developed a different approach which mining the conserved region from the classified enzyme dataset [18].  Therefore, we try to detect or discover similar local structure via different approaches and local structure representations to mine local structure conservation and find the link between local structure and functional region.  Beyond that, we will discuss local structure conservation discovery and relationships between local structures and functional regions.

2. Local conservation and functional site  As found by Campbell and Jackson [7], Src homology 2 (SH2) family can be divided into two groups on the basis of similarity of binding site residues.  In this research, it showed that proteins with the same family share similar local sequences and local structures closed to its binding area.  The result also showed that sequence conservation would fall on whole sequence diversely but compact in 3D space.  In this case, they observed that there exists conservation on local sequence and its corresponding 3D structure and has relationship between local structure and binding area.  Moreover, according to MAGIIC-PRO developed by Hsu et al. [10] on detecting functional signature, they approach sequence pattern mining to discover functional signatures of a query protein.  Their experimental results showed that gapped local sequence can be detected that its corresponding local structure might be close to protein functional site.

The function often occurs in cavity, packets or voids of proteins.  Therefore, the study of protein local structures is helpful for understanding the protein function.  It is also a trend to discover relationship between function and protein local structures.  In previous studies, CSA [17] extracts functional site information from research literatures manually; Protemot [8] uses computational approach to detect and extract all protein-ligand complexes in PDB automatically.  Another trend on this topic is to discover possible functional areas on protein surface, such as CASTp [6] and pvSOAR [5].

Figure 1. An example of neighborhood residues sphere.  A real case of protein (PDBID: 1AU0).  Residues in blue are surrounded by central residue in red within 10 ? distance  3. Local structure representation  In the task of mining local structure conservation, local structure representation is the first consideration we should regard for.  In this study, we first use the straightforward representation of the results derived from protein structure comparison.  In addition, we adopt and modify the idea of structural motif of SPratt2 [11].  In SPratt2, they use sphere to describe local structure for discovering structural motif.  We will illustrate details in the following sub-sections.

3.1. Alignment result of protein structure comparison  To use the alignment result generated by protein structure comparison is the first candidate to mine local structure conservation.  While comparing a set of protein structure pair-wisely, we can obtain a set of matched C? points from each compared pair.  And then we can apply simple clustering algorithm to group matched C? points as      local structure.  Each group will be a representation of local structure for further investigation.

3.2. Neighborhood residues sphere  In order to depict local structure with an appropriate representation, our original idea comes from the NSr, called a neighbor string, developed by Jonassen et al. [11], which is used to mine structural motif.  This string encodes all residues in the structure that are with a distance of d ? from r (d=10, as default), including r itself from N-terminal to C-terminal.  We redefine NSr to be NRS, neighborhood residues sphere, which includes structure coordinate information therefore the NRS contains local structure information with its sequence.  As shown in Figure 1, if a central residue is colored in red and radius is 10 ?, residues within a blue part is neighborhood closed to central residue within 10 ?.

Figure 2. The flow chart for mining conserved structural patterns via pair-wise protein structure comparison  4. Structure conservation detection  In order to detect protein local conserved structure related to protein function or closed to protein binding area.

In previous researches, the believed assumption is that proteins with the same function share similar local structure.

Hence, to mining local structure region that have biochemical meaning will be very useful for identifying protein function.  Given a set of protein chains, our goal is to extract local structure patterns shared among those protein chains which have the same function and apply the concept of mining frequent itemset to discover structure conservation [9].  In this section, we will introduce two methods of mining local structure patterns; one is using pair-wise protein structure comparison and another is sphere-based conservation mining approach, and will be illustrated in the following sub-sections.

4.1. Pair-wise protein structure comparison approach  In this approach, we use pair-wise protein structure comparison to obtain matched residue, group them as a substructure and check substructure similarity further.

Our strategy is to describe local structure representation of matched residues via protein structure comparison and then detect frequent substructure.  In addition, we use EMPSC [19] as protein structure alignment tool to compare protein structures pair-wisely.  As shown in Figure 2, the overall framework contains three major parts: (I) local structure generation via pair-wise local structure comparison, (II) substructure comparison and similarity measurement, (III) similar substructure grouping and representative pattern selection.

Figure 3. The flow chart for mining conserved structural patterns via NRS-based conservation mining approach  4.2. NRS-based conservation mining approach  In text mining, mining frequent itemset is often applied to find the frequent term in a corpus.  But given a set of protein chains (e.g. 4HHB:A.), can we apply a concept of frequent itemset mining on protein chains?  In the Figure 3, we illustrate an overall framework for pattern extraction.  Given a set of protein chains, our goal is to extract representatives for a set.  Those representatives are considered as conserved patterns which most of proteins share these substructures.  Because the NRS contains sequence and structure information, we can apply analysis method on sequence and structure data.  Our strategy is to apply sequence alignment for sequence conservation and then structure alignment for structure conservation.  This framework is divided into three major steps to select conserved pattern for a set of protein chains: (I) NRS segmentation, (II) sequence conservation grouping, and (III)      representative selection.

Table 1. List of protein chains for 6 randomly selected EC families  EC Numbers List of Protein Chains  1.6.2.4 18  1AMO:A 1B1C:A 1BVY:F 1FAG:A 1FAH:A 1J9Z:A 1JA1:A 1JME:A 1JPZ:A 1P0V:A 1P0W:A 1P0X:A 1SMI:A 1YQP:A 1ZO4:A 1ZOA:A 2BF4:A 2BPO:A  1.14.99.3 14  1DVE:A 1DVG:A 1IW0:A 1N3U:A 1OYK:A 1WE1:A 1WNV:A 1WNW:A 1WNX:A 1WOV:A 1XJZ:A 1XK0:A 1XK1:A 1XK2:A  2.3.1.74 12  1BI5:A 1CGK:A 1CHW:A 1CML:A 1D6H:A 1D6I:A 1I86:A 1I88:A 1I89:A 1I8B:A 1JWX:A 1U0V:A  4.1.2.17 14  1DZU:P 1DZV:P 1DZW:P 1DZX:P 1DZY:P 1DZZ:P 1E46:P 1E47:P 1E48:P 1E49:P 1E4A:P 1E4B:P 1E4C:P 1FUA:_  5.3.1.9 13  1B0Z:A 1G98:A 1GZD:A 1IRI:A 1J3P:A 1JLH:A 1N8T:A 1T10:A 1TZB:A 1U0E:A 1X7N:A 1X82:A 1ZZG:A  6.3.2.17 7 1FGS:_ 1JBV:A 1W78:A 2GC5:A 2GC6:A 2GCA:A 2GCB:A  Table 2. Experimental results for local conservation discovery via pair-wise protein structure comparison  # of local conservation # of ligand contact  PSC based NRS  PSC based NRS  1.6.2.4 13 16 3 4 1.14.99.3 5 n/a 3 n/a 2.3.1.74 16 n/a 4 n/a 4.1.2.17 n/a 49 n/a 4 5.3.1.9 7 3 n/a 0 6.3.2.17 4 6 n/a 3 n/a: no local conservation or ligand contact could be found.

5. Experiments  In order to compare two approaches on detecting structure conservation, we use enzyme classification as our data collection, and approach these two methods to figure out structure conservation in local region and find out the relationship between local structure regions and substrates or ligands.  According to PDBSProtEC [13], we randomly select 6 EC families as our dataset to evaluate these two methods.  In Table 1, we list all protein chains after removing identical protein sequences for these 6 EC families.  In addition, substrate information is selected from PDBSum [12] (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/databases/pdbsum/).

Figure 4. Protein PDB ID 1J9Z:A.  The areas in red, blue and navy are substrates of NAP, FMN, and FAD respectively, and discovered local conservations in yellow, lime, and aqua respectively  6. Discussions  6.1. Pair-wise protein structure comparison approach  In Table 2, we list number of local conservation we found and number of substrate contacts within 10 ? between substrate and discovered local conservation.  In the experimental results, not all EC family will discover local conservation because their global structures might be too similar or diversity.  The experimental results reveal that we don?t detect in EC 4.1.2.17, and we find these sequences share above 90% sequence identity within this EC family, checked by BLASTCLUST [1].  Therefore, it is hard to use this approach to detect local conservation because above 90% sequence identity means that they have      the same global structures.  In addition, the reason why we list the value of number of substrate, ligand, or metal ion is try to connect the relation between local conservations and substrates.

Although we only test few cases on discovering conserved structure patterns of proteins with same function, the result reveals that local structure conservation region could be detected under functional classification. We select all possible substrates information related to protein chains.

In Figure 4, the picture shows the relationships between conserved patterns and substrates, and the protein PDBID is 1J9Z:A and substructures are areas colored in yellow, aqua, or lime and the ball colored in red, blue, and navy are substrates (Navy: FAD, Red: NAP, Blue: FMN).

Moreover, we also find that local conservations discovered in proteins of PDBID 1BVY:A, 1AMO:A, 1BU7:A, 1SMI:A, 1B1C:A have substrate/ligand contacts such as FMN, EDO, FAD, HEM, and NAP.

6.2. NRS-based conservation mining approach  For each EC family, we apply NRS-based conservation mining approach to mine local conservation.  Because of large amount of spheres, we first apply sequence alignment to group similar sequence and further check their structure similar within a group via geometric hashing.  In Table 2, we also list the values of number of local conservation and number of substrate, ligand, or metal ions respectively.

We still have two EC families, EC 1.14.99.3 and EC 2.3.1.74, that local structure conservation could not be detected.  In EC 2.3.1.74, their sequences share above 90% sequence identity.  And in EC 1.14.99.3, there are still 3 protein chains while the cut-off of sequence identity is below 50%.

As shown in our experimental results, conserved patterns are mined from protein chains with the same EC labels sharing highly conservation in local structure and conserved patterns have high capacity to identify.  In addition, we also find that protein chains within the same EC labels can be grouped into more than two sub-groups.

For example, while applying this approach on whole EC families, in EC 3.2.1.17, there are totally 895 protein chains, and we mined two conserved patterns.  However, 326 protein chains share one of them, and 417 protein chains share another one, but these two conserved patterns have no overlapping region.  According to our observation, number of conserved patterns has relation to the number of protein chains.  In general, the more in the number of protein chains within the same EC labels, the lower in the number of conserved patterns, if protein chains within an EC label have diversity.

6.3. Summarization  As shown in Figure 5, this is PDBID 1SMI:A and the substrate is HEM (PROTOPORPHYRIN IX CONTAINING FE).  The area colored in blue is the local conservation discovered by NRS-based conservation mining approach and the central residue is colored in red, and the area color colored in yellow are two local conservation discovered by pair-wise protein structure comparison approach.  In addition, the area in pink is the area the overlapping area discovered by these two approaches.  Comparing with these two approaches, local conservation detected by pair-wise protein structure comparison approach will be more fragment than NRS-based conservation mining approach.  The reason is that NRS is more suitable to describe residue environmental information, but a group of matched residue points just provides local similar area and it is not a well-organized structure representation.

Figure 5. PDB ID 1SMI:A and the substrate is HEM.  The areas colored in yellow and blue are conserved local structure by protein structure comparison approach and NRS-based approach respectively.  The area colored in pink is the overlapping area that both approaches discovered  7. Conclusions  In this study, we try to find out relationships between local conservations and functional area via mining frequent itemset.  Our purpose is to use different local structure representations as itemset and then apply mining frequent itemset to discover local structure conservation.  Although the alignment results as local structure representation are      not well-organized representation, it still provides us examples to realize how conservation could be formed in protein structure.  Furthermore, we use neighborhood residues sphere as local structure representation to describe local structure.  We use EC family to verify our purpose because of the ease of substrate/ligand verification.

Therefore, we can use ligand contact to explain what we discovered.  In our experiments, conserved local structure can be discovered and the observations show contact areas but not all elements of substrate contact with a substructure.

We can discover conserved local structure region from functional hierarchical classification because proteins have the same function will share some attributes reflect on their structures.

