

Abstract? The ARGO project archives huge quantities of upper ocean salinity/temperature time series measurements that are related to climate issues such as global warming. Fuzzy inter-transaction association rules are derived from ARGO data using a reduced prefix-projected itemset algorithm that has a small space and time complexity. After mining the frequent 1-itemsets the proposed algorithm exploits a reduced prefix projection strategy to extract the frequent inter-itemsets. Based on the extracted fuzzy inter-transaction association rules a fuzzy inference model is proposed for identifying salinity/temperature anomalies. Experimental results verify that the proposed model is effective in predicting the occurrence of abnormal salinity/temperature variations.



I. INTRODUCTION  he ocean salinity/temperature variations and their impact on global climate changes are attracting increasing  attention. To understand (and eventually predict) changes in salinity and temperature, salinity/temperature patterns of interest need to be discovered and then used to predict future abnormal events. Data mining techniques can be applied to extract interesting ARGO data that include time series measurements of upper ocean salinity/temperature data.

Conceptually, the problem of mining Boolean association rules over market basket data can be viewed as finding associations between the ?1? values in a relational table of Boolean attributes. However, ARGO dataset attributes are quantitative and more effort is therefore needed to mine such inter-transaction association rules.

One can mine quantitative association rules by partitioning the quantitative attribute domain, and thereby transform the problem into the binary domain [7]. However, the partitioning process is subject to the sharp boundary problem. That is, the mining algorithm either ignores or over-emphasizes elements near the boundary of the intervals. Gyenesei proposed a fuzzy approach for solving the sharp boundary problem such that the fuzzy association rules of the form, ?if X is A, then Y is B? can be extracted [1]. In these rules, X and Y are attributes and A and B are fuzzy sets which characterize X and Y, respectively.

The fuzzy sets provide a smooth, or soft, transition between members and non-members of a set; consequently, all the   Yo-Ping Huang and Li-Jen Kao are with the Department of Computer  Science and Engineering, Tatung University, Taipei, Taiwan 10451 R.O.C., phone:+886-2-21822928 ext 6566, fax:+886-2-25943699, (corresponding author e-mail: yphuang@ttu.edu.tw).

Frode Eika Sandnes is with the Faculty of Engineering, Oslo University College, P.O. Box 4, St. Olavs plass, N-0130 Oslo, Norway, phone: +47 22 45 32 49, fax: +47 22 45 32 05, e-mail: Frode-Eika.Sandnes@iu.hio.no.

boundary elements are also more or less included.

Another shortcoming of the conventional rules is that they  only relate salinity/temperature variations that occur simultaneously. It would be helpful if the rules can reveal the associations among variations that occur at different times or at different places such that the associations can be applied to disaster prediction. Tung et al. proposed efficient algorithms for finding such rules [2]. In [2] a sliding window is applied to the multi-dimensional transaction database to reduce the search space and hence form mega-transactions.

The first objective of this study is to establish a scheme that can discover associations from databases with quantitative attributes as well as take the associations among records into consideration. The proposed mining algorithm for fuzzy inter-transaction association rules first fuzzifies a quantitative attribute into fuzzy sets. In order to extract the inter-transaction association rules, a time sliding window spanning multiple transactions is used to form mega-transactions. The number of items increases with the introduction of fuzzy attributes and inter-transactions in the search for frequent inter-itemsets [4]. Furthermore, more computational effort is needed. A reduced prefix-projected itemsets method based on the PrefixSpan algorithm [6] is proposed for reducing the computational complexity of finding frequent inter-itemsets.

The second objective is to propose a fuzzy inference model that infers future abnormal salinity and temperature variations.

The fuzzy inter-transaction association rules are used to construct a fuzzy rule base. Since the fuzzy rules are derived from inter-transaction association rules, the inference results contain salinity/temperature anomalies together with their respective time and location information. The inference results can help us better understand the relationships between the ocean salinity and temperature structure.

The remaining parts of this paper are organized as follows.

In section 2 the problems at hand are summarized and related work is introduced. In section 3 the proposed algorithm is described and section 4 provides experimental evidence.

Section 5 concludes the paper.



II. PROBLEM DEFINITION  This section describes problems associated with mining fuzzy inter-transaction association rules. Some definitions will also be given before describing the proposed algorithm.

Data Mining and Fuzzy Inference Based Salinity and Temperature Variation Prediction  Yo-Ping Huang, Li-Jen Kao and Frode Eika Sandnes  T          A. Transactions in ARGO Data The work aims at finding the ocean salinity and temperature  relations in the waters surrounding Taiwan. A reference centric model is constructed to exploit the spatial-temporal patterns that may reveal the salinity and temperature relations.

Taipei is chosen as the reference site and concentric circles are used to define neighboring regions of the reference site. A transaction is materialized by the reference centric model to enumerate the abnormal events inside the concentric circles.

Fig. 1 shows this reference centric model. The concentric circles are also used to annotate the location of the abnormal events. The sub-areas defined by the concentric circles represent different distances and directions to the reference site. For example, sub-area A1 implies that it is in the east-northeast direction and is far from Taiwan, and sub-area A2 is in the east-northeast direction and is close to Taiwan.

Thus, the location context information for abnormal variations is maintained. In Fig. 2, the set of all the abnormal variations within the concentric circles is treated as a single transaction.

Table 1 is part of the transaction data set derived from ARGO measurements. Each transaction is recorded with its spatial/temporal information. The transaction that is transformed from Fig. 2 has transaction ID 2001/01 in Table 2.

B. Quantitative attributes Many algorithms for mining binary association rules have  been proposed in the past [3,5-6]. However, the attributes in most businesses or scientific databases are quantitative (e.g., age, income). Srikant et al. proposed an algorithm for finding the quantitative association rules by partitioning the continuous attribute domain, and then transforming the partitioned attributes into a binary representation [7]. Table 3 gives an example with the quantitative attribute ?age?. Table 4 shows the transformed attribute ?age?. Age is partitioned into three intervals: {young| age ? [20, 29]}, {middle age| age ? [30, 45]} and {senior| age ? [46, 99]}.

The crisp set partition method results in a sharp boundary problem. Table 4 shows that the intervals, [20, 29], [30, 45] and [46, 99] have support of 33.3%, 33.3%, and 33.4%, respectively. If operating with a minimum support of 40%, then none of these intervals will be considered for further analysis. For instance, if a user is interested in finding the associations from the interval of [20, 30], then the sharp boundary may not provide the expected result.

The attribute partitioning method is subject to the effect of sharp boundaries due to the discrete nature of classical set theory [1]. However, this problem is overcome by applying fuzzy set theory in which an element can belong to a set with a membership degree in the range [0, 1].

C. Inter-transaction association rules In this section, fundamental concepts and definitions are  introduced before presenting the proposed approach to fuzzy inter-transaction association rules mining.

Definition 1. Let I = {i1, i2, ?, ik} be a set of items. Let D be a dimensional attribute and Dom(D) be the domain of D. A transaction database is a database containing records in the form (d, Ij), where d ? Dom(D) and Ij ? I. We call this type of database a 1-dimensional database.

The dimensional attribute usually describes the item time or location.

An inter-transaction association rule that spans p intervals is found if an association exists between items that are p intervals apart. Since an inter-transaction association rule may cover many intervals, finding all such rules is time-consuming.

In order to minimize the effort involved in mining uninteresting rules, a sliding window denoted by w is introduced. When mining inter-transaction association rules, only the rules spanning shorter than or equal to w intervals are considered. The sliding window is thus used to avoid mining rules that span many consecutive intervals [8].

Each sliding window forms a mega-transaction. A mega-transaction M that is contained within W can be described as follows:  M = {ik(j) | ik ? W[j]; 1 ? k ? u; 0 ? j ? w ? 1}, where W is a sliding window with w intervals and u is the number of items in I = {i1, i2, ?, iu}.

To distinguish the items in a mega-transaction from traditional transaction items, the mega-transaction items are called extended items. We denote the set of all possible extended items I?. Given I and w, we have:  I? = {i1(0), ?, i1(w-1), i2(0), ?, i2(w-1), ?, iu(0), ?, iu(w-1)}.

The following is the definition of an inter-transaction association rule.

Definition 2. An inter-transaction itemset is a set of extended items B ? I? such that ?ik(0) ? B, 1 ? k ? u.

Definition 3. An inter-transaction association rule has the form X ? Y, where  1. X ? I?, Y ? I?.

2. ?ik(0) ? X, 1 ? k ? u.

3. ?ik(j) ? Y, 1 ? k ? u, j ? 0.

4. X ? Y = {}.

Definition 4. Let MTxy be the set of mega-transactions that  contains a set of extended items X ? Y and MTx be the set of mega-transactions that contains X. Let S be the number of transactions in the transaction database. Then, the support and confidence of an inter-transaction association rule X ? Y can be defined as:  .,sup x  xyxy  T  T confidence  S  T port ==  As with intra-association rules mining algorithms, a minimum support, minsup, and a minimum confidence, minconf, are given and our task is to discover the inter-transaction association rules from the transaction database with support and confidence greater than or equal to the minimum requirements.

D. Mining frequent itemsets by prefix projections Pei et al. [6] employed a projection scheme in the  PrefixSpan algorithm where the customer sequences (transactions) were projected into overlapping sets called projected databases such that all the customer sequences in each set had the same prefix that corresponded to a frequent sequence (itemset). The main idea behind PrefixSpan is that, instead of projecting sequence databases by considering all the possible occurrences of frequent subsequences, the projection is based only on frequent prefixes. This holds, because any frequent subsequence can always be found by growing a frequent prefix.

The same idea can be applied to the inter-transaction association rules mining task discussed herein. By using the example database in Table 5, with a minimum support count of 2, the PrefixSpan algorithm first scans the database to find the frequent 1-itemset, i.e., <a(0)>, <b(0)>, <c(0)>, <d(0)>, <e(0)> and <f(0)>. After that, the algorithm generates the projected database for each frequent 1-itemset. For instance, Table 6 shows the projected database of <a(0)>. For this projected database, the PrefixSpan algorithm continues the discovery of frequent 1-itemsets to form the frequent 2-itemsets with prefix <a(0)>. In this way, the PrefixSpan algorithm recursively generates the projected database for each frequent k-itemset to find frequent (k+1)-itemsets.

E. Fuzzy inference Fuzzy inference is the process of formulating the mapping  from a given input to an output using fuzzy logic. The mapping then provides a basis from which decisions can be made, or patterns discerned. The process of fuzzy inference involves three steps:  (1). Fuzzification.

(2). Inference from fuzzy rules.

(3). Defuzzification.



III. THE PROPOSED MINING STRATEGY AND FUZZY INFERENCE MODEL  The existing mining algorithms may face difficulties when discovering fuzzy inter-transaction association rules. Tung et al. proposed a framework that can only discover inter-transaction association rules [2], whereas Srikant et al.

proposed an approach to mine quantitative intra-transaction association rules [7]. In order to discover fuzzy inter-transaction association rules, a new method is developed to extract rules from a 1-dimensional transaction database.

The proposed process of mining fuzzy inter-transaction association rules from a 1-dimensional database can be divided into three steps: quantitative attribute transformation, the discovery of frequent inter-transaction itemsets, and association rule generation.

(1) Quantitative attribute transformation: The first step is to map each quantitative attribute into its fuzzy intervals. Let I = {i1, i2, ?, ik} be the set of all items that belongs to the original database. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that the  database only has one quantitative attribute, ij, where 1 ? j ? k.

If ij is mapped to l fuzzy intervals, then the new set of all items If becomes {i1, i2, ?, i(j, 1), i(j, 2), ?, i(j, l), ij+1, ?, ik}, where ir, r ? j, is a binary attribute and i(j, 1), i(j, 2), ?, i(j, l) are fuzzy attributes that are transformed from quantitative attribute ij.

(2) The discovery of frequent inter-transaction itemsets: Let If be the new set of all items that is defined from the previous phase and W be a sliding window with w intervals along the dimensional attribute. We now redefine a mega-transaction M contained within W to be:  M = {i(t)| i ? W[t], i could be a binary attribute or a fuzzy attribute, 0 ? t ? w ? 1}.

The set of all possible extended items is then redefined as:  fI ?  = {i1(0), ?, i1(w - 1), i2(0), ?, i2(w ? 1), ?, i(j, 1)(0), ?, i(j, 1)(w - 1), ?, i(j, l)(0), ?, i(j, l)(w ? 1), ij+1(0), ?, ij+1(w ? 1), ?, ik(0), ?, ik(w ? 1)}.

Furthermore, an inter-transaction k-itemset is the set B ?  fI ?  such that there at least exists one binary attribute ir(0) or fuzzy attribute i(j, l)(0) ? B. Since the fuzzy attribute transformations and inter-transactions results in more data, our algorithm employs a reduced prefix-projected itemsets method based on PrefixSpan algorithm to expedite the efficient search for the frequent itemsets, instead of using the classical Apriori algorithm which is more resource demanding.

The following is a more detailed description of how frequent itemsets are generated.

Step 1: Discover the frequent 1-itemset L1. The candidate set C1 of 1-itemsets should be fI ? , the set of all possible  extended items. The mega-transactions can be scanned to determine whether a special item i(t), 0 ? t ? w ? 1, exists and determine whether it is a frequent 1-itemset. However, it is not necessary to do so. Since each inter-transaction frequent itemset will contain at least one i(0), we only need to check item i(0). In other words, we have reduced the search space and thereby reduced the time and space complexity. Therefore, the count of i(0) is increased by 1, if it is a binary attribute, otherwise increasing its membership degree, if it is a fuzzy attribute. Therefore, L1 can be found simply by one scan through the mega-transactions.

Step 2: Divide the search space and build the projected databases. The projected databases are built by partitioning the complete set of itemset into subsets according to the corresponding prefixes in L1.

Step 3: Reduce the size of the projected databases. For the projected databases, the PrefixSpan algorithm continues the discovery of frequent 1-itemsets to form the frequent 2-itemsets with prefix <i(0)>. However, some items in the projected database can be pruned before obtaining frequent 1-itemsets by PrefixSpan. The following items can be deleted from the projected database: (i) The fuzzy item i(j, l)(t) where the source quantitative  attribute is the same as its prefix. For example, ij is a          quantitative attribute and it is transformed to two fuzzy attributes, i(j, 1) and i(j, 2). If i(j, 1)(0) is a prefix and i(j, 2)(0) is shown in the projected database with respect to prefix i(j, 1)(0), then i(j, 2)(0) needs to be deleted.

(ii) The item i(t) where i(0) does not appear in L1. The reason is that if i(0) is not a frequent 1-itemset, then i(1), i(2), ?, i(w-1) will not be frequent 1-itemsets either.

Following these steps, the improved PrefixSpan algorithm recursively generates the reduced projected database for each frequent k-itemset to find the frequent (k+1)-itemsets.

(3) Generate the association rules. The generation of inter-transaction association rules is similar to the generation of classic association rules. The calculation of rule confidence is shown in Definition 4.

To design a fuzzy inference model, one needs to define its inputs and outputs. A total of 5 inputs are used to infer the abnormal salinity/temperature events and their spatial/temporal relationships. These include:  (1) The salinity event represents what kind of abnormal salinity event that occurs. Fig. 3 shows the membership functions for salinity events.

(2) The temperature event represents what kind of abnormal temperature event that occurs. Fig. 4 shows the membership functions for temperature events.

(3) The radius represents the distance to the event in the reference centric model. Fig. 5 shows the membership functions for the radius.

(4) Angle represents the direction of the event in the reference centric model. Fig. 6 shows the membership functions for angle.

(5) Time represents the time of the event. Fig. 7 shows the membership functions for time.

The linguistic output terms are identical to the input terms.

That is, the model can infer when, where and what kind of event that will occur based on the known input events.

Then, a set of fuzzy inter-transaction association rules is selected to generate a fuzzy rule base. One example of the rule is: ?if the salinity event is dropping little, the temperature event is NOR, distance is near, angle is ? 1 and time is short-term, then the salinity event is dropping little, the temperature event is NOR, distance is near, angle is ? 2 and time is short-term.?

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  The experimental salinity/temperature data used in this study were taken from the ARGO delayed-mode database that can be downloaded from Oceanographically Products in Japan. The monthly salinity/temperature images are collected from the period of January 2001 to December 2005. We put concentric circles on each map and then treat all the abnormal events that occur inside the concentric circles on each map as a transaction. The radius for inner and outer circles is 380km and 760km, respectively. Concentric circles allow us to easily keep the events?  location context information such as  direction and distance to the reference site of Taipei, Taiwan.

In case no special events occurred in a sub-area then it is denoted a NOR event. After the quantitative attributes in Table 2 are mapped to several fuzzy intervals, the PrefixSpan algorithm is employed to find large inter-itemsets (the maxspan window size is set to 6 months and the minimum support is set to 25%). Then the fuzzy inter-transaction association rules can be derived from large itemsets as the minimum confidence is set to 70%. Table 7 shows part of the fuzzy association rules.

The next step is to design the fuzzy inference model.

Assume that the fuzzy rule has the form ?if the salinity event is A1, the temperature event is A2, distance is A3, angle is A4 and time is A5 then the salinity event is A1, the temperature event is A2, distance is A3, angle is A4 and time is A5.? A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5 are fuzzy sets that characterize the salinity event, the temperature event, distance, angle and time, respectively.

Table 8 shows the fuzzy rule base.

The ARGO 2006 maps are used as test data. For example, taking the following data ?the salinity event is dropping 0.1psu, the temperature event is NOR, distance is 340km, and angle is 45?? as inputs, after fuzzification, inference process and defuzzication, one can get the inference result ?the salinity is dropping 0.1psu, the temperature event is NOR, distance is 340km, and angle is 45? during the next two months.? Since the abnormal events only occurs in sub-areas A1, A2, B1, B2, F2, G1, G2, H1 and H2, this experiment selects one abnormal event from each sub-area in the map as inputs for fuzzy inference model (the period for monthly map data is from January to November 2006). The experiment shows that the average inference accuracy is 82%. Table 9 shows the inference accuracy rate for each month.



V. CONCLUSIONS  This paper is based around two research objectives. First, we proposed a strategy for discovering fuzzy inter-transaction association rules that require less resource than the traditional Apriori algorithm. Secondly, a fuzzy inference model is designed that is based on fuzzy association rules. Since the fuzzy rules contain the salinity/temperature variations that associate with their temporal and spatial information, the inference results allow the prediction of when, where and what event will occur. Our experiment also shows that the fuzzy inference model has a prediction accuracy of 82%. That is, our study that integrates data mining and fuzzy model can provide satisfactory results without consulting expert knowledge. In the future, more data will be used to extract fuzzy association rules to further improve the prediction accuracy.

