An Effective Algorithm for Mining Weighted Association Rules in  Telecommunication Networks

Abstract   The algorithms of weighted association rules  mining and weights confirming were studied in alarm correlation analysis. A novel method named Neural Network based WFP-Tree (NNWFP) for mining association rules was proposed. NNWFP differs from the classical weighted association rules mining algorithm MINWAL (O). It is an efficient algorithm based on weighted frequent pattern tree, and the weights of the items are confirmed by the neural network. Experiments on a large alarm data set show that the approach is efficient and practical for finding frequent patterns in the alarm correlation analysis of telecommunication networks, and the performance of NNWFP is better than MINWAL (O).

1. Introduction   Recently, Networks often consist of hundreds of even thousands of interconnected nodes from different manufacturers using various transport media and systems. As a result, when a network problem or failure occurs, it is possible that a very large number of alarm messages are generated. Alarm correlation is a conceptual interpretation of multiple alarms such that new meanings are assigned to these alarms [1]. In the past, the knowledge of alarm correlation was mainly obtains from network experts. But with the development of telecommunication networks, it is much more difficult for experts to keep up with the rapid change of networks, so more and more researchers adopt data mining methods to discover alarm correlation rules. Telecommunication alarm correlation analysis based on mining association rules plays an important part in current research.

Association rules, which is an important research field in data mining, is used widely. Efficient mining  of frequent itemsets is a fundamental problem for mining association rules. Lots of Apriori-like algorithms [2-4] are proved to achieve good performance. However, it is costly to handle a large number of candidate sets and must scan the database repeatedly. As the amount of data increases, designing an efficient mining algorithm become increasingly urgent. FP-Tree algorithm [5] avoids the costly generation of a huge number of candidate sets which is a depth-first search algorithm. Although the FP-Tree algorithm is an efficient algorithm in many applications, it is not applicable in the alarm correlation analysis of telecommunication networks directly, for large amounts of conditional FP-Tree will be created and the items have the same significance without taking account of their weights within a transaction or within the whole items space in the previous work. In fact, the alarms data are considered inequity, which are short messages, generally of textual format; typically contain several fields giving information creation time, location and some condition which the alarms contain. The items should be given different weights to reflect their importance and the weighted association rules mining should be proposed.

MINWAL (O) [6] is a classical weighted association rules mining algorithm proposed by Chun- Hing Cai. It is used to find binary association rules, but the weight is defined by the total profit of each item, which is unfit for the alarm. Another problem is that MINWAL (O) is based on the Apriori algorithm, which also exits the problems Apriori has.

In order to tackle these challenges, we propose a novel method which uses the Neural Network to identify the alarm weight and the WFP-Tree algorithm for mining association rules (NNWFP). The neural network has three inputs with the key elements which reflect the importance of the alarm in telecommunication networks. After the course of   DOI 10.1109/CIS.Workshops.2007.130    DOI 10.1109/CIS.Workshops.2007.130    DOI 10.1109/CIS.Workshops.2007.130    DOI 10.1109/CIS.Workshops.2007.130    DOI 10.1109/CIS.Workshops.2007.130    DOI 10.1109/CIS.Workshops.2007.130    DOI 10.1109/CIS.Workshops.2007.130    DOI 10.1109/CIS.Workshops.2007.130     sample training, we will get the link weights. The weights of the neural network may reflect the knowledge of the experts and also can be changed automatically with the different items from the inputs; the WFP-Tree can avoid creating large number of condition FP-Tree and scanning the database only twice. Simulation shows that the NNWFP algorithm in telecommunication networks is proved to be efficient.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 is outlines the NNWFP algorithm, while Section 3 shows the experimental results. A conclusion is drawn in Section 4.

2. The Neural Network based WFP-Tree method proposed  2.1 Weights confirmed by the neural network   There are already many productions for weights analysis in mining association rules, but they are unfit for the alarm weights set in telecommunication networks. In this paper, we propose one neural cell network to confirm the weights of alarm data effectively.

The input of the neural network has three key factors which influence the alarm weights, the output are the weights of the alarms, so one neuron neural network can accomplish the learning process. The model can be seen as the simplest kind of feed-forward neural network which contains three inputs, three link weights, one neuron and one output.

In this neural network model, three parameters should be confirmed: (1) the ration of description for the inputs; (2) the link weights of the neural network; (3) the transfer function;  ?  1w  2w 3w   Figure 1.Construction of the neural network  In our study, the input datasets are the alarm data in telecommunication network with pretreatment. Alarm attributes are made of many factors, of which influence the telecommunication network most should be chosen to form the inputs of the neural network including the  node degree of the alarm equipment, the alarm level that may reflect the severity and the alarm type which can influence the network. The outputs of the neural network are the alarm weights we need. First the sample values from the experience of experts should be put into the input port. After training the link weights of the neural network, we will get the neural network model for confirming the alarm weights. The construction process of neural network displays in Figure 1.

Determine the transfer function is the final and crucial step in the neural network design process for alarm correlation analysis. In this design, according to the characteristics of alarm data transmission, the saturated linear function is selected as follow:  0 0  1 1  n f n n  n  <? ?=       0 ? ?? ?        >?    Using the saturated linear function, we can get the link weights between 0 and 1 after the sample training.

The process of the link weights training is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2.Training process of the link weights  2.2. WFP-tree Construction algorithm   Starting with the root node, the WFP-tree can be constructed as follows: Inputs: Transaction database D , minimum weighted support value Wminsup .

Output: WFP-tree.

Algorithm for WFP-tree Construction: 1) Scan the transaction database D once. Collect the  descending weighted potential 1-itemsets S according to the count of the support.

2) Scan the transaction database D , for each     transaction iT , find all the weighted potential 1- itemset in iT  and sort them as a sequence  iS according to the descending order of the support count. Set the pointer point to the new node of WFP-tree all the time, and insert the sequence iS to WFP-tree.

3) Traverse the WFP-tree from the root, overturn the pointers that pointed to the child node and sibling node, and make them point to the father node and the tree, nodes with the same item-name are linked in sequence via node-links.

2.3. The NNWFP algorithm proposed  The Neural Network based WFP-Tree algorithm (NNWFP) for mining weighted association rules has the following inputs and output.

Inputs: The WFP-tree, the two threshold values  Wminsup  and mincof , weights of the items from the neural network as jw and the weighted potential 1-itemset S.

Output: A list of interesting rules.

Algorithm NNWFP: 1) Make an ascending order of S, for each item in :  a)  Find all the conditional pattern sets pbsetC of  in and the maximum length value maxT of all prefix paths in in ;  b)  2 1{ }iC n C= ? ; ( 1C is the weighted potential 1- itemset in pbsetC );  c)  ( 2C , 2L ) = Checking( 2C ); ( kC is the weighted potential k -itemset);  d)  for ( k = 3; maxTk <  &&the number of maxT >1 ; k ++) ;  e)  kC = Join ( 1kC ? ); f)  ( kC , kL ) = Checking ( kC ); g)  UpdateCount ( kC ); h)  kL L L= ? ( kL is the frequent weighted k -  itemset? L is a set of kL ); 2)  Rules ( mincof , L ).

The subroutines are outlined as follows: (1) Join ( 1kC ? ): join the 1k ? -itemset 1kC ?  to  k -itemset kC , the count of each item in kC equals to the minimum value of the  two items linked in 1kC ? . The link method is similar to the Apriori in [7]. Prune ( kC ) will be executed to each linked item.

(2) Checking ( kC ): this sub-program will complete three functions, the first UpdateCount ( kC ) updates the support counts of k -itemset, the second checking up every item and executing Prune ( kC ), deleting the itemsets which can not make up the weighted potential k -itemset in kC , and the last getting the weighted frequent k - itemset according to the definition.

(3) UpdateCount ( kC ): updating the support count of the k -itemset.

(4) Rules ( mincof , L ): the similar to the method in [7].

The framework for our proposed algorithm for mining weighted association rules is similar to MINWAL (O) [6], but with some major differences in the details. First, the definition of the potential weighted frequent itemsets is proposed. Second, the construction of WFP-tree with passing database only once, contrast to the MINWAL (O) which needs pass the database many times. Third, the neural network is used to confirm the weights of the items, which proves to be useful for mining association rules in telecommunication networks.

3. Performance Study   In the following experiments, we use 10~50 typical alarm weight values from the typical network NSFNET to train the link weights in the neural network. When the final alarm weights tend to stabilize, the training will complete. A series of experiments are done to show the performance of these algorithms on AMD Sempron (tm) Processor 2800+ machine with 512MB of main memory and the algorithms are written in JAVA.

After weight training of the Nueral Network, a performance study is carried out for the two algorithms, NNWFP and MINWAL (O).

Figure 3~5 show the performances of the two algorithms in time executed and the main memory occupied.

In Figure3, we can find that the time efficiency of NNWFP is better than MINWAL (O). In the alarm transaction database, when the weighted support is 0.15, the running time of NNWFP is about 1/7 of MINWAL (O). The growth of NNWFP is more gently     than MINWAL (O) with reducing the weighted support.

Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the flex performance of the two algorithms in running time and memory occupied capacity. The minimum weighted support is fixed up to 0.25. From the figures, although running time and memory occupied capacity with two algorithms increase with the number of transactions linearly, NNWFP increases more slowly than MINWAL (O), and it has better flex performance than MINWAL (O).

4. Conclusions  In this paper, we have proposed the NNWFP algorithm for weighted association rules mining in telecommunication network. In the weights generation, the weights can reflect the importance of the alarms with the neural network. The main portions of NNWFP algorithm include WFP-tree construction and weighted association rules mining. Algorithm performance tests show that NNWFP can improve mining efficiency obviously in comparison with MINWAL (O) and has better flex performance. It has great significance for rapid and accurate fault location of alarm correlation analysis in telecommunication networks.

5. Acknowledgment   This work is supported by Natural Science Foundation of china (NSFC 60572091).

6. Reference  [1]Bouloutas, A.T.Calo, S.Finkel,A. ?alarm correlation and  fault identification in communication networks?[J], IEEE transaction on communications,VOL.42, NO234,1994 , pp: 523-533.

[2] R. Ng, L. V. S. Lakshmanan, J. Han, and A. Pang.

?Exploratory mining and pruning optimizations of constrained association rules? [C], In SIGMOD?98, 1998, pp: 13-24.

[3] S. sarawagi, S. Thomas, and R. Agrawal. ?Integrating association rule mining with relational database system: Alternatives and implications? [C], In SIGMOD?98, 1998, pp: 343-354.

[4]R. Srikant, Q. Vu, and R. Agrawal. ?Mining association rules with item constraints? [C]. In KDD?97, pp: 67-73.

[5] J. Han, J. Pei, Y. Yin, and R. Mao, ?Mining Frequent Patterns without Candidate Generation: A Frequent- Pattern Tree Approach? [J]. In Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2004, Vol. 8, pp: 53-87.

[6] Cai C. H, Ada, Fu W. C, et al. Ming Association Rules with Weighted Items [A]. Proc of IEEE International Database Engineering and Applications Symposium[C].

1998:68-77  [7] AGRAWAL R, SRIKANT R. ?Fast Algorithm for Mining Association Rules? [C]. In Proceedings of the 20th VLDB Conference, 1994, pp: 487-499.

