April. 9-11, 2008 in KINTEX, Gyeonggi-do, Korea

Abstract: In outdoor environment vision system, weather effects are complex noise. They degrade the performance of vision algorithm such as feature detection, segmentation and object recognition. Rain scene has property that an image pixel is never always covered by rain throughout the whole video. Even though we can only see a short distance ahead because of heavy rain, each pixel of the scenes taken by camera is not always covered by rain. If pixel is affected by rain, this pixel has large intensity but this pixel has original chromatic information. Consequently we make a recovery to original color value via decreasing intensity to original value. Proposing recursive data processing, we can estimate the intensity value of each pixel. And this method needs the periodic reset. If unsuitable estimated mean value is determined because of heavy noise, henceforth cleanly captured scene has little weight effect for estimated mean value.

Accordingly we reset the weighted value between estimated intensity and new captured one. Additionally, the proposed method has big advantages, including small equation by repeatedly estimating the mean of intensity and handling in real-time and benefits that too simple and it can implement to real time processing. And we obtain more pure scene than existing methods.

Keywords: Rain Removal, Kalman Filter  1. INTRODUCTION  In indoor environment, video is captured in ideal environment because artificial illumination is formed.

Other hands in outdoor environment, it is important to remove weather effect. Because natural environment have various noise such as steady weather condition (fog, mist and haze) and dynamic weather condition (rain, snow and hail) [3]. Therefore it is difficult to implement in robust environment that vision algorithms such as feature detection, segmentation and object recognition.

Removal of bad weather effect is developed by Garg  and Nayar. In steady weather, water droplets or smoke particles are very small and steadily float in the air. By modeling the scattering and chromatic effects, he gets the good results. In dynamic weather, he developed the physical properties of Rain. Using spatial temporal property, detect the rain region. For reduce the false alarm, Garg and Nayar use compute spatio-temporal correlation. But this method has complex processes [2].

Another proposed method that by properly setting a camcorder's parameters such as exposure time, aperture, etc., the rain could be removed when recording the video. But this method cannot handle the scenario of heavy rain and motion blurred.[4] Zhang proposed that incorporates both temporal and chromatic properties of rain in video. The temporal property states that an image pixel is not always covered by rain throughout the entire video. The chromatic property states that the changes of R, G, and B values of rain-affected pixels are approximately the same. In rain detection, K-mean Clustering divide between rain and background region.

By a blending, replace the rain region. But this method is not a real time processing [1].

We propose a new algorithm that Intensity estimation  using Kalman Filter in real time system [7]. Assume that camera and captured object are fixed. We calculate the estimated intensity using Recursive data processing for real time processing. Proposed method is very simple and has good results.

2. PROPERTIES OF RAIN  2.1 Temporal Property of Rain  Fig. 1 show that the spatial temporal property of rain.

The pixel of n frame has large intensity when rain is captured. Therefore rain produces sharp intensity variations at a pixel. Rain has the temporal property states that an image pixel is not always covered by rain throughout the entire video. Although pixel is covered by rain, this pixel has chromatic information.

Therefore we make a recovery to original color value via descend intensity to original value.

ID_.

n-nlfn I FrmI jb I~ ~ ~ Ud_  Fig. 1 The intensity change at a pixel due to a falling raindrop.

System dynamic mode1w x (i xh w4- M ur Ar(O.Pk )  Measur-ement model,  Image Drop (a) The Field of view of a rain drop  Initial conditions  indepenidene assumption:  E? ) X E *lo) = P  E<KT)=O tforalkndj'  .i  100t)  0 1  E  IB  3 4 5 7jjjion& (b) Experiment on the brightness of raindrop  31ate estimate extrplation: ( ) 4)k X1 1(+)  nrror ariarce xtrapclationr P() = 4D P r WP, +0Q  itaLte estimate observatio al update  4(+x)= t} + Kk xs .' Errr variance pXate  <(+)Pt H PKj H( Kalman gain mtrEix  Table I Discrete-Time Kalman Filter Equations.

Fig. 2 The intensity change at a pixel due to a falling raindrop.

La  I;  I IE  (a) Original scene  Fig. 3 Rain detection  Assume that presented point of the pixel in a frame is the same point in other frames. In accordance with Camera, filmed objects and back ground are fixed. For videos of stationary scenes taken by a stationary camera, the method can still be applied after performing video stabilization to remove camera motion [5, 6].

2.2 Intensity Property of Rain  Fig. 2 explains the intensity of pixel screened by rains.

Fig 2(a) shows that background information is projected on all of pixel of the image because reflection by rains makes FOV(Field Of View) increase to 165?. Fig 2(b) shows the results from above mentioned. The intensity from point A to E gets increasing and indicates different values one another. However, the intensity of pixel veiled by rains almost shows similar values. Therefore, pixels influenced by rains have large intensity, and the values are almost similar in the image.

Fig. 3 shows the result from detecting rains in the picture. That is the image gotten using temporal and intensity property. K-mean clustering with Xiaopeng Zhang arid Teck Khim Ng detects rains and shows it.

However, K-mean clustering has a disadvantage, which isn't able to handle data in real-time. That is why K-mean clustering estimates each frame with the intensity of each pixel, photographing over regular frame. To solve this problem, in next chapter, the intensity of pixels is estimated using Kalman Filter.

3. Intensity Estimation Using Kalman Filter  Discrete-Time Kalman Filter Equations was used to estimate intensity of image. We set the initial value  below that 'K- 1, HK=1' P6I, X0 100 and check the property of parameter, Qk and Rk.

If Q. is too small, reliability of Xk.,,is large value and revise value of Xk] is small relatively. Therefore it needs many frames to get wanted intensity estimation.

However this case robust noise even though heavy noise in measurement. Accordingly this property has good point for impulse noise such as rain. Relative to increase of Qk, the time to reach the proper value is decrease.

However this means that noise of Xk is enormous.

So estimation value is similarity with measurement value. Therefore we decide Qk =5 with proper trade off.

Rk means noise variance of measurement.

Consequently relative to ratio between Rk and Qk  (noise variance of Xk] ), it decide that how fast reach to proper estimation and weights ofmeasurement and   1l5  1-     Original X Kalman Estimation  105 - Nayar Zhang  -: 100  a) 95  _D a) 95 -i   85.L 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90  Frame number  Fig. 4 results of intensity estimation  50 100 Frame number  Fig. 6 results of intensity estimation  (a) Original scene (b) Proposed method  (a) uriginal scene (b) vroposed metnoc  (c) Ztang's metnod  (i1) INdayar- S IILeIUCo  Fig. 5 25h frame images in result video of rain removal  Xk . If Rk is too large, estimation is robust noise, but increase of time to reach to proper estimation. In this research, we decide large value ( Rk = 50) because our goal is to remove impulse noise such as rain.

4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT  Fig. 4 shows intensity variations on random points by each method. The results indicate the proposed method makes intensity be estimated to nearly mean value rather than when using K. Garg, S.K. Nayar, Xiaopeng Zhang, and Teck Khim Ng.

Also, Fig. 5 shows the 25th frame of the experimental video and results. (a) is an original image, and (b) is the  Fig. 7 25th frame images in result video of rain removal  result from proposed method. (c) is the result from Xiaopeng Zhang and Teck Khim Ng, and (d) is result from the method by K. Garg and S.K. Nayar. As shown above, the proposed method shows better results. In case of (c) and (d), we can find a part appearing rains  In K. Garg and S.K. Nayar method, if it decides that the n frame is pixel of rain region, recovery value is got by average of n-I frame and f+1 frame such as equation (1). However a pixel of continuous frames is able to rain region. Therefore Fig. 5 (d) show that high intensity pixels such as rain even though rain remove process.

At Equation (2), it is used by Xiaopeng Zhang and Teck Khim Ng, and the value C means color values, Cb color  values not influenced by rains, Cr color values  influenced by rains, and then value C is restored by c( - blending  (1)       2 120 u)  a) C 118 7a)- L 116   Original Kalman Estimation Nayar Zhang    108 L 0 150  in = (in-I + ln+l) / 2    C =UCb +(1 U)Cr (2)  Fig. 6 shows the result from the method using Kalman Filter is superior to any other experimental images. Also, Fig. 7 shows an excellent result.

Therefore, enlarged images indicate that the proposed method is able to get better results. Additionally, the proposed method has big advantages, including small equation by repeatedly estimating the mean of intensity and handling in real-time and benefits that too simple and it can implement to real time processing.

5. FURTHERWORK  This result is only stationary camera as yet. We will apply the scenes taken by a moving camera [5, 6].

Therefore We must get Homogeneous matrix between each frame. This matrix is used when intensity estimation for each pixel [8]. For various environments, we expect that Extended Kalman Filter is more robust and will develop suitable algorithm [7].

