Miniaturized Data Acquisition System for Extreme Temperature Environments

Abstract A data acquisition system is being developed for use on the NASA Lunar-Mars series of missions. The unit will accept inputs from multiple types of sensors, employing three types of input channels that each incorporate programmable elements to accommodate a wider variety of input signals. Based in part on a subsystem called the Remote Health Node (RHN) that was originally developed during the 1990s for use on the now-defunct NASA X-33 "space plane", the Remote Electronics Unit (REU) is being developed using a 0.5 micron Silicon Germanium (SiGe) BiCMOS technology from IBM with a circuit library that has been designed to operate normally across a temperature range from -180 degrees C up through +125 degrees C. 12  This NASA project is one of the Exploration Technology Development Projects (EDTP) associated with NASA's Radiation Hardened Electronics for Space Environments (RHESE) program. A large team combining both University and Industry partners is being led by Dr. John Cressler from the Georgia Institute of Technology. Other University team members include the University of Arkansas, Auburn University, the University of Maryland, the University of Tennessee, and Vanderbilt University.

Industry members are BAE Systems, Boeing, Lynguent, and Jet Propulsion Laboratories. IBM is acting as the foundry.

The REU will support sixteen input channels, including twelve low speed channels designed for signals in the 1-200 Hz range, two higher speed channels that support inputs up to 5 KHz, and two charge amplifier channels that support piezoelectric transducers up to 5 KHz. All sixteen input channels reside on a single mixed signal ASIC that includes analog-to-digital (A/D) conversion to provide a digital output for back-end processing of the signals. The low speed and high speed channels incorporate a programmable Wheatstone bridge that can be programmed as a 1/4, 12, or full bridge, along with variable gain amplifiers. The A/D converter employs a novel Wilkinson architecture that 1 1-4244-1488-1/08/$25.00 C 2008 IEEE.

2 IEEEAC paper # 1652, Version 3, Updated January 9, 2008  allows 16 inputs without the use of an analog multiplexer, employs common circuitry to minimize die area, and dissipates very little power.

The programmable elements of the input channels are controlled by a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) that also provides signals for both sensor stimulation and input channel calibration. These signals are translated to analog values by a pair of digital-to-analog (D/A) converters that reside on each of the low and high speed channels. The stimulus is boosted to higher voltages through use of a current mirror that employs special high voltage transistors that do not require any special processing steps. Back-end processing will also include a small processor to supply commands and accept data before passing the information on to the main computer via RS- 485 links.

Support of extreme temperatures is achieved through the use of device models that have been extended to cover the desired temperature range, adapted technology ground rules to support long term reliability, and unique packages that are designed for this extended range. The circuitry employs both heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs) and field effect transistors (FETs). Where needed, radiation hardened by design (RHBD) techniques are being employed in the circuits to provide mitigation against single event latch-up (SEL), single event upsets (SEU), and total dose accumulation.

