Multi-Standard WIMAX/UMTS System Framework Based on SDR

Abstract In this work, we are proposing a novel approach targeted to handling signal processing and data transmission tasks related to a multi-standard terminal encompassing WiMAX and UMTS standards. We shall present an innovative Software-Defined-Radio (SDR)-based framework which will be able to arrange the digital processing tasks concerning the baseband level of the multi- standard transceiver architecture. In particular, an object- oriented model will be proposed for the baseband level implementation. The general structure consists of a number of modules for each specific and/or common component of UMTS and WiMAX signal processing chain. We start to design the SDR architecture model as a software prototype.

The framework model was built as C++ class library in order to evaluate how SDR-based implementation works and to assess its quantitative performances. This model allows to consider the process of the packet interaction between transmitter and receiver and, moreover, the inter- packet interaction inside each module of the terminal. After all, the proposed software model will be integrated into the hardware platform and the final tests will be performed.12  TABLE OF CONTENTS  1. INTRODUCTION..................................... 1 2.BASE COMPONENTS.................................... 2  3.SYSTEM FRAMEWORK..................................... 5 4. IMPLEMENTING THE SDR MODULES ...................6 5. HARDWARE PLATFORM SELECTION .................. 11 6. PROTOTYPING THE WIMAX/UMTS SYSTEM ... 11 7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK.................... 11  8.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................... 12 9. REFERENCES..................................... 12 BIOGRAPHIES ............ ......................... 13  1. INTRODUCTION  Several current technologies are putting people together in a small world where everyone can easily find a way to stay connected with those of their interest. Today, people care the most about being updated and informed with every piece of data that can be retrieved from different places in the world. Light devices such as smartphones or PDAs are showing great reliability in communicating data among different remote areas. These devices are playing an  11-4244-1488-1/08/$25.00 C 2008 IEEE 2 IEEEAC paper #1032, Version 2.2 (final), Updated December 15, 2007  important role in the new telecommunication era where we can virtually carry our office applications everywhere we go. People can check their e-mails, exchange faxes, surf the Internet, edit documents and do shopping on the go. The connection provided to users of these devices is significant for the quality and amount of data transmitted to preinstalled applications. Scholars are attempting to co-exist the varieties of technologies commonly applied by focusing their research on introduction of proper multi-standard, multi-protocol, and multi-air interface devices.

Up to now 2G standards such as Interim Standard 54 (IS- 54), and IS-136, IS-95, Global System Mobile Communication (GSM) and Personal Digital Cellular (PDC) are widely used in the mobile communication area.

At the same time, 3G standards such as: International Mobile Telecommunication-2000 (IMT-2000), Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) 2000 and Universal Mobile telecommunication System (UMTS) [1] are widespread. Recently, mobile communication systems have increased their data rates up to 2 Mbps, thus allowing real- time transmission of real-video format. Moreover, wireless standards for local area networking, such as: IEEE 802.1Ix [2], Bluetooth, and emerging specifications of IEEE 802.16 are becoming more and more popular [3].

Present technologies oblige their users to buy a particular device for each type of communication standard, and operators have to deploy base stations for each system.

However, these circumstances require to seamlessly switch user's equipment from one cellular standard to another or from the cellular network to hotspot. For this case, emerging multi-standards, multi-bands, multi-modes [4], and multi-protocols systems have been developed. The capability to integrate as many as possible diverse services in a single terminal is extended. Therefore, Software Radio technology [14] (SDR) can serve as the fundamental technology. SDR allows system reconfiguration and reprogramming by using only software commands. These commands help to build the required architecture of the transceiver. Thus, SDR is the mechanism supporting system rebuild on request. The work of SDR includes hardware adaptability by software means that is by downloading the necessary software from the network and installation. By this way no skills and no efforts are required from the user.

The usage of new standards, such as WiMAX (IEEE 802.16e-2005) [5] for providing a fast Internet connection with ability to transmit large data files, and UMTS in telephony family, are spreading widely [6]. Thereby,     examination of the possibility to realize at least two standards over one common element base, that will be then handled and rebuilt by SDR [7], has become relevant.

Thus, SDR is one possible way to realize the structure of the device with high mobility, flexibility, and reconfigurability [8]. This technology can provide seamless switching between existing air-interface standards. The basic definition of SDR can be sketched as follows: SDR is a system which can realize connection between different hardware units, arranged in a radio node, and govern the whole process by using software functions. This kind of control widens perspectives of SDR systems' development as it is the main part of mobile devices. Moreover, the chance to handle the system consisting of different radio- functional units by applying software commands can be relevant for the reconfiguration and reprogramming [9].

In this paper we present a new framework model for multi- standard device. The system switching must be carried out by SDR. The multi-standard feature is composed of two new standards: Universal Mobile Telecommunication System (UMTS) and Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX). In addition we introduce a novel approach to handle the signal processing for those standards. The structural level of our development includes the baseband (BB) level of the transceiver architecture. We present the SDR module framework that will be able to arrange the digital processing module. The object-oriented programming environment we propose for the realization of our work. The general structure will be constructed by a number of modules for each particular component ofUMTS and WiMAX signal processing chain, and also by the modules for common units. This work aims at demonstrating how the proposed multi-standard terminal will work. We show that the system can recognize the type of the signal and select a particular mechanism for its processing according to the modulation type, code scheme and frequency range.

The uplink (UL) baseband architectures of WCDMA (Wide-band Code Division Multiplexing) and OFDM (Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing) have different radio configurations, but they can share some similar parts. Thus, we present the description of these parts together with a possible solution to realize them as common blocks using SDR.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the base components which we use to build our system. Section 3 sketches the description of a system workflow, and considers common and special blocks. Then, Section 4 presents the choice of a hardware platform to check this system. In Section 5 we present preliminary results obtained up to now by software simulations. Finally, the conclusions and directions of the future work are drawn in Section 6.

2. BASE COMPONENTS  The present situation in telecommunication area pushes vendors to find a solution to make coexisting different signal transmission technologies together in a single mobile device. These technologies can come from a cellular side, for example GSM or UMTS, and from a WLAN side that can transmit the huge data traffic over wireless connection (e.g.: Bluetooth for Personal Area Network or Wi-Fi).

Current mobile devices handle switching between different data transmission typologies by manual user interface.

Hence the user should spend their time to manage the process of transmission of any information. The biggest problem of this approach is that it strongly depends on signal power. In other words, the user cannot transmit over Wi-Fi connection if its signal is weaker then cellular one.

Therefore, the mobile device automatically switches to cellular and uses packet data transmission (like General Packet Radio Service) instead of a free local area connection. Thus, there is an actual need to provide switching between standards by a smart mechanism, that would be able not only to estimate power of the signal, but at the same time to verify the correctness of the data transmission for an application used. SDR can be solution to this problem, given that this technology allows to download, install and setup different applications for the proper user's work.

Based on these features of SDR, we selected this technology for realizing the seamless switching mechanism between UMTS and WiMAX. All this technologies are basic components of the proposed system. In the remainder of this section, we describe in detail both standards and SDR technology.

2.1 WCDMA  Cellular mobile devices of the third-generation (3G) have employed WCDMA as physical layer. The band of the channel is 5 MHz and therefore wide enough to provide correct signal reception in multipath-fading propagation for both voice and data transmission with the constant data speed equal to 3.84 Mchip/sec. In the best channel conditions, this technology allows to obtain speed up to 2 Mbps for voice, video, data, and image transmission. The general parameters for WCDMA are presented in Table 1 [1]. WCDMA is based on the direct sequence code division multiple access modulation (DS-CDMA) that enables finding multi-user scenarios. The main peculiarity of this technique is that signal energy is spread over a spectrum, therefore the signal level can be compared to a noise level.

Each side in signal transmission process knows the spreading code or pseudo-noise sequence independent from message. The advantages of spread spectrum technique for UMTS are followings: * resistance to the radio interference and distortions; * partial presence of the signal interception;     CRC TB concatenation Channel Coding Radio Frame 1 RaiSraeRt attachment CB segmentation PCCC equalization interleaving segmentation Matching Ir  U I II~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ Transport channel #1  o < Spreading | ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~CCTrCHmapping onto Physical channel mapping  Figure 1. The block scheme ofWCDMA in UL direction.

* the high level of protection from multi-path effect; * asynchronous multiple access implementation.

Table 1. WCDMA Main Parameters Parameter Description Frequency band 2110-2170/1920-1980 DL/UL(MHz) Multiple access FDD:DS/CDMA Carrier spacing 5 (MHz) Modulation Adaptive mechanism: BPSK,  QPSK, 16QAM, 64 QAM Chip rates FDD: 1.024/4.096, (Mcps) 8.192/16.384 Frame size 10/2560 (ms)/chips Frame/Slots 1/15 Coding FEC scheme:  Convolution Coding Turbo Coding  Frequency 5 MHz bandwidth gives multi- diversity path diversity with Rake  receiver mechanism Spreading Channelization code plus  Spreading code  Nevertheless, in order to avoid the inter-symbol and intra- symbol interference appearance due to the usage of a spread spectrum (SS) modulation technique, the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) provides the support for the spreading factor method consisting of two codes, in particular, channelization code and complex-valued scrambling code [1][10]. The WCDMA signal processing for baseband level is presented in Figure 1.

This modulation technique allows to extend the signal to a larger bandwidth with the same energy by reducing the amplitude of the signal. Therefore, the signal propagation can escape any voluntarily jamming action with certain noise threshold. Meanwhile WCDMA facilitates multiple accessing simultaneous at the same frequency band.

size of transport block is equal to 1280 bits and the end frame size is 2400 bit, the Transmission Time Interval (TTI) equals to 20. It means that we are going to have at least two frames for transmission, since multiplexing module compacts frames that received each 10 ms. We consider one transport channel and correspondingly have one physical channel, hence spreading process needs following parameters: spreading factor = 16 and channelization code = 16 chips, in other words one symbol will be spread over 16 chips [10].

2.2 WiMAX  As the number of Internet users is growing every day, more and more Wi-Fi access points appear in urban areas.

However different points can be interfered by each other and by the surrounding buildings. In a rural area, provision of a broadband connection by cable or digital subscriber line (DSL) technologies can be complicated because of the natural disturbances or budget limitations. To this end, the recently appeared standard IEEE 802.16-2004 can be implemented to cope with the last mile problem [11]. In urban area, with high density of the interference the most important quality is good resistance to multi-reflection effect. Industrial name of this standard is Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX). Because of wireless nature of this new technology the networks based on it can easily scale up and are flexible to changes.

WiMAX forum promises to support high data rate for a large number of subscribers over a wide coverage. The WiMAX implementation can be very suitable for operators since it does not require frequent base stations or access point installations.

WiMAX PHY provides multiple specifications based on same Media Access Control layer [5]:  - WirelessMAN-SC is a single carrier modulation format.

- WirelessMAN- OFDM is orthogonal frequency division multiplexing with 256 FFT points.

- WirelessMAN-OFDMA is orthogonal frequency division multiplexing with access 2048 FFT points transform.

In order to implement the proposed process, we have to determine the initial parameters. As discussed above, the     This WirelessMAN-OFDM specification supports non-line- of-sight capability that is an important feature in urban area.

This quality is achieved by using frequency band less than 11 GHz. This type of signal processing structure for the baseband level is determined using the multi-carrier transmission technique and is perfectly suitable for uplink and downlink transmissions. The main parameters for IEEE 802.16-2004 are presented in Table 2.

Table 2. Main parameters of WiMAX Parameters WiMAX (802.16-2004) Type of OFDM256 modulation Channel bandwidth Variable bandwidths from 1 to  28 MHz with 256 FFT Spectral efficiency 3.1-3.8 Mbit/s/Hz Guard interval Variable length guard interval  at the beginning of the packet to compensate for multipath interference: range from /32 to 1/4 symbol time  Duplexing Time Division Duplexing (TDD), Frequency Division Duplexing (FDD), Half- Duplex FDD  Cover Supported mesh network topology Different antenna systems are supported: Diversity, MIMO, SDMA  First of all, we introduce OFDM as a multi-carrier modulation technique [23], that employs densely spaced orthogonal subcarriers and overlap its spectrums (Figure 2).

Figure 2. OFDM subcarrier spectrum  Because subcarriers are orthogonal, the bandwidth is used very efficiently. Due to this features the inter-carrier interference is avoided, at least over slowly time-varying fading channels [23]. The WiMAX signal processing chain with OFDM PHY is depicted in Figure 3.

OFDM technique becomes very important in urban area where mobile device meets a non-line-of-sight signal  stuffed with reflections, diffractions, and scatterings. In this case, the downlink signal includes diffracted propagation paths, a scattering energy, multiply reflected parts and the direct path.

a)  vt ?-  Figure 3. The block scheme of WiMAX PHY layer architecture in UL direction  The main principle of the OFDM technique is to divide the signal into N parallel data streams, where each one has data rate equal to 1/N of the original rate. After each data stream has been mapped to a tone at a unique frequency, all of them are joined together in a single OFDM symbol by applying the inverse fast furrier transformation (IFFT). The OFDM symbol transmission is carried out by all parallel subchannels simultaneously. The high rate is reached by simultaneous transmission. However, the rate of each subchannel may not be high. On the one hand the subchannel mechanism is required the narrow bandwidth for minimization of the signal distortions; on the other hand, wide bandwidth guarantees the required high data rate.

2.3 Software Defined Radio  Present mobile telecommunication services promises to support different applications. In the majority of the cases, a different application is related to a particular standard [12].

For the purpose of providing new services, the novel user equipment (UE) appeared, thus pushing users to buy it.

Nevertheless, the UE with a little enhancement is existed very often and sometimes a costumer cannot purchase this piece of equipment because he or she knows that after a while a new one will appear. It complicates the situation in telecommunication area and requires vendors to find new solutions to coexist as many as possible different communication standards in a single mobile node [13].

However, even if different standards existed in the same device, the management between them should be realized by manual switching. It makes users' life difficult, and normally costumers do not want to perform any manual tuning before sending data through their mobile devices.

Therefore, switching between different standards must guarantee users that their data will be sent through dedicated network configuration. This point makes vendors face the fact that switching between different standards in a mobile node should be done by software commands and the mobile device must be smart enough to choose the correct transmission environment. Moreover, the node must support the opportunity to be reprogramming under corresponded services and network requirements. These problems can be     solved by implementing the Software Defined Radio (SDR) technology.

The approach to this problem was proposed by J. Mitola [14]. According to Mitola, the development of the SDR technology has five levels of development:  - Zero level: the device functionality can be reconfigured by changes of hardware level.

- First level supports Software-Controlled Radio. In such kind of devices, there is no possibility to change modulation type or frequency band, however these devices can support multi-standards by applying some program controlled transceivers, for example, mobile phones with GSM/CDMA or Wi-Fi access points with two range frequency.

- Second level presents SDR modules, where user can handle frequency band, modulation type, hopping type.

- Third level is Ideal Software Radio. All components are digital, only in mobile phone case there is exception which consists of analog antenna, microphone and dynamic, that must be analog. SDR Forum is oriented on these type devices which will allow to make an essential progress in the telecommunication area.

- Forth level is the Ultimate Software Radio. SDR Forum determines that in these kind devices will be possible to control and manage traffic, support wide frequency range, different air interfaces and applications. At the same time, device can instantly switch between interfaces and track a location of user by using GPS, transmit video into mobile device from a closest station, and use satellite channels.

SDR is a rapidly evolving technology that receives a lot of research attention and attracts a deep interest in the telecommunication industry. Over the last few years, analog radio transceiver systems have been replaced by digital radio transceiver systems for various radio applications.

Moreover, programmable hardware is increasing and being used in digital radio systems at different functional levels.

SDR technology aims to take advantage of the programmable hardware to build an open software architecture based on the radio system. The general block scheme of SDR supported device is shown on Figure 4.

Figure 4. The general block scheme of SDR  As the picture shows, the Digital Signal Processing (DSP) is the central component in the realization of SDR structure.

The special attention should be drawn to the choice of DSP processor and its main features. All possible functions are executed in the transceiver BB level presented by digital architecture. Due to this solution, we are able to implement all processing in the digital environment.

3. SYSTEM FRAMEWORK  In our work, we focus on the SDR technology and applied this approach as the mechanism for seamless switching between different standards: UMTS and WiMAX [15]. We believe that SDR technique allows to reprogram and reconfigure our system by using a software function, which should be written in a special library. This library will consist of object-oriented descriptions for each module of BB signal processing part. In our approach we are going to integrate the object-oriented library into DSP based platform in order to evaluate how the proposed system works. Also SDR implementation allows to reduce time expenditure of switching between different wireless environments.

In order to achieve better performances for WiMAX as well as for UMTS, the new design of the BB physical layer for mobile devices based on commanding by the SDR control module is presented in this paper. The block scheme of the signal processing is given in Figure 5.

Y_Front- ADC/ BB-) Upper Uer end DAC level levels Interface  SDR r- control CP Adder/ IFFT/FFT Channel Encoder/ module: |Removal 256 Equalizer Decoder  Data Mapper/ Interleaver/ Spreader/ DeMapper Deinterleaver DeSpreader  WiMX QPSK UMTS _  SDR Library  Figure 5. The main block scheme for the transceiver based on SDR modules in the baseband level     The special chains of processed blocks are built by the SDR modules which are included in the WiMAX/UMTS SDR library. Then, the SDR library is uploaded into DSP or FPGA. The working principle of SDR modules and the SDR library are schematically illustrated in Figure 6.

The top layer of Figure 6 contains the part in which user interacts with the system through the pre-developed terminal, i.e., "User Interface". In the same layer, the interface communicates the user's queries to the next phase of the same layer, i.e., "Control Module". In the control module, a simple monitoring phase is carried out. In this phase, the architecture ensures that the queries are correctly routed to the right download module. After a message has been passed to the second step, the "Download Module" serves as a memory buffer, where information related to downloading is stored. In addition, depending on the message received from the previous step, the Download Module communicates with the Network to retrieve necessary information.

The first layer is connected to the following one through the link established between the Download module and the "Analyser" stage of the architecture. During this step, the system analyzes the retrieved information in order to match it with the corresponding correct condition, and as a result, the way signals are processed is specified. In parallel to this horizontal function, the analyzer operates also in the vertical direction in order to ensure that no negative impact is made on the hardware layer.

IJ  Figure 6. The block scheme of system framework for SDR module and SDR library  The block developed in this model is the SDR control module with WiMAX/UMTS SDR library. It consists of three basic components: "Set of software procedures", "Sequences library for WiMAX/UMTS" and "Configurator  of chain". The request of a correct function structure comes from Control module, through "Analyser" system verifies the need parameters sent from the network. Set of Software procedure stores functions' description for all possible scenarios and connects to the Sequence library that provides the description of signal processing. After that, Configurator of chain collects some necessary functions required by specific signal transmission and reception procedures and connects to hardware level, where these functions are implemented in digital form.

The bottom layer of the proposed workflow includes the hardware elements which obtain the particular chain of signal processing. The Analyser plays a significant role as a mechanism of the work verification. In other words, this module compares the work done by hardware with requirements involved during established connections.

4. IMPLEMENTING THE SDR MODULES  4.1 Common Blocks  In this section, we describe the structure of the physical layers of both UMTS and WiMAX that are based on WCDMA and OFDM techniques respectively. We factor out the main blocks that can be implemented as SDR blocks.

Figure 2 shows the WCDMA architecture. It contains such blocks as: CRC attachment, Transport Block (TB) concatenation and Code Block (CB) segmentation, Channel Coding, Radio frame (Rf) equalization, 1st interleaving, Rf segmentation, Rate Matching, Multiplexing, Physical channel segmentation, 2nd interleaving, Data Mapping, and Spreading (Channelization and Scrambling).

In OFDM baseband level architecture shown in Figure 3, there are the following blocks: Channel Coding, Interleaver, Constellation Mapper (Data Mapping process), Serial-to- Parallel (S/P) Converter, IFFT with 256 points, Parallel-to- Serial (P/S) Converter, and Cyclic Prefix Adder.

The common blocks and special blocks are presented in each baseband architecture We can organize them in the following order: Channel Coding, Interleaver, and Data Mapping.

4.1.1 Channel coding  In this subsection, we first explain UMTS encoder structure and then WiMAX encoder. Each of them has it own parameters. In the proposed model, we combine encoder structures in one SDR block using a digital procedure description. Since in OFDM the turbo coding scheme is existed as an optional performance, we can define the turbo coding block as a common block in our UMTS/WiMAX architecture.

Channel coding block plays a very important role in baseband level signal processing. The choice of scheme allows to guarantee grate error capability. In 3GPP     specification TS 25.212 V7.4.0 (2007-03) two different ways of data encoding are presented: convolutional encoding and turbo encoding schemes. Turbo coding scheme was evaluated as a more robust method for channel encoding, which allows to perform right decision in sense of correction error after signal transmission [16]. By applying this scheme the system can achieve a higher throughput.

There are two possible methods of Channel Coding in UMTS physical layer architecture:  - convolutional coding (CC); - turbo coding (TC).

The choice of coding scheme and coding rate depends on the specific data and/or control channel. Such a choice is specified in UMTS standard [17] and shown in Table 3.

Table 3. The correspondence TrCH types to coding scheme and coding rate  Coding scheme  Convolution coding  Turbo coding  Coding rate  1/2  1/2, 1/3  1/3  code internal interleaver which forms input bits to a rectangular matrix (RM) with padding, intra-row and inter- row permutation of RM and output bits sequence from the RM with pruning. The code block size used in bits input varies between 40 and 5114. Three types of RM exist for different block sizes: 5, 10 and 20 rows. The number of columns depends on the input bit sequence and prime number of inter-row permutation. After all permutations the bit sequence are written into the 2nd constituent encoder by taking columns by columns out. There is a code block in the output of the Turbo encoder consisting of three tails bits from I't constituent encoder, second constituent encoder and input bits to the Turbo encoder. One of the Turbo coder parameters is the transfer function, which characterizes relation between input and output. For the 8-states constituent code of PCCC the transfer function is defined as follows:  (1)G(D) = 1L gl(D) j  where g1(D) and go(D) are polynomial functions for feedback branch and parity bit respectively. These polynomials are defined as:  go(D)= 1+D2+ D3  gl(D)= 1+D+D3  (2)  (3)  In our framework model, we work with dedicated channels (DCH) of both transport and physical layer, which provides data transmission. Consequently, the turbo coding scheme can be chosen with a coding rate equal to 1/3. The Turbo encoder component in the UMTS framework consists of two constituent encoders and an internal interleaver. The encoder block scheme is shown in Figure 7.

This scheme is based on a Parallel Concatenated Convolutional Code (PCCC) with two 8-statets constituent encoders and one internal interleaver. Each encoder is a binary Recursive Systematic Convolutional (RSC) code, which is the key component of Turbo Coding. The RSC principle works as Linear Feedback.

Xk  Input  bits Xk st  Zk  constituent  encoder  Intemnal Output  interleaver d bits constituent  encoder x  Fieure 7. Block scheme of UMTS Turbo encoder  Shift-Register and behaves as pseudo-random scrambler.

The prime value of shift registers shall be equal to zero when input bits are being encoded. The tail bits are padded in terms of trellis termination of turbo code processing. The next important block of the Turbo encoder is the Turbo  The next part described is the Coding Scheme in WiMAX baseband level [18]. There are three different possibilities to realize the coding process in Forward Error Correction subblock. One possible solution is to use Reed-Solomon outer code and rate-compatible convolutional inner code.

Another way is to use Block Turbo Coding. Finally, the last possible approach is to adopt Convolutional Turbo Coding (CTC) scheme. Since Turbo Coding scheme is more robust and advanced scheme, we consider it as a perspective direction for emerging standard IEEE 802.16-2004. In our model, we took the Convolutional Turbo Coding in order to apply it like SDR block for both cases. Moreover, this specification is included in the WCDMA coding scheme.

The constituent encoder is one of the central parts of the CTC encoder that uses a double binary Circular RSC code.

The block scheme of encoder is shown in Figure 8.

k/2 binary  Figure 8. Convolutional Turbo Code encoder block scheme for WiMAX baseband processing  The polynomials distinguishing the connections inside the Constituent encoder are defined in symbol notation as follows:   TrCh type BCH, PCH, RACH  DCH, FACH    Yparity bit: 1 + D2 +D? (4)  Feedback branch: 1 D +D (5)  However, in more precise description there are some discrepancies in each of Turbo Coding implementations.

The comparison between two schemes is realized in Table 4. As it is shown in the table below, the main difference between coding schemes is that double bit sequence is present at input of encoder in OFDM process chain. In addition, inside the RSC, the second bit should allow for future bit sequence transformation.

Table 4. Turbo Code Comparison for WCDMA and OFDM implementations  Characteristics  Type  Termination  Polynomials  Rates  WCDMA OFDM  Binary, 8-state Duo-Binary, 8-state  Tail bits  13, 15, 17 1/41 12  , 3,  Circular  13, 15  up to /8  4.1.2 Interleaver  The interleaving process allows to avoid the burst error during signal transmission. In both cases, two permutations are performed. From the UMTS point of view there is first interleaving made on a TrCH bit sequence. The inter- columns permutation is done by the matrix with determined number of columns. The number of columns depends on the size of TTI (see Table 5). The main parameter of permutation scheme choice is TTI which is defined as a set of serially concatenated transport blocks and indicates how often data from the higher layer comes to the physical layer.

According to particular permutation pattern the output of I't interleaving is read as bit sequence.

Table 5. Link between TTI and number of columns  TTI, ms      Number of columns      Permutation patterns <0>  <0,1> <0, 2, 1,3>  <0, 4, 2, 6, 1, 5, 3, 7>  Next important process is intra-frame interleaving. The second interleaving is performed in the physical channel.

This intra-frame permutation limits the number of columns to 30, and uses the universal common pattern to minimize the processing load and thus to reduce hardware scale and power consumption. Also here a matrix has a rectangular structure and it is constituted by padding the dummy bits, which are then pruned away in the output of the matrix after the inter-column permutation.

In OFDM, we work with frequency interleaving mechanism, which is aimed to spread the burst errors out in the bit-stream after FEC. This process is accomplished in two step permutation: first sub-carrier permutation and second bit-to-symbol mapping permutation. Thus, the mapping is performed by constellation of adjacent code bits into nonadjacent subcarriers. Then these code bits are mapped onto significant components. The block size equals to 384 coded bits per one interleaved block. This number was defined by the functional dependence interleaver block size and modulation type given that in our framework model, we use the QPSK modulation and the default number of subchannels, i.e., 16. The number of code bits NCPC equals to 2 in each sub-carrier. Thus, we have fixed permutation pattern defined by equation:  mk = (Ncbp, /12) k.odl2+ floor(k 112) (6)  where mk is coded bit index after first and before second permutation, Nh'p, is number of coded bits per allocated subchannels per OFDM symbol, for our model assume 384, k is code bit index in input and equals to 0, 1, ..., Ncbps- 1.

Second permutation allows constructing the bit-to-symbol mapping by equation:  jk mk + (mk + N,,,, floor(12.mk / N,bp, ))mod(l) (7)  The issue is creation of common interleaving block. The way of transformation will depend on kind of characteristic bit sequences. These bit sequences should have the size corresponding to OFDM or WCDMA model.

4.1.3 Data mapping  In this subsection, we describe the data mapping of the bit sequence onto I and Q branches using QPSK constellation.

In our UMTS/WiMAX system, we consider QPSK as mapping scheme allocated before spreading transformation of WCDMA signal and before FFT mechanism for the OFDM signal. It is necessary to say that QPSK mapping is a transfer of bit sequence consisting of binary 0 and binary 1 into the inphase (+1) and the quadrature (-1) of the real- valued part respectively. Below we define the similarities and differences between the QPSK mapping of WCDMA signal and OFDM bit sequence in respect to SDR realization.

Since our model is developed for both dedicated transport and physical channels, in followings explanations we speaks only about these types of channels in UMTS chain.

Data Mapping is accomplished after mapping Code Composite Transport Channel (CCTrCH) [19], constituted by multiplexing of few Transport Channels (TrCH), onto Dedicated Physical Channel, as depicted on Figure 9. One PhCH can include just one CCTrCH, in other words one CCTrCH can be spread between different PhCHs, but there is no different CCTrCHs in one PhCH.

Figure 9. TrCHs multiplexing and mapping onto PhCHs  In WCDMA UL two types of dedicated physical channels (data and control) are multiplexed with I-Q/code technique which allows the parallel transmission separated different Dedicated Physical Data Channels (DPDCHs) and Dedicated Physical Control Channel (DPCCH) as shown in Figure 10.

First step is the I-Q mapping in this constellation and then applying the combination either channelization code and scrambling or just scrambling code, in case if there is no other PhCHs.

DPDCH1 DPDCH2 DPDCH3 Dedicated Physical  DPCCH J  Channel (Control information provided by physical layer)  Figure 10. Physical layer transmission with parallel dedicated channels  Each DPDCH shall be mapped onto I and Q components, and DPCCH can be mapped only onto Q component. This technique allows the separation of different signals by using the orthogonal phases 0 and n/2. The UMTS provides the transmission of up to six DPDCHs and one DPCCH simultaneously.

From WiMAX point of view OFDM signal has a constellation mapper in the signal processing scheme.

Different data rates are supported in WiMAX signal processing. It influences onto the mapping technique. This process provides the map of bits into the OFDM symbol description by applying gray-mapped QPSK technique.

Here code bits are mapped into I and Q symbol coordinates.

In OFDM case, we perform signal transformation with set of subcarriers separated as data carriers, pilot carriers and null carriers. Data carriers carry information bits. Pilots ensure the synchronization between Transmitter and Receiver parts and channel estimation as well. And nulls are used to avoid Inter-Symbol Interference, i.e. Guard Interval in time domain, and like the direct current (DC) carrier.

There is no any information in nulls carriers. Thus all allocated data subcarriers shall be modulated by Gray- mapped QPSK. In the output of constellation mapper we have I and Q symbols which are organized into OFDM symbol after IFFT block. The general mapping scheme  becomes the same for both cases.

This module can be implemented as the common unit for both configurations independently, so that in WCDMA we obtain up to 6 channels and 200 subchannels in OFDM.

The software system framework was defined in object- oriented descriptions. For our two standards we have to consider different scenarios. For first try we implement parameters defined in previous section.

4.2 Special blocks  The rest of each signal processing chains is described in proper way. As we can see from Figure 1 and Figure 2, the chain of UMTS is more complicated for WiMAX and includes different modules. Basically, we considered following modules:  - in UMTS chain: the transport block concatenation because we need to make single transport block after adding CRC; radio frame equalization block must appear to confirm the proper frame size for next processing steps, especially for the rate matching block, where the suitable frame size needs to be determined; radio frame segmentation plays important role when we work with TTI more than 10 ms. In multiplex module we arrange the frame by frame in 10 ms interval for each TrCH. The next module is the spreading block that is discussed below more specifically.

- In the WiMAX chain: the randomizer can be selected as the special block, serial-to-parallel, parallel-to-serial converters, cyclic prefix insertion and IFFT. All these signal processing elements can be concatenated in one block called OFDM symbol creation. IFFT256 is considered in more detail below.

Each special block has its own description as a class of the library. By object-oriented method we can create set of classes that defined each function separately and can be applied in future hardware implementation. The corresponding pseudo code for the radio frame segmentation module is presented in Figure 11.

The first block of the UMTS scheme is the Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) attachment. The data comes from upper layer is separated in transport blocks. Each block should have the error detection part which can be realized by adding the CRC. The size CRC can vary between 24, 16, 12, 8, and 0 bits. For our system we use CRC with 16 bits size. These parity bits must be generated by the following polynomial generator:  CRC (D) = D16 +D12 +D +1 (8)  After the CRC step, the transport blocks are transmitted during definite TTI must be concatenated and, if the size of result is greater than 5114 bits, then the code block segmentation procedure will be executed. In the initial     parameters, we choose the size of transport block equal to 1280 bits. Hence, this step we can be eliminated from the system. Next step in signal processing is presented by Frame segmentation element.

Figure 11. Example of pseudo code for radio frame segmentation module  Frame segmentation should be done to ensure the suitable end frame size which corresponds to the specified bit rate and the spreading factor. After this, Rate Matching (RM) is applied. This process plays the key role in further procedures. The matching ensures equality of the total bit rate after transport channel (TrCH) multiplexing to the total channel bit rate of the allocated dedicated physical channels (PhCH). The main parameter of the rate matching is an attribute specified for each transport channel (TrCH) and depending on the upper layers. During this step the determination of the spreading factor and the number of physical channels needed for the given number of TrCH are calculated. As a result of fulfilling this step, the correct form of TrCH multiplexing is selected that ensure the right way for physical channels mapping and data processing. After multiplexing all TrCHs into one or more Coded Composite Transport Channels (CCTrCH), we can map CCTrCH into Physical Channel, but there is one limitation. This limitation is that only one CCTrCH can be mapped onto one or several PhCHs. Ifwe have case where more than one PhCH is used, we have to apply PhCH segmentation block. In our system implementation we consider one PhCH; hence we can avoid the presence of this procedure. PhCH mapping process includes few items: Data mapping, Channelization and Scrambling. As shown in the Figure 1, a QPSK mapping is used for Data Mapping in Physical channel mapping processing. This scheme maps every two bits into one symbol.

In the special blocks description, we also focused our attention on two different modules for both chains: spreading module for UMTS and IFFT256 for WiMAX.

Spread spectrum mechanism is the most important thing in whole signal processing chain ofWCDMA PHY. It is based on the Direct Sequence which provides the expending of a bandwidth by unique channelization code. This code should be generated by code-tree of orthogonal variable spreading factor (OVSF) codes. Thus, it guarantees the orthogonality between different channels during signal transmission [1].

In OFDM chain, the main role is played by IFFT256 that converts time domain presentation into frequency domain, and provides orthogonal independency between adjacent subcarriers.

4.3 Main Procedures between SDR blocks  There are a set of inherent procedures in the system work which must be done during the signal transmission between SDR blocks: (1) Verification the signal nature, (2) Switching to particular signal path, (3) Reconfiguration of the system according to required protocol scheme, (4) Step- by-step signal processing, (5) Signal transmission in the chosen mode. These procedures present only basic process.

The BB processing which this paper is presented based on SDR blocks work. The step-by-step data exchange between common and special blocks is presented in Figure 12.

vir ,,fIJMT  4ooo o  Figure 12. Data processing block scheme   READ module rfsegmentation DETERMINE number of frames  SET input signal to particular input port IF number of frame more than 1 THEN  EXTRACT first data bits of input bits sequence  SET framel equals to input data bits PRINT length of framel  EXTRACT next data bits of input bits sequence SET frame2 equals to next part PRINT length of frame2  EXTRACT last data bits of input data bits SET frameN equals to last data bits PRINT length of frameN  SET output sequence equals to framel, frame2, frameN ENDIF  SET output port equals to output signal END  -1  E    This figure presents the data flow through main blocks that can be used a few times and special blocks that must execute only particular functions. Here also "Configurator of chain" and "Sequences library for WiMAX/UMTS" modules are equipped. First one is responsible for right construction of next processing path, and second one stores necessary number of elements. After signal verification system is reconfigured according to input data and with using the chosen protocol type. The "OUTPUT" connects to radio link and then signal must be transmitted over one of six channel types. And at the reception side we configure the receiver in relation to transmitted mode.

5. HARDWARE PLATFORM SELECTION  Current technologies in a hardware environment allow to test our system in real-time implementation. There are a couple of DSP based platforms that can be selected for validation from Lyrtech Inc.: the Small Form Factor (SFF) Software Communication Architecture (SCA) Development, the Small Form Factor (SFF) Software- defined Radio (SDR) Development Platform, the Small Form Factor (SFF) Software-defined Radio (SDR) Evaluation Module [20]. All these platforms are based on TMS320DM6446 DMP SoC from Texas Instruments [21].

For the proposed SDR based system, we chose the SFFSDR Evaluation board (see Figure 13) as far as this platform supports WiMAX technology, model based design tools, accelerating prototyping, implementation of all protocols layers for complete radio, stacking extra boards; operates with 297MHz ARM926EJ-s RISC CPU and 594MHz C64x+ DSP, in sense of power management this module has MSP430 MCU. Due to an availability of Virtex-4 SX35 FPGA from Xilinx [22] this module can perform implementation of full modem processing functions that is very important feature in meaning of multi-protocol architecture of our system. We are able to vary our requirements to each protocol inside the same hardware structure.

Figure 13. SFF SDR development platform by Lyrtech  6. PROTOTYPING THE WiMAX/UMTS SYSTEM  The WiMAX/UMTS system is implemented in high-level language as C++ with the class library. The main accent was done on the correct form of the signal processing sequence. The path for WiMAX or UMTS signal is determined in the beginning and system should verify its entity, leads the system in a relevant direction. The main goal of this software implementation is to check how our system can handle the input signal sequence. The simulation was carried out for following parameters for each subsystem. For UMTS we consider transport block with 1280 bits size, frame size is 2400 bits, channelization code with 16 chips sequence. For WiMAX we generate the bit block is equal to 1280 bits, however during channel coding operation this block is divided on turbo coding block that include 384 bits. The size of turbo coding block forms from the block determination corresponding modulation type and number of subchannels.

During software verification we obtained that our proposed model can separate different paths subject to a type of an inter sequence in the software environment. The framework of our WiMAX/UMTS system went through one scenario step and now we are directed to an extension of this model.

For the more detailed system visualization we integrate our C++ code modules into MATLAB library by means of proper dynamic linking libraries (dll) compiled by using the MATLAB C compiler. Each block can be formed with extended parameters. Modules with C++ code configurate the system work in a host. This host implementation will present a prototype. This prototype will help to analyze future real-time hardware implementation. MATLAB prototype can also provide debugging of real system: the result of real system must be equal to our MATLAB prototype.

Next step of the work development and verification is to implement it into the hardware platform based on DSP. DSP based platform allows to organize signal processing in a digital presentation that serves SDR based part of our general system.

7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  In this paper, we considered the framework of WiMAX/UMTS baseband level system for mobile device in UL transmission direction. We presented the different signal processing structures based on OFDM and WCDMA physical layer procedures. Our research work is mainly devoted to developing the approach of seamless switching between different subsystems that can be realized by SDR technology implementation. To this end, we proposed a possible solution to allow coexistence of different data transmission technologies.

The position of SDR blocks in common UMTS/WiMAX architecture for mobile terminal was shown in this paper.

We presented the different blocks of each subsystem and have identified three blocks which can be implemented as common SDR blocks. These blocks include channel coding module, interleaver module and data mapping module. We also demonstrated the work of our system in the software environment.

Next steps of the UMTS/WiMAX system development are preparation of the specification and implementation of all possible scenarios. Each scenario will include particular blocks parameters and common description of main blocks.

But we have to be carefully in case of main blocks description, because there are a plenty of features.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  We gratefully acknowledge the company Arslogica, that kindly provided us the hardware support for our experimental studies.

9. REFERENCES  [1] A. Samukic, "UMTS Universal Mobile Telecommunications System: development of standards for the third generation", Proc. of 1998 IEEE GLOBECOM Conf, Sydney (AUS) Nov. 8-12, 1998, vol.4, pp.1976- 1983.

[2] N. Fourty, T. Val, P. Fraisse, and J.-J Mercier, "Comparative analysis of new high data rate wireless communication technologies "From Wi-Fi to WiMAX", Proc. of the IEEE Autonomic and Autonomous Systems and International Conf on Networking and Services (ICAS-ICNS 05), Oct. 23-28 2005, pp.66-66.

[3] M. Komara, "SDR Architecture Ideally Suited for Evolving 802.16 WiMAX", AirNet Communications, SDR Forum Exhibition, 2004.

[4] I. Held, 0. Klein, A. Chen, C.-Y. Huang, and V. Ma, "Receiver Architecture and Performance of WLAN Cellular Multi-Mode and Multi-Standard Mobile Terminals", Proc. of 2004 IEEE VTC Fall Conf, Los Angeles (CA), Sept. 26-29 2004, vol. 3, pp. 2248 - 2253.

[5] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems, 2004.

[6] R. Weigel, and L. Maurer , D. Pimingsdorfer, A.

Springer "RF Transceiver Architectures for W-CDMA Systems Like UMTS: State of the Art and Future Trends", Proc. of the Intern. Symp. on Acoustic Wave Devices for Future Mobile Communication Systems, Chiba (JP) March 5-7, 2001, pp. 25-34.

[7] P-W. Fu, and K.C .Chen, "A Programmable Transceiver Structure of Multi-rate OFDM-CDMA for Wireless Multimedia Communications", Proc. of 2001 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf (VTC-Fall 2001), Atlantic City (NJ), Oct.7-11, 2001, vol. 3, pp. 1942-1946.

[8] L. Zhigang, L. Wei, Z. Yan, G. Wei, "A Multi-standard SDR Base Band Platform". Proc. of2003 International Conference on Computer Networks and Mobile Computing, Shanghai (PRC), Oct. 20-23, 2003, pp. 461 -464.

[9] C. Moy, A. A. Kountouris, L. Rambaud, and P. Le Corre " Full Digital IF UMTS Transceiver for Future Software Radio Systems" , Proc. ofERSA '01 Conf, Las Vegas (NV), June 25-28 2001.

[10] 3GPP TS 25.201: "Physical layer - general description".

[11] K.R. Santhi, and G.S. Kumaran, "Migration to 4 G: Mobile IP based Solutions", Proc. of International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and pp. 76 - 76.

[12] S. Zhu, M. Song, Y. Li, J. Song, and F. Ren, "Simulation platform of WCDMA based on software defined radio", Proc. of 2nd ACM International Conference on Mobile Technology, Applications and Systems, Nov. 2005, pp. 1-5.

[13] L. Ma, and D. Jia, "The Competition and Cooperation of WiMAX, WLAN and 3G", Proc. of 2nd International Conference on Mobile Technology, Applications and Systems, Nov. 2005, pp. 1- 5.

[14] J. Mitola III, "Software Radio Architecture: Object- Oriented Approaches to Wireless Systems", (new ed.).

Wiley, New York: 2004.

[15] R. Seungwan, 0. Donsung, S. Gyungchul, and K. Han, "Perspective of the next generation mobile communications and services", Proc. ofIEEE 2004 Int.

Symp. on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC 2004), Barcelona (SP), 5-8 Sept. 2004, vol.1, pp. 643-647.

[16] E. Biglieri, "Coding for Wireless Channels ", Springer, New York: 2005.

[17] 3GPP TS 25.212: "Multiplexing and channel coding (FDD)".

[18] IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1, 2006 pp. 0_1 - 822.

[19] 3GPP TS 25.211: "Physical channels and mapping of transport channels onto physical channels (FDD)".

[20] Data sheet from Lyrtech Inc. http available at: htp chwwkneopusff_.l/p.s/lrtehs _sr  d21]DateforomTdf  [21] Data sheet from Texas Instruments, http available at:  [22] Data sheet from Xilinx, http available at: httll/www.xilinx.com/  [23] L. Hanzo, W. Webb, and T. Keller, "Single- and Multi- carrier Quadrature Amplitude Modulation ", Wiley, New York: 2000.

titled: "Wireless and Satellite Communications ". The research interests of Dr. Sacchi are mainly focused on wideband mobile and satellite transmission systems based on space, time andfrequency diversity, multi-user receivers based on non conventional techniques (neural networks, genetic algorithms, higher-order statistics-based receivers etc), cross-layer PHY-MAC design, and high-frequency broadband satellite communications. He is currently local coordinator for University of Trento of research projects dealing with reconfigurable communication platforms based on MIMO techniques and space-time signal processing (ICONA project, funded by MIUR) and with exploitation of W-band for broadband satellite communications (WA VE programs, funded by ASI). Claudio Sacchi is author and co-author of more than 50 papers published in international journals and conferences and reviewer for international journals and magazines (IEEE Wireless Communications, IEEE Communications Letters, Electronics Letters, Wireless Networks, IEEE Communications Magazine, etc.). Dr. Sacchi is member of the Organizing Committees and Technical Program GLOBECOM, ACM-MOBIMEDIA, etc. Claudio Sacchi is member ofIEEE (M'01, SM'07).

BIOGRAPHIES  Olga Zlydareva is a PhD student of the University of Trento, Italy. She obtained her Master degree in Design Electronics  Systems with specialization in High Radio  Frequency Devices from "MATI"  Moscow State Aviation Technological University named after KE. Tsiolkovsky, Moscow, Russia. Her research interests  have oriented on the Software Defined Radio Technology, Wireless Technologies, Cellular Technologies, Tunable devices, Multi-standard systems, Multi-protocol systems, Physical layer of mobile devices, Reconfigurability and Reprogramming of mobile devices. The recent research focuses on the development of the baseband level of multi- standard mobile devices based on SDR technology.

