

Abstract?NASA is planning to upgrade its network infrastructure to support missions for the 21st century.  The first step is to increase the data rate provided to science missions to at least the 100 Mbps range.  This is under way, using Ka-band 26 GHz, erecting an 18-meter antenna for the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, and the planned upgrade of the Deep Space Network (DSN) 34-meter network to support the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST). 12  The next step is the support of manned missions to the Moon and beyond.  Establishing an outpost with several activities such as rovers, colonization, and observatories, is better achieved by using a network configuration rather than the current method of point-to-point.  Another challenge associated with the Moon is communication coverage with the Earth.  The Moon?s South Pole, targeted for human habitat and exploration, is obscured from Earth view for half of the 28-day lunar cycle and requires the use of lunar relay satellites to provide coverage for the times when there is no direct view of the Earth.

The future NASA and Constellation network architecture is described in the Space Communications Architecture Working Group (SCAWG) Report[1].  The Space Communications and Navigation (SCAN) Constellation Integration Project (SCIP) is responsible for coordinating Constellation requirements and has assigned the responsibility for implementing these requirements to the existing NASA communication providers: DSN, Space Network (SN), Ground Network (GN) and the NASA Integrated Services Network (NISN).

The SCAWG Report provides a future architecture but does not provide implementation details.  The architecture calls for a Netcentric system, using hundreds of 12-meter antennas, a ground antenna array, and a relay network  2 IEEEAC paper #1020, Version 5, Updated November 13, 2007  around the Moon.  The report did not use cost as a variable in determining the feasibility of this approach.  As part of the SCIP Mission Concept Review and the second iteration of the Lunar Architecture Team (LAT), the focus is on cost, as well as communication coverage using operational scenarios.  This approach maximizes use of existing assets and adds capability in small increments.

This paper addresses architecture decisions such as the Radio Frequency (RF) signal and network (Netcentric) decisions that need to be made and the difficulty of implementing them into the existing Space Network and DSN.  It discusses the evolution of the lunar system and describes its components: TDRSS, Earth-based ground stations, Lunar Relay, and surface systems.

