

Abstract?Typical ground antennas intended for use in space communication require large apertures operating at high frequencies. The challenges involved with these applications include achieving the required antenna performance in terms of antenna aperture efficiency and pointing accuracy. The utilization of a focal plane array in place of a standard single mode feed minimizes these problems. This paper discusses the key elements required to implement a focal plane array on a large high frequency antenna. It is shown that adaptive ?least mean-square? (LMS) algorithms applied to the output of the array elements obtain the optimum combining weights in real- time, even in the presence of dynamic interference such as nearby spacecraft in array?s field-of-view, or planetary radiation. This adaptive optimization capability maximizes the combined output SNR in real time, ensuring maximum data throughput in the communications link when operating in the presence of receiver noise and external interference generally present during planetary encounters.12  TABLE OF CONTENTS  1. INTRODUCTION......................................................1 2. THEORETICAL FPA PERFORMANCE ....................1 3. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION ...............................9 4.  REFERENCES.......................................................10  1. INTRODUCTION  This paper examines the conceptual design and the expected performance of a cryogenically cooled focal plane array receiver system designed for deep space communications applications. In particular, focal plane array (FPA) based receivers are investigated as a solution for recovering lost focal plane energy in large antennas intended for 32 GHz deep space communication [1].  Large aperture radio astronomy researchers have also used array feeds to produce multiple beams on the sky in the 26 to 30 GHz band [2].

The system described here uses a focal plane array of patch antennas that is designed to allow the energy in the focal- plane to be more efficiently coupled into the receiver. In addition to the increase in coupling efficiency, the patch antenna approach allows the low noise amplifiers (LNA) to  2 IEEEAC paper #1391, Version 2, Updated Dec. 14, 2007  be coupled directly to the elements, lowering complexity and cryogenic cooling requirements, and making implementation in a limited space easier.

Although the array receiver configuration presented here is applicable to virtually any antenna, the modeling and simulation is based on 32 GHz operation on a DSN 70m antenna.  The 70 m antenna was chosen as an example for several reasons. First of all, Ka-band operation on a 7 0m antenna is a worse case scenario. The ratio of the operating wavelength to antenna diameter is challenging and would normally require adaptive mechanical compensation of the main reflector surface, or similar costly and complicated techniques to achieve the desired performance. Secondly, a 32 GHz array receiver using horn antennas was demonstrated on a 70m antenna [1] and the available data allows a direct comparison to show the advantage of the patch array antenna configuration. Finally, there is a substantial amount of data available on the actual surface deformation of the 70m antenna for analysis and modeling [3, 4].

2. THEORETICAL FPA PERFORMANCE  In this section we will discuss the electromagnetic modeling of the FPA. We have chosen to use the Deep Space Network (DSN) 70-meter dual-shaped antenna for this performance investigation. The main reason for choosing this particular antenna is that it suffers from significant gain loss as a function of elevation angle. The gain loss is a result of distortion of the primary reflector which changes as the antenna tips in elevation, causing a relative change between the orientation of the gravity vector and the primary. This phenomenon exists, but to a lesser extent, on the DSN 34-meter antennas as well. As we shall see the focal plane array is quite effective in compensating for this particular gain loss. In addition we wish to illustrate the ability of the focal plane array to reduce blind pointing requirements for large antennas.

Qualitative Results  The left panel of Figure 1 shows the primary focal plane distribution when the antenna is receiving at an elevation angle of 45 degrees. In this particular case the X and Y axis scale is in pixel units rather than engineering units. For this elevation angle the distortion is minimum, and a well-  formed spot is visible. The energy distribution is well- matched to a corrugated feed horn and can be efficiently collected. If the energy is not collected but allowed to pass  through the re-imaging optics and onto the focal plane array, we may compute the array element excitation as shown in the right panel of Figure 1. For this particular  magnification the energy falls primarily on nine pixels and is efficiently collected by the focal plane array.

The extreme case of an elevation angle of 85 degrees is illustrated in Figure 2. In this case the antenna is severely distorted and the primary focal plane distribution is multi- lobed. Only a few percent of this energy is available for  coupling into a standard corrugated feed horn. Next, the energy passes through the re-imaging optics and on to the focal plane array where it can be collected with relatively  high efficiency as shown in the right hand panel of Figure 2.

The image flip that occurs between the primary and secondary focal planes is visible in this figure. Although     this image flip is present at all elevations including 45 degrees, the near symmetry of the results makes it difficult to detect in the previous figure.  These results illustrate the advantage of the focal plane array relative to a single feed horn for this particular application. Even though the energy is significantly spread out in the focal plane it can be collected efficiently by the array.

Compensation of Gravity Induced Surface Distortions  In this section we address the quantitative performance of the array for gravity compensation as a function of the number of elements in the array and the magnification factor. Clearly, increasing the number of elements, or equivalently the size of the array, will always be beneficial, regardless of the magnification. This is true since larger arrays have access to more of the focal plane energy, although the benefit can be out-weighed by the cost and complexity of the array which grows in proportion to the number of elements.

Figure 3 plots the computed antenna efficiency versus elevation angle and number of array elements for a re- imaging magnification factor of two. Here antenna efficiency is defined as the ratio of computed physical optics gain to the theoretical gain of a 70-meter circular aperture with uniform illumination. For the undistorted  dual-shaped antenna this efficiency approaches 91% when a single matched corrugated horn is used as the feed. In practice many additional losses, such as high-order surface errors, panel setting, secondary positioning, etc. will reduce this ?theoretical? efficiency further. For the purposes of this study these effects are ignored.

In this case, we plot results for efficiency versus elevation angle for arrays containing 1,9,25,49, and 81 elements, as well as those for a single matched corrugated horn as a comparison. The horn result is effectively the performance of the antenna as presently configured. For this particular set of distortions we see that the horn feed, the cyan curve, achieves only 70% efficiency near an elevation angle of 45 degrees, whereas 90% is theoretically available. This is due to the residual distortion of the antenna present at 45 degrees.  This efficiency falls to below 50% for an elevation angle of 15 degrees and below 5% for an extreme elevation angle of 85 degrees. For this particular magnification a 9- element array covers approximately the same area as the  matched horn and gives similar performance. Larger arrays are increasingly more effective in capturing the focal plane energy at elevation angles removed from 45 degrees. The 81-element array improves the efficiency at 85 degrees elevation from less than 5% to greater than 50%. The array is also effective in recovering the efficiency lost due to the     residual distortion at 45 degrees. Apparently there is still significant energy spilling past the array for elevation angles larger than 70 degrees. The situation can be improved by increasing the magnification of the re-imaging optics.

Figure 4 illustrates this point by plotting efficiency versus elevation angle for an 81-element array for three magnifications, namely 2, 3, and 4.  All array results are superior to the single horn result. Increasing magnification  improves array performance for large elevation angles, but actually degrades performance near 45 degrees. This is because the results for large elevation angles are dominated by the advantage of large magnification values putting more energy on the array, despite the loss in resolution of an individual element. On the other hand, near elevation angles of 45 degrees the spot extent is small and the results are dominated by the decrease in element resolution, and hence increasing the magnification actually hinders the performance of the array.

The above results illustrate the benefits of the focal plane array over a single horn feed for an antenna with severe elevation-dependent distortion such as the DSN 70-meter antenna. Although this antenna represents the greatest challenge for operation at 32 GHz in the DSN, the 34 meter antennas can benefit from the array as well. For these antennas the elevation distortion is less severe but other  distortions occur as well, and these can also be compensated for by the array. For example wind-induced and thermally induced distortions can be compensated in exactly the same way as gravity induced distortions assuming that their time scale is consistent with the bandwidth of the signal processing scheme used to combine the signals from the array.  Another significant source of gain loss in DSN antennas operating at 32 GHz is secondary positioning error.  This error is much more benign than 70-meter  gravity distortions, and can also easily be compensated for by the focal plane array.

Optimum Weight Estimation via the LMS Algorithm  The array output voltages are downconverted to complex baseband, and sampled at a rate commensurate with the data bandwidth, that is, at the Nyquist rate. The vector of complex samples serve as the input to the signal processing assembly, which estimates the optimum combining weights, performs multiplication of the signal samples by the optimum complex weights, and combines the weighted signals to provide a single output with maximum signal-to- noise ratio (SNR), or, in case there is spatially resolved interference, maximum signal-to-interference-noise-ratio (SINR).

The downconverted complex signal sample at time ?n? in the i-th channel can be represented as )(nsi , and additive  noise samples originating in the i-th channel amplifier are denoted by )(nvi . These noise samples are assumed to be independent from sample to sample in each channel, as well as between channels. In addition to amplifier noise, the focal-plane array may collect correlated noise samples originating from unresolved sources within the FPA?s field- of view, such as from a planet. Extended planetary sources can be represented as clusters of point sources, as described in [7], however here we consider only a single interfering point source, generating samples )(nbi .

As shown in Figure 5, the observed signal vector consists of three vector components, namely signal samples, amplifier noise samples, and point-source interference samples:  )()()()( nnnn vbsu ++=  For a vector of complex array signals accompanied by additive noise, a set of optimum weights exist that maximize the SINR of the combined sum. As derived in [8] by direct application of the Schwarz inequality specifically for the case of focal-plane array signals observed in the presence of statistically independent additive noise, the optimum weights are proportional to the conjugate of the signal divided by the variance of the additive noise. Therefore, the  optimum weight in the i-th channel is of the form 2* /)()( iii nsnw ?= , where  i?    denotes the variance  of the additive noise in the i-th channel. For the case of correlated noise, generated by a combination of point- source interference and amplifier noise, the optimum weight vector that maximizes the SINR is known as the Wiener solution, and is of the form pRw 1~ ?= , where R is the covariance matrix of the observable vector,  [ ]ikH rnnE =? )()( uuR  and where the correlation between the desired output signal samples d(n) (required in the formulation of the LMS algorithm) and the observable vector u(n) is defined as   )()( * ndnE up = . Here the superscript H refers to Hermitian transpose, and asterisk denotes conjugation. For the case of an unmodulated tone, the desired signal is the sum of the component signal amplitudes. However, for the case of modulated signals, a more general interpretation can be applied, whereby the desired signal may consist of the array-sum of known frame markers in the data-stream, partially decoded data-symbols obtained from hard decisions, or preliminary symbol estimates from the decoder itself.

Defining the error signal e(n) as the difference between the desired output signal samples d(n) (here taken to be the data sequence itself) and the output of the array     )()()( nnny H uw=  y(n),  the error signal can be expressed as:  )()()( nyndne ?=  Next, define the cost function )(wJ as the mean-squared error, and let )~(min wJJ =  , where tilde denotes the optimum weight vector. Applying the definition of mean- squared error directly, some vector algebra yields:  )~()~( |)(|  |)(|)(  min    wwRww wRwwppw  w  ??+=  +??= =  H  HHH  J ndE  neEJ    Given an arbitrary initial weight-vector w(0), how do we converge to w~ ? A well-know approach to minimizing cost in optimization is the method of ?steepest descent? which can be described as the following two-step procedure:  (1) First, generate a sequence of weight vectors ),1(),(,),1(),0( +nn wwww  , such that the  average cost is reduced at each iteration: ))(())1(( nJnJ ww <+  (2) At each step, adjust the weight-vector in the direction  opposite to the gradient of the cost function, )(wJ? .

The steepest descent algorithm (SDA) is formally defined in vector form as:  ))(()()1( 21 nJnn www ??=+ ?  It can be shown that pRww 2)(2))(( ?=? nnJ , hence the SDA can be rewritten as follows:  [ ]pwRww ??=+ )()()1( nnn ?  The parameter  ?   is called the stepsize: it controls both the rate of convergence, and the steady-state SINR achieved by the combined output after convergence. If the theoretical expected values in the gradient are replaced by their instantaneous values, available at each update in a real implementation, we arrive at the LMS algorithm.

Substituting instantaneous estimates for the expected values in the update equation, and carrying out the implied operations yields:  [ ] [ ] [ ] )()()()(  )()()()()()( )()()1(  **  *  nndnyn ndnnnnn  nnn H  uw uwuuw pwRww  ??= ???  ??=+  ? ?  ?   The RHS of the last equality represents the conventional form of the LMS update algorithm. Note that the expected value of the LMS descent vector is of the form:  [ ] [ ]  pwR wuu  u  ?= ?=  ?  )( )()()()(  )()()( *  **  n ndnnnE  ndnynE H  This demonstrates that the expected value of the LMS descent vector approaches zero as pRw =)(n , or equivalently when )(~)( 1 nn wpRw ?= ? , and hence stops updating the weights when the optimum weight-vector is achieved. This is the well-known Wiener solution that maximizes the SINR of the combined output.  When there is no interference, the optimum weight vector is proportional to the signal vector itself: sw ?~ . When interfering sources are present, the optimum Wiener solution maximizes the combined SINR, effectively minimizing the interference via spatial filtering while transmitting the required signal power to achieve optimum performance.

LMS Algorithm Simulation Results  Performance of the LMS algorithm has been evaluated by means of simulations. The FPA excitations were computed with the assumption of an undistorted antenna, both for an unmodulated signal source at normal incidence, and an interfering unresolved thermal point-source offset from the signal by approximately one antenna beamwidth.

First, we consider the effect of stepsize on LMS algorithm convergence. Two cases of the time-history of the combined output, when the LMS starts with the all-zeros weight vector, are shown in Figs. 6a and b.

Note that with a stepsize of 0.0007, meaning that only this small fraction of the current update is applied to the weight- vector, convergence takes place in approximately 1000 samples in Figure 6a (this is where the combined output reaches its steady-state value). When the stepsize is increased by a factor of 10 to 0.007, the output converges to its final value in approximately 100 samples as shown in Figure 6b, but also becomes somewhat noisier due to less accurate combining weight estimates (this is termed ?weight misadjustment? noise in the literature). Although in Figures 6a and 6b the observed performance degradation is minimal, it can become prohibitive with larger stepsize, implying that a ?best? value exists even for steady-state problems (that is, problems where the optimum weights do not change with time). When channel dynamics are present, the minimum stepsize is generally determined by the convergence rate required to track the signal (hence weight) dynamics: in this case, there is generally an optimum stepsize, one that best balances the conflicting requirements of rapid response and noise reduction through longer effective integration.

When the signal is observed in the presence of an interfering point-source (such as an unresolved planet) as well as additive noise, the behavior of the LMS algorithm becomes more complex. Typical behavior is illustrated in Figure 7, which clearly shows an ?interference cancellation?  region, in addition to the monotonic convergence to a steady-state value considered previously. When the interference power is much greater than the power of the additive noise, it tends to dominate the SINR until its direction of arrival is adequately determined by the LMS algorithm, and an effective null of the focal plane array pattern is generated at the imaged location of the interference. The degree to which this can be accomplished depends on the number of degrees of freedom in the FPA (roughly the number of array elements), and the separation of the interference from the signal source: if the interference is much closer to the signal source than the angular resolution of the antenna, little improvement is possible because nulling the interference also results in nulling of the signal source. However, when the source-to-interference separation is a significant fraction of a beamwidth or greater, then distorting the beam can often result in greater interference suppression with minimal signal attenuation, resulting in improved SINR. In general, the stronger the interference the faster the algorithm estimates its direction, and the faster it can adjust the combining weights in order to suppress it. The example of Figure 7 shows that even with a relatively large stepsize of 0.001, convergence to steady-state SINR seems to occur after about 3000 samples, which is about 3 times longer than required with additive noise alone (at a comparable stepsize of 0.0007). This additional time to convergence must be taken into account     when attempting to adaptively cancel an interference with time-varying relative geometry, such as would occur with a spacecraft orbiting a distant planet.

Compensation of Antenna Pointing Errors  Pointing error is also a significant source of gain loss for the large antennas of the DSN at 32 GHz. Presently a complex monopulse pointing system is used to aid in pointing the DSN 34-meter antennas at 32 GHz. The blind pointing requirement on the antennas is driven by the pull-in range of this monopulse system requiring elaborate pointing models and calibration.  Use of a focal plane array eliminates the need for a monopulse system entirely, and  greatly reduces the requirements on blind pointing accuracy and associated calibration effort.

Figure 8 shows the gain of the 70-meter antenna for signals appearing off bore-site when a single corrugated horn is used as the feed, and for the case of an 81-element array used with a re-imaging magnification factor of three. The response for the single horn feed effectively is that of a uniform aperture, resulting in a 3-dB beamwidth of approximately 7.5 mdeg. Therefore in practice the antenna must be pointed, without feedback, to approximately this accuracy before an active pointing control system such as a monopulse system or CONSCAN can be employed to  actively point to the beam peak.  On the other hand, the response of the focal plane array to off-axis signals is quite forgiving, as illustrated by the black curve on the figure. In this case the response is not limited by the inherent beamwidth of the antenna, but rather by the field of view of the array. For this particular magnification and array size, pointing errors of greater than +/- 20 mdeg can be accommodated  by the array with essentially no gain loss.

These pointing requirements are consistent with typical 8 GHz (X-Band) values, allowing operation of the 70-meter antenna at 32 GHz with no requirement for an additional active pointing system or improvements to the present blind pointing performance of the antenna. While illustrated here for the 70-meter antenna, exactly the same advantages exist  for application of the FPA on a smaller, 34-meter DSN antenna. Relaxation of antenna pointing requirements is considered a major advantage of the focal plane array over a single horn feed.

3. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION  The operational advantages of a focal-plane array receiver for use on large antennas of the Deep Space Network have been discussed. Examples of gravity compensation of the 70-m antenna during 32-GHz operation has been used to illustrate these advantages. In addition, an adaptive     algorithm for optimal combining of focal-plane array signals in a noisy environment, including interference, has been described and evaluated via simulation. Finally, mitigation of antenna pointing errors via focal-plane array processing is illustrated, providing additional benefits over the use of a single receiving horn.

