A ROI-Based Mining Method with Medical Domain Knowledge Guidance

Abstract   Image mining is a growing research focus and is more than just an extension of data mining to image domain but an interdisciplinary endeavor. Very few people have systematically investigated this field. Mining association rules in medical images is an important part in domain- specific application image mining because there are several technical aspects which make this problem challenging. In this paper, we firstly incorporate the domain knowledge into the ROI extraction algorithm and ROI clustering algorithm, then we extend the concept of association rule based on ROI and image in medical images, and propose two algorithms to discover frequent item-sets and mine interesting association rules from medical images. Some interesting results are obtained by our program and we believe many of the problems we come across are likely to appear in other domains.

1. Introduction   Mining knowledge from large databases has been the focus of many recent studies and applications. However, most of these methods have emphasized corporate data typically in alphanumeric databases. Little research has been conducted on mining image. Advances in image acquisition and storage technology have led to tremendous growth in very large and detailed image databases [4]. A vast amount of image data is generated in our daily life and each field, such as medical image (CT images, ECT images and MR images etc), satellite images and all kinds of digital photographs. These images involve a great number of useful and implicit information that is difficult for users to discover.

Image mining can automatically discover these implicit information and patterns from the high volume of images and is rapidly gaining attention in the field of data mining. Image mining is more than just an extension of data mining to image domain. It is an interdisciplinary endeavor that draws upon computer vision, image  processing, image retrieval, machine learning, artificial intelligence, database and data mining, etc. While some of individual fields in themselves may be quite matured, image mining, to date, is just a growing research focus and is still at an experimental stage. Research in image mining can be broadly classified to two main directions: (1) domain-specific applications; (2) general applications [7]. Data mining in medical images belongs to the first direction.

A few interesting studies and successful applications involving image mining have been reported. For example, [2] describes the CONQUEST system that combines satellite data with geophysical data to discover patterns in global climate change. The SKICAT system [1] integrates techniques for image processing and data classification in order to identify ?sky objects? captured in a very large satellite picture set. A multimedia data mining system prototype MultiMediaMiner [3, 4] uses a data cube structure for mining characteristic, association, and classification rules. However, the system does not use image content to the extent we wanted. In [9], localization of the visual features, their spatial relationships and their motion in time (for video) are presented. A discovering association rules algorithm based on image content from a simple image dataset is presented in [10]. Some algorithms used in the medical images are generally for classification[6, 8, 11, 12] and Similarity Retrieval[5]. [13, 14] propose the methods for mining association rules in relational databases. They are not suitable to find rules in the medical images because there are important differences between relational databases versus image databases: (1) Absolute versus relative values. In relational databases, the data values are semantically meaningful. For example, one item is milk is well understood. However, in medical image databases, the data values themselves may not be significant unless the domain of medicine supports them. For example, a grey scale value of 46 could appear darker than a grey scale value of 87 if the surrounding context pixels values are all very bright. (2) Spatial information (Independent versus   DOI 10.1109/ICICSE.2008.91     dependent position). Another important difference between relational databases and medical image databases is that the implicit spatial information is critical for interpretation of image contents but there is no such requirement in relational databases.

In this paper, we extend the concept of association rule using object, object-based attribute and relationship predicate, and image-based attribute in medical images.

To detect objects in medical images, a progressive water immersion algorithm is presented. Then we propose a new method with guidance of domain knowledge to discover frequent item-sets and mine interesting association rules from medical images. Throughout the paper we try to provide a general framework to understand our approach. We believe many of the problems we are facing are likely to appear in other domains. As such this work tries to isolate those problems which we consider will be of most interest to the database community doing research on association rules.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 is pre-processing describing an algorithm to detect objects in medical images. Association rule mining in medical images is presented in section 3. Section 4 briefly reports our performance study. Conclusions are presented in section 5.

2. ROI Extraction Algorithm   In this paper, we use domain knowledge effectively to remove the noisy data. A brain CT image mainly consists of three parts: noisy data, skull and cerebrum. The noisy data includes the black background and patient's name etc.

These information is not only helpless but revealing patient's privacy. We are only interested in cerebrum. So we use domain knowledge (for short DK1) and cropping technique of image processing to gain it.

DK1 --- human's brain skull has the highest density and surrounds the cerebrum.

(a)                      (b)   (c)                      (d)  Fig. 1.  Figure (a) and (c) are two original abnormal brain images. Progressive water immersion algorithm is used to mark the objects with dotted line in figure (b) and (d).

That is, the skull is a cricoid area in the image with the whitest pixels that separate cerebrum from the noisy data, see figure 1(a). It becomes easy to remove the noisy data by using cropping technique and keep the interesting region with the guidance of DK1.

2.1. ROI Extraction Algorithm   We firstly use progressive water immersion method  with guidance of domain knowledge to detect region of interest (ROI) in medical images, then we combine these ROIs with their location, size and other descriptors to form a table for mining.

First, a N?N window is used to locate the local optimal points in the image. For each segmented patches, we place the center of the window over each pixel in the patches. If the grey level of the central pixel is optimal with respect to all the other pixels in the window, we say that the central pixel is a local optimum; otherwise, the window will move to be centered at another pixel to continue the search for all local optimal points. At the end of this phase, all the optimum is marked and they will be treated as the starting seeds for water immersion method.

One advantage of using the sliding window approach is that with the appropriate window size, it is possible to eliminate a large amount of optimal points that correspond to the light and dark reflection regions thus removing false detection. This is because the grey level of the optimal points corresponding to the light and dark reflection patches are generally lower and higher than that of potential ROI. Given that the distances between the optimal points of the light and dark reflection patches and the nearest optimal points of the neighboring ROI are generally less than that between two touching ROI, it is possible to set the window size in such a way that these false optimal points are ?absorbed? by the neighboring ROI optimal points while the true optimal points are not affected.

Having identified the true optimal points, water immersion process starts from these detected points and progressively floods its neighboring pixels. The neighboring pixels are defined to be the 8-direction neighbors. These neighbors are placed in a growing queue structure sorted in descending order of the grey level of the pixels. The lowest and highest grey pixel in the growing queue will be ?immersed? first but respectively and it is marked as belonging to the same region label as the current seed. The marked pixel is then removed from the growing queue. All neighboring pixels whose grey level is lower or higher than the marked pixel are added to the growing queue. This immersion process continues until the growing queue is empty.

Unfortunately, simple application of the water immersion technique has the tendency of over-flooding.

To overcome this problem, we firstly give some definitions.

Definition 1. We partition all pixels in pixel set P into m blocks. Pixels in the same block have the same grey level and pixels in the different blocks have the different grey level. Let G(P)={g1, g2, ?, gm} be P?s grey-scale (GS) set if G(P) is an ascending sort set of g1?, g2?, ?, gm? and gi? is grey level of pixels in the ith block, where gi (i=1,?,m) is the ith GS, g1? and gm? are P?s minimum and maximum GS respectively. The GS of pixel pi is denoted as g(pi).

Definition 2. We call gmean(P) the mean GS if |P| gmean(P)= ?g(pi)/|P|.

i=1  Definition 3. For any P and distance function DisA=|gk - gmean(P)|, mid-value GS is a middle value in the GS set that minimizes DisA. Mid-value GS set is a set of mid-value GS.

Definition 4. For any P, if (1) Mid-value GS set includes one element gmid, and gs  is the minimum value between gmean and gmid; (2) Mid GS set includes two elements, gs is the  minimum value between these two values; gs is called Benchmark GS and another one is denoted  as gs?.

Definition 5. For pixel set P, let g(l)={gi | g1? gi ?g1+|g1-gs|/2} be low bound GS; g(h)={gi | gm-|gm-gs?|/2?gi?gm} be high bound GS; g(b)= g(l) ?g(h) be bound GS; Our progressive water immersion ignores all those  pixels whose grey level doesn?t belong to the bound GS.

Bound GS is defined with guidance of domain knowledge that describes the degree of dark and light. So the optimality of point in a certain region is defined as follows:  ? ? ?  ;set  pixel bound low  tobelongspoint  if level,grey  minimal ;set  pixel boundhigh   tobelongspoint  if level,grey  maximal  =optimality   2.2. ROI Feature Extraction    Brain midline  Fig 2. Normal person?s brain image  For each extracted object Ri, we need to extract relevant information for features mining to take place. The domain knowledge of the brain image characteristics indicates that the normal persons have nearly the same brain structure that is evident to be bilateral symmetry. That is, the distribution of density in the left hemisphere of the brain is almost identical with the right, see figure 2. The pathological regions result in irregularly shaped grey level distribution in the CT scan images and destroy the symmetry, see  figure 1.  At this point, the following relevant features are able to provide sufficient discriminative power to cluster objects into different groups: (1) grey level of the object of interest; (2) area of the object of interest; (3) location of the object of interest; (4) elongation of the object of interest; (5) direction of the object of interest; and (6) symmetry of the object of interest.

With the above method, the object extracted from brain image is either brightness or darkness. So we define grey level as GL= 0 (brightness), or 1 (darkness). The second feature we have found useful relate to the size of the region in the form of the area of the region. Area of the region of interest is defined as the total number of pixels within the region, up to and including the boundary pixels. The location of an object of interest is defined as a ratio. The coordinates of the centroid of the object are computed with the formula (1).

?= =  k  j jxk  x  1            ?= =  k  j jyk  y  1     (1)  k is the number of the pixels of the object and the location is ( x /|x|, y /|y|).

The fourth feature is the elongation of an object which is defined as the ratio of the width of the minor axis to the length of the major axis. This ratio is computed as the minor axis width distance divided by the major axis length distance, giving a value between 0 and 1. If the ratio is equal to 1, the object is roughly a square or is circular in shaped. As the ratio decreases from 1, the object becomes more elongated. Major axis is the longest line that can be drawn through the object. The two end points of the major axis are found by selecting the pairs of boundary pixels with the maximum distance between them. This maximum distance is also known as the major axis length. Similarly, the minor axis is defined as the line that it is perpendicular with respect to the major axis and the length between the two end points of the line intersected with the object is the longest which is called the width of the minor axis. The ratio, elongation, is a measure of the degree of elongation of an object.

elongation = lenmajor / lenminor  (2) where lenmajor is the major axis length of the object and  lenminor is the minor axis length of the object. We establish a common coordinate with brain midline as y and perpendicular line going through the midpoint of midline as x. With the major axis of the object, we define the next feature, direction of the object, as the inclination ? of the major axis and x positive direction and ??[0,180].

Before introducing the final feature, we will give some definitions.

Definition 6. Pixel set of IMp is defined as P={pi|pi is the pixel with coordinate (xi, yi) in the image IMp}, P(L) and P(R) are pixel set of IMp(L) and IMp(R) respectively.

Definition 7. For any pli?P(L), prj?P(R), they are symmetric pixel if the line between pli and prj is halved vertically by brain midline. They are denoted as pli and pri below.

Definition 8. ?g(P) is IMp?s difference set if for any symmetrical pixel pli and pri, ?g(P)={ ?gi|?gi=g(pli)-g(pri), i=1,2,?,|p|/2 }, where g(pli) and g(pri) are grey level of these two pixels respectively.

Now we define the sixth feature as following.

Definition 9. An object of interest Rpk is symmetrical  if for IMp and Rp1, Rp2, ?, Rpk, , the mean grey level of ?g(R  ??= = k i piRPPP 1 )('  pk), mean(?g(Rpk)), and the mean grey level of ?g(P?), mean(?g(P?)), satisfy the following condition:  |mean(?g(Rpk)) - mean(?g(P?))| < ?.

After the above process, all the ROIs are detected and  we will call them objects later, see figure 1. Next, images with many different objects are represented by transactions, but there exist relationship among these objects and identical objects (either bright or dark) can repeat in an image. Therefore, we use a table to describe these transactions, see table 1. In table 1, Part I and Part II is image id and object id respectively. Part III is the attribute set of object, for example, grey level, location, etc., and Part IV is the relationship predicate set, for instance, next-to, inside and predicate related to domain.

Part V is the attribute set of image.

Table 1. Images are modeled by transactions   3. ROI-Based Association Rule Mining Method   The main title (on the first page) should begin 1-3/8 inches (3.49 cm) from the top edge of the page, centered, and in Times 14-point, boldface type. Capitalize the first letter of nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs; do not capitalize articles, coordinate conjunctions, or prepositions (unless the title begins with such a word).

Leave two blank lines after the title.

3.1. Basic Definitions   Definition 10. An association rule in medical images is a rule that associates visual object features and the relationship among objects in images, and is of the form:  ?1P1 ? ?2P2 ? ? ??nPn ? ?1(P1, P2, ?, Pn) ? ?2(P1, P2, ?, Pn) ? ? ? ?g(P1, P2, ?, Pn)? ?1Q1 ? ?2Q2 ??? ?mQm ? ?1(Q1, Q2, ?, Qm) ? ?2(Q1, Q2, ?, Qm) ? ? ? ?h(Q1, Q2, ?, Qm)  (c%)  where c% is the confidence of the rule, one or more Pi, i ? [1..n] and Qj, j? [1..m] are not just features or objects, but can also be related descriptors of image and object, the mean over their histogram etc., and ?i, i ? [1..n], and ?j, j? [1..m], are integers quantifying the occurrence of the object or feature or item. ?nPn is true if and only if Pn has ?n occurrences. ?i, i ? [1..g], and ?j, j? [1..h], are relationship predicates indicating the relationship of the object or feature or item. ?i(P1, P2, ?, Pn) and ?j(Q1, Q2, ?, Qm) don?t always exist and include all items in the bracket.

Definition 10 leads to the introduction of two notions of support.

Definition 11. The object-based support of an itemset X in a set of images S denoted by ob_support(X) is the percentage of objects in all images S. The image-based support of an itemset X in a set of images S denoted by ib_support(X) is the percentage of images with the same attributes in all images S. The confidence of an association rule X?Y is the ratio ib_support(X?Y)/ ib_support(X) if X or Y includes the attribute of image.

Otherwise, the confidence is the ratio ob_support(X?Y)/ ob_support(X).

Definition 12. An itemset x is sufficiently frequent in a set S if the support of x is no less than its corresponding minimum support threshold ??, and no more than its corresponding maximum support threshold ??.

Definition 13. An association rule X?Y in a set of images S is sufficiently strong if X and Y are sufficiently frequent (X and Y ? [??...??]) and the confidence of X ?Y is greater than ??.

We propose two supports based on object and image because an object maybe appears repeatedly in an image but image is unique. The different supports mean different counting and different interestingness. We will give an example to describe this difference in next subsection.

3.2. Frequent Item-sets Mining Algorithm   The reader is asked to read this subsection carefully as  it provides the motivation for the algorithm we will describe later. Several medically important association rules are discussed as well as rules which are not interesting. Here we summarize the main difficulties we have isolated so far trying to discover frequent item-sets in the medical images.

Association size. Associations and rules that involve many items are hard to interpret and can potentially generate a very high number of rules. And further, they  Part I Part II Part III Part IV Part V Image ID Object ID oattr1 ? RP1 ? iattr1 ?  IM1 O1 oattr1_v ? O2 ? iattr1_v IM1 O1 ? ? ? ? ? ? IM1 O2 ? IM2 O1 ? IM2 O2 ? ? ? ?  IMn On ? ? ? ? ? ?     slow down the interactive process by the user. Therefore, there should be a default threshold for association size.

The biggest size of found associations is a practical bottleneck for algorithm performance. If for a given support the k-itemset X is frequent then all Y?? and Y?X are frequent and then there are O(2k) frequent item- sets included. It is easy to see that no matter how efficient the algorithm is, the approach above will be slow for a large k.

Associations having uninteresting combinations of Items. This is the case where certain combinations are known to be trivial or have such a high support that does not really tell something new about the data set. Consider items xi and xj, if the association X1={xi, xj} is not interesting then any other association X2?X1 will not be interesting. Therefore, many of the items can be grouped by the domain expert to discard uninteresting associations.

We assume small groups can be identified by domain knowledge.

With all the above problems, we propose the following algorithm. We introduce a function group(), which comes from domain knowledge, to constraint the number of frequent item-sets to be discovered. Let Ck = {O1, O2, ?, Ok} be a set of items to be mined. We define group(Oi) to be an integer t if the item Oi belongs to a group. The constraint for discovering frequent item-sets was set as follows. Since the brain is composed of the left and right hemisphere, we set group(Oi) = 0 if the object Oi is only in the left hemisphere, 1 if the object Oi is only in the right, and 2 if the object Oi bestrides both brain hemispheres. Let imax be the maximum number of items appearing in one rule.

Algorithm 1 (SFIMI)  Find sufficient frequent item- sets based on two supports in medical images.

Input: (i) S1 a set of transactions without relationship predicate; (ii) the maximum and minimum object-based support and image-based support thresholds max_ob, min_ob, max_ib and min_ib;  Output: Sufficiently frequent item-sets.

(1) C1 ? {candidate 1 item-set}; (2) F1 ? {frequent 1 item-set from C1}; (3) k = 2; (4) while ( k ? max ) { (5) Extend Fk-1 by one item belonging to any Fk-1;  let Ck = {O1, O2, ?, Ok}; if (group(Oi) ? group(Oj), for i?j and 1?i, j?k then Ck is a candidate;  (6) Check support of all candidate Ck making one pass over the transactions; let X be item-sets only containing items about objects; let Y be item-sets containing items about images; Fk ? {c?Ck | (c?X ? (ob_support(c) ? min_ob)) ? (c?Y ? (ib_support(Y)?min_ib))};  (7) k=k+1; (8) } (9) Result??k{c?Fk|(k>1)?((c?X?(ob_support(c)?  max_ob)) ?(c?Y? (ib_support(Y) ?max_ib)))};  Line 1-3 are done in the same initial scan. In line 5, the  candidate item-sets are discovered by joining (k-1) frequent item-sets. We use function group() to prune away the item-sets that probably are frequent item-sets. In line 6, only the frequent item-sets that are higher than the minimum support are kept. It is only at the end of the loop (line 9) that maximum support is used to eliminate item-sets that appear too frequently.

Lemma 1. Itemset interestingness is anti-monotonic in group(Oi) constraints.

Lemma 2. The group(Oi) constraints can be used to prune away association.

Lemma 3. Let F be a frequent k itemset. Assume imax < k then there are 2k- 2  ?? ?  ? ?? ?  ? imax  k imax pruned associations.

3.3. Association Rules Generating Algorithm   Most papers published in the database literature concentrate on optimizing the above phase, but few to improve rule generation. For mining association rule in medical images, there exist the following problem.

Items can appear only in the antecedent, only in the consequent or in either. Note that given the interesting rule X?Y no matter where an item appears the association X?Y must be a frequent itemset, but where the item appears prunes out many uninteresting rules. In other words, support is still needed to prune uninteresting associations but confidence is not enough to prune out uninteresting rules because there may be many rules having high confidence containing forbidden items in the antecedent or in the consequent. Therefore items need to be constrained to appear in a specific part of the rule.

With this requirement, we propose the following algorithm. Let F1, F2, ?, FM be all frequent item-sets obtained in the above algorithm (SFIMI). We propose a constraint function cons() to eliminate the rules to be mined. We define cons(fi) to be 1 if the item fi can appear either in the antecedent or in the consequent, and 2 if it can appear only in the consequent of the rule.

Algorithm 2 (GAR) Generate association rules from the sufficient frequent item-sets.

Input: (i) Sufficient frequent item-sets F1, F2, ?, FM; (ii) minimum confidence;  Output: Association rules.

(1) for m=1 to M { (2) for all non-empty subsets of Fm {     (3)    Let fj, fk? Fm; if (fj?fk=?) and (cons(i) ?2 ? i ? fj) and (cons(i) ?1 ? i ? fk) and (support(fj?fk)/support(fj) ? minconfidence) then fj ? fk is valid;  (4)   } (5) }   Lemma 4. Let F be a frequent k itemset. Assume m items are conf(fi) constrained . Then the upper limit of discarded rules are ( )-( ). CCC kkkk 121 ... ?+++ CCC mk mkmkmk ???? +++ ...21   4. Experiments   The goal of the following experiment was to relate CT to brain tumor to validate actual diagnosis rules used by medical experts. In this case the purpose was mainly to confirm the validity of medical knowledge and tried to find new rules.

The dataset utilized in our experiments was real data from hospital. The main reason why we study on real brain CT images instead of any simulative data is to avoid insignificance and uninterestingness and the reliability of the discovered knowledge. To have access to real medical images is a very difficult undertaking due to legally privacy issues and management of hospital. But with some specialists' help and support, we got 618 precious images and their corresponding diagnosis records which, for simplicity, we generalized to normal(N) and abnormal(A).

The following is the constraint for generating association rules. For the descriptions of the images, like diagnosis record, they were constrained to appear in the consequent of the rule, that is, cons(i)=2, because it is more significant not only to medical doctors but patients.

Objects with their attributes were constrained to appear concurrently either in the antecedent or in the consequent, i.e. cons(i)=1. It is evidently unmeaningful that an object is in the consequent and its attribute is in the antecedent.

We ran experiments with both of two max support = 100% and association rule size imax = 6. We varied minimum confidence and minimum support of object- based and image-based to get rules. The program can?t be run without constraining and maybe the excessive rules will be generated. Table 2 shows our experiment results.

Table 2. Experiment results with medical images  Min_ob Min_conf_o (object-based) Min_ib Min_conf_i  (image-based) the number of  the rules 0.3 0.6 0.2 0.6 103 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.5 72 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 13   When the minimum support was lower, many of these rules were not interesting. But when it was higher, most of them were interesting and even important. We will show two rules that validate the actual diagnosis and domain knowledge.

Rule 1: 2O1?2O2?symmetry(O1,O1) ?symmetry(O2,O2)  ? N [90%] Rule 2: 1O1?1O2?homolateral(O1,O2)  ?2O1?homolateral(O1,O1) ?A [60%]  O1 and O2 in rule 1 and rule 2 are light region and dark  region respectively. The integer is the number of the objects repetition. Relationship predicate symmetry() represents that two objects are symmetrical and homolateral() represents that two objects are concurrently in the left or right hemisphere. Rule 1 describes that if there are two light regions and two dark regions in a brain image and they are symmetrical for a pair of regions with similar intensity, then this image belongs to a normal person. Rule 2 describes that if there are one light region and one dark region in one side of the brain image, then there are two dark regions in another side of the brain image and this image belongs to an abnormal person.

With constraint function group() and cons(), we eliminate many rules like 2O1 ? 1O2, where O1 and O2 are in the same side. Many previous works will generate this kind of rules that is not practically significant.

100 200 300 400 500 600  number of image  T i m e  ( s )  SFIMI  Apriori  Max_Miner   Fig 3. Effect of SFIMI vs. other two methods with different  data size              0.3 0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05  support  t i m e ( s )  SFIMI  Apriori  Max_Miner   Fig 4. Effect of SFIMI vs. other two methods with different  support   In figure 3 and 4, the speed of our algorithm is faster than other two algorithms. The reason is that we use     medical domain knowledge to direct the algorithms to decrease the number of candidate k item-sets to a large extent     5. Conclusion   In this paper, we have extended the concept of association rule using object, object-based attribute and relationship predicate, and image-based attribute in medical images. Two different supports based on object and image mean different counting and different interestingness. To detect objects in medical images, we have presented a progressive water immersion algorithm with guidance of domain knowledge to preprocessing the medical image set. Then we proposed two new algorithms with guidance of domain knowledge to discover frequent item-sets and mine interesting association rules from medical images. We have described the problem with a general form to provide a common framework for other problems appeared in other domains. Some interesting results were obtained by our program and solved the excessive uninteresting rules to some extent.

