254 255

Abstract?As digital resources increasingly growing and the economic benefit of digital intellectual property rights being increasingly important, people has been increasingly emphasis on information security issues brought by the data remnants in storage devices. They try their best to prevent the potential risks.

In this paper, we survey comprehensively related technologies, standards and trends of erasure, discuss the shortcomings of techniques on adding secure deletion to file systems and on cryptographic to prevent deleted data from being accessible. We focus on secure deletion mechanism in the NTFS file system, combining the asynchronous I/O multi-threading technology.

Finally we present a novel data erasing algorithm, Quick Erase, which not only greatly exceeds the speed of the existing international data erasing algorithms but also can be easily combined with a variety of standard algorithms to form various high-speed mixed erase algorithms. It can be used to erase file data and metadata to ensure the security and reliability of data erasing.  The test result of Quick Erase indicates that the erasure speed of one big file has reached 10-12 s/100MB, faster than that of existing secure deletion tools (60-80s/100MB). The algorithm has good application prospects for practical applications.

Index Terms?Secure Deletion, Multi-thread asynchronous I/O Data wiping

I. INTRODUCTION n modern networks and information storage systems, data recording systems have become essential equipment, which carry a large number of important or sensitive data, such as  confidential business information or national secrets, even personal privacy. Once these data recording system "disappeared" or data stolen, the consequences would be disastrous if there is no effective high-tech means to removal or destroy these data.

Currently, a number of important research institutions, governments, and enterprises are undertaking researches, experiments and product sales in secure deletion area [1]-[3]-[5]. This paper has a comprehensive investigation in the field of disk wiping technology, and comparison the erasure effectiveness of various data erasure methods. Finally, we present a novel algorithm that can effectively improve  Manuscript received March 28, 2008. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of China, the project code: 70471064 and Research Foundation of National Innovation Base in Philosophy and Social Science of 985 II, the project No. 107008200400024.

Guomeng Wang is with School of Management and Economics Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P.R.China. (phone: (+8610)13401072820; e-mail: guomeng.wang@yahoo.com.cn).

Yanping Zhao is with School of Management and Economics Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P.R.China  ( corresponding author to provide phone: (+8610)13911558038; e-mail: zhaoyp@bit.edu.cn).

efficiency of all existing data erasure methods, such as Gutmann 35 times data erasure algorithm.

The paper is organized as follows: section II presents related progress in data erasure; section III presents the Limitation of techniques on adding secure deletion to file systems and on cryptographic; section IV a fast data erasing algorithm; section V, test results of secure deletion algorithms; the last section, a summary.



II. RELATED PROGRESS IN DATA ERASURE EREA Data Erasing is a kind of technology that using software?s or  hardware?s means to erase data on storage media (including hard drives and flash disk), so as to achieve the purpose that ensures data not be recovered. Nowadays, many countries are studying secure deletion algorithms and detection mechanisms.

Therefore, this paper surveys comprehensively researches on this issues and divided existing erasing technology into five categories:  1) Cryptographic technique is a good technique in protection of Dynamic data. MS?s Encryption File System (EFS) [6] can encrypt files, directories, or whole file systems with individual keys, but the key management in encryption system is a very crucial problem to resolve, because once the key was sniffed, it could be used to decrypt both deleted and undeleted data.

2) Changing operating systems so that files are actually overwritten when they are unlinked from the system is another solution [8].

3) Physical destruction is the best and the safest way to erase data. Generally include degaussing, chemical corrosion, shredding, burning.

4) Using a novel method, Dead on Demand Digital Shredder, to secure erase data. NIST Special Publication 800-88 states that the method is quickly earning market acceptance, as well as receiving growing public awareness [4].

5) Data erasing Based on the software model is also often called secure deletion tools, there are usually two erasure modes, one is to use disk I/O mode to overwrite, and the other is to use the operating system file drive interface to overwrite the disk. Here are some typical methods.

Peter Gutmann presented a deletion algorithm, now is widely used in the world, in his paper "Secure Deletion of Data from Magnetic and Solid-State Memory" in 1996 [2], created a new field of data erasing based on software, and formed the industry-recognized Gutmann standards.

We propose our Quick Erase erasing system based on Quick Erase algorithm here, The survey results of famous erasing tools[8]-[9]-[10] are in table 1.

A Fast Algorithm for Data Erasure  Guomeng Wang and Yanping Zhao  I  Abstract ?Cyberactivism refers to the use of the Internet to advocate vigorous or intentional actions to bring about social or political change. Cyberactivism analysis aims to improve the understanding of cyber activists and their online communities. In this paper, we present a case study of online Free Tibet activities.

For web site analysis, we use the inlink and outlink information of five selected seed URLs to construct the network of Free Tibet web sites. The network shows the close relationships between our five seed sites. Centrality measures reveal that tibet.org is probably an information hub site in the network. Further content analysis tells us that common hub site words are most popular in tibet.org whereas dalailama.com focuses mostly on religious words. For forum analysis, descriptive statistics such as the number of posts each month and the post distribution of forum users illustrate that the two large forums FreeTibetAndYou and RFAnews-Tibbs have experienced significant reduction in activities in recent years and that a small percentage of their users contribute the majority of posts. Important phrases of several long threads and active forum users are identified by using mutual information and TF-IDF scores. Such topical analyses help us understand the topics discussed in the forums and the ideas and interest of those forum users. Finally, social network analyses of the forum users are conducted to reflect their interactions and the social structure of their online communities.

Index Terms ? Cyberactivism, Forum Analysis, Free Tibet, Web Site Analysis

I. INTRODUCTION CTIVISM often refers to vigorous or intentional actions that aim to bring about social or political change [1]. The  rapid development of the Internet makes it an ideal source for information and propaganda dissemination [2] [3]. Cyber activists use web sites, forums, and other types of computer media to build relationships with the public, voice their opinions, and spread their propaganda [4] [5]. Consequently, Cyberactivism, which refers to activism on the Internet, has emerged as a new and important social phenomenon.

A comprehensive and systematic framework for analysis of Cyberactivism needs to be developed for researchers, analysts, and related government agents to get a better understanding of cyber activists and their online communities. For example, it has been observed that web sites of related activism groups are linked to each other through hyperlinks, creating their own community network [6]. A good research framework would include an effective method to identify such networks and the roles of the web sites in the networks. In forums, social networks of forum users, representative topics and phrases, and active users are useful information that can help understand member interactions.

This paper presents a case study of online Free Tibet  activities and is an initial attempt toward a framework to analyze Cyberactivism. Two popular Internet media, web sites and forums of Free Tibet activities, are identified, collected, and analyzed. We aim to shed light on the following research questions:  1. What automated methods can be used to analyze Cyberactivism?

2. What knowledge and insights can we gain through social network and topical analysis of Cyberactivism?



II. FREE TIBET Tibet generally refers to the Tibet Autonomous Region, a  province-level entity governed by the People's Republic of China (PRC). Religion is extremely important to the Tibetans and Tibet is the traditional center of Tibetan Buddhism.

Panchen Lamas and Dalai Lamas are two well-known spiritual leaders of Tibetans.

Tibet was first included into China?s territory in the 1300s.

At the beginning of the 20th century, Tibet and Mongolia signed a treaty proclaiming mutual recognition and their independence from the Republic of China.  When the China Civil War ended in 1949, Tibet became a part of the PRC. In 1959, PRC armies thwarted the Tibetan resistance movement and Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, fled to India.

The Central Tibetan Administration (CTA), also referred to as the Tibetan Government in Exile (TGE), is headed by the 14th Dalai Lama and claims to be the rightful and legitimate government of Tibet.  Free Tibet activities refer to activities that aim to support the independence of Tibet. Most Free Tibet activities are guided by the CTA.



III. RESEARCH DESIGN Free Tibet related web sites and forums are the focuses of  this case study. Such web sites and forums are created and maintained by activists, supporters, and sympathizers in a variety of languages, including English, Chinese, and Tibetan.

In this study, we propose different methodologies for analysis of each medium.

A. Web Site Analysis 1) Identifying and Collecting Important Web Sites  Since there are many Free Tibet web sites available, the first step is to identify which ones are important. Fig. 1 shows our identification process.

Analysis of Cyberactivism: A Case Study of Online Free Tibet Activities  Tianjun Fu and Hsinchun Chen, Artificial Intelligence Lab, University of Arizona  A  1ISI 2008, June 17-20, 2008, Taipei, Taiwan    ??? ???  Table.1: Test Results

III. THE LIMITATION OF ADDING SECURE DELETION TO FILE SYSTEM FUNCTION AND CRYPTOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUES  Using the way of adding secure deletion to file system [7] or cryptographic techniques to erase sensitive data is very efficient and useful in many aspects, but also has some limitations, here are shortcomings in A and B. So developing secure deletion tools still has a large demand, especially in record devices reusable cases.

A. Limitations of Adding secure deletion to file systems The Ext2, Ext3, and Reiserfs file systems support a special  per-file attribute to mark files or directories that contain sensitive information and require secure deletion.

Unfortunately, the attribute is different thus difficultly maintained for different OS versions. Bauer [2] used special per-file attribute setting method and modified unlink () and truncate () operations to Ext2 to erase the data and meta-data.

Joukov and Zadok [11] developed an extension of the file system which is good to incorporate other file system to implement synchronous or asynchronous data erasure work.

These approaches have many advantages but still have some shortcomings:  1) Need to modify and increase the source code of file system  2) Data erasing may not completely overwrite 3) Synchronous and asynchronous data erasing  B. Cryptographic techniques Cryptographic erasing [5] approach mainly uses either an  encrypted file system or encrypted tools. The idea is that destroy the encryption key will make encoded data not be accessible without overwriting. The advantage of cryptographic techniques is that it has quick erasing speed, but there are a number of deficiencies as follows:  1) Difficulty in key management 2) Plaintext files may remain visible 3) Affect system performance

IV. A FAST DATA ERASING ALGORITHM MODEL  A. Asynchronous I/O algorithm in Data Erasing system The main drawback of secure deletion tools is that speed is much slow, because it needs to use data to cover the disk sector when you do the overwriting work, so in order to improve the speed and efficiency of erasure, we introduce multi-threading technology base on asynchronous I/O in data erasing system to erase data.

Our Data Erasing system use the multi-threading technology base on asynchronous I /O to erase data for improving speed, because of data erasing system need frequent to write data to disk when it is overwriting, threads will be blocked when it is writing data to disk, if the data erasing system use synchronous single-threaded to erase data, programming instructions can not be executed until the data have been completely written to disk.

B. Core algorithm of data overwrite Although disk drives are often thought of as ?random access?  devices, the fact is that mass storage access is usually more efficient when done in a sequential fashion. Sequential access on a disk drive is relatively efficient because the OS can move the read/write head one track at a time (assuming the file appears in sequential blocks on the disk). This is much faster than accessing one block on the disk, moving the read/ write head to some other track, accessing another block, moving the head again, and so on.  So our data erasing system attempt to read or write large blocks of data or whole disk blocks on each file access rather than reading or writing small amounts more frequently. Reasons as following:  1) OS external file system calls are not fast, so if you want the application run twice as fast, you can make half as many calls by reading or writing twice as much data on each access.

2) The OS must read or write whole disk blocks, it cannot transfer partial blocks between the disk and memory.  It bring two advantages, first, slack space can be overwritten for improving security. Second, it follows the rules that the OS must read/write whole disk block, so improving data erasure speed.

???  3)  We can?t control the number of the OS file system calls because the number of files is choired by the user. But we can control read/write mode of the file system calls. Windows file system calls read/write approach can be determined by set up read/write flag.

SDelete software use FILE_FLAG_WRITE_THROUGH flag to make system write data to the disk through fast disk cache.



V. TEST RESULTS OF SECURE DELETION TOOLS We evaluate our system on a P4 3.2GHz machine with 1GB  of memory. The disk is a 30GB 7200 RPM Western Digital Caviar IDE and formatted with NTFS. The operation system is windows XP sp2.

The tested software are Eraser Sdelete Quick Erase. The tested files are set as two types, one is single file that file size increased by the order is 4 MB, 16MB, 32MB, 50MB, 100MB, 1GB, the other multi-files in directories that make total file size 100MB. The 100MB directory includes 24 subdirectory and 440 files. Every file size is between 1K and 10MB.

Fig. 1 three-passes overwrite We can see from above Fig. 1 that the distance between the  two lines has linear growth with the file size increasing.  If the file has the same size, our Quick Erase?s erasure time is the fastest, Sdelete is the second, and Eraser is the last. For example, if the single-file size is 100 MB, our Quick Erase?s erasure time is 10.12s, the Eraser is 18.32s, so our erasure time is 8s faster than the latter. If the single-file size is 1GB, our erasure time is 96.62s, the Eraser is 172.45s, so our erasure time is 78s faster than the latter.

Thus, we conclude that our Quick Erase?s erasure time is faster than Eraser twice, and is 33 percents faster than Sdelete.



VI. CONCLUSIONS This paper comprehensively overviews technologies,  standards and trends related to data erasure, discusses the shortcomings of techniques on adding secure deletion to file system and on cryptographic to prevent deleted data from being accessible. Focusing on secure deletion mechanism in the NTFS file system and combining the asynchronous I/O multi-threading technology, we develop Quick Erase, data erasure software, to erase both the file data and metadata.

Comparison with the best international secure deletion tools, our Quick Erase has much improved the erasure speed. The principle of the algorithm shows ability to combine with other effective data erasure methods to form different levels of erasure algorithms that can be applicable to variety of security situations. The technology we provide can be used for both good and bad purposes, for good it benefits to the protection of people?s privacy, of confidential information; for bad is that it would help hacker hide their activities by erasing evidence of criminals and allow them to evade the law more easily.

Our future work is to extend our Quick Erase algorithm to other file systems and other file types such as complex compression, encryption and sparse files.

