

Abstract- Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the five most common cancers worldwide. Experimental and clinical data indi- cate that in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumor pro- gression is associated with angiogenesis and that an increase in microvascular density is associated with a poor prognosis.

Ultrasound is an attractive modality for imaging angiogenesis because of the ease with which it can be repeated without exposing the patient to any risk. The ready repeatability of ultrasound is proving useful in following tumour response to conventional and novel antitumour drugs.

The tumour growth and its treatment response are the subjects of present interest which concerns the oncologic community worldwide. Cancer research has undergone radical changes in the past few years. The next big step will be to implement mathemati- cal modeling approaches to interrogate the enormous amount of data being produced and extract useful answers.

In summary, this paper illustrates how mathematical models mighty be used to investigate promising US techniques for an in vivo, non-invasive, globally quantification of tumour?s morpholog- ical and functional changes.



I.  INTRODUCTION  Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the five most common cancers worldwide, with a particularly high prevalence in Asian countries due to endemic hepatitis B virus infection [1].

The incidence of HCC is also rising in Western countries as a result of increasing hepatitis C virus infection. More than 80% of patients with HCC have associated cirrhosis and impaired liver function, making treatment of HCC more difficult than many other cancers. The tumour growth and its treatment re- sponse are the subjects of present interest which concerns the oncologic community worldwide. Cancer research has under- gone radical changes in the past few years. An important and hot trend of the research in this field is represented by the study of the cancer on models that simulate reality. Since the '80s, there was a consensus in biomedical community that the bio- logical systems are too complex to be used with accuracy by mathematical models. There was the same opinion about mathematical correlation of cancer which has a chaotically and unpredictable evolution. The distrust for biomathematics left biomedical science back to other sciences, biomedical achiev- ing only immature experimental observations.



II.  Angiogenesis in hepatocellular carcinoma  There are two types of microvascular structures in the liver: large vessels, such as portal and central venules and hepatic  arterioles, lined with continuous endothelial cells, and fene- strated sinusoids lined with discontinuous sinusoidal endotheli- al cells (SEC). The adult liver is highly vascularized.

Malignant liver tumours grow in an uncontrolled fashion with the propensity to spread into the surrounding tissues. Both these critical features are closely dependent from the tumour vascular network [2]. As passive diffusion alone would limit the passage of nutrients and the removal of waste products to few millimetres of tissue, the development of neoformed ves- sels is essential for the tumour growth. In liver tumors capilla- ries are formed and sinusoid fenestration is lost. Stellate cells are regarded as liver-resident pericytes. They may contribute to angiogenesis through mechanisms different from those attri- buted to pericytes and become activated. Fibrillar extracellular matrix accumulates and hepatocytes lose microvilli. The result is a distorted sinusoidal structure characterized by capillariza- tion and formation of neovessels. Vascular proliferation is sti- mulated by a large number of angiogenesis factors and many of these have been recently identifed as peptides and cytokines.

The ability of tumoural cells to produce such substances was frstly reported in 1971 by Folkman et al. [3], who subsequently proposed that, in small tumours, the development of neovascu- larization identifies the shift from the dormant pre-vascular phase to the growing and spreading phase. Unlike the dual supply of the normal hepatic parenchyma provided by vessels arising from the systemic arterial circulation and the portal venous circulation, an advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is abundantly supplied by systemic arteries alone. This abundancy facilitates the angiographic diagnosis of malignancy and differentiates non-neoplastic or preneoplastic conditions, such as liver cirrhosis, hepatocellular adenoma, focal nodular hyperplasia and adenomatous hyperplasia. Tumoural vasculari- zation shows some peculiar biological and morphological fea- tures. Firstly, it is not self-limited and tends to grow indefinite- ly according to the biological behavior of the tumour. Second- ly, it develops as a complex, chaotic network at the growing edge of the tumour with irregular and winding branches pene- trating the nodule with a radial shape. The number of vessels within the tumour is often, but not always, increased, so that hypervascularity is a common feature. The vessels are primi- tive, thin-walled, with paucity or absence of smooth muscular layer, frequently formed by incomplete  endothelial cells layer and connective tissue alone, sometimes directly lined by tu- mour cells. Anastomoses between adjacent arteries and veins, mainly at the periphery of the nodule, are frequently observed [4].HCC progresses from a small, well-differentiated tumor    with no developed blood vessels to a larger and moderately or poorly differentiated form with a characteristic hypervasculari- ty during dedifferentiation process.



III.  Angiogenesis imaging ? ultrasound  By insonating tissues where blood is flowing, and then processing the received signal, a non-invasive assessment of blood velocity can be made. In particular, when a transmitted ultrasonic wave is backscattered by moving red cells, the re- flected signal displays a change in frequency which is de- scribed by the Doppler equation:  fD=2fV(cos?)/c where fD is the Doppler shift frequency, f the emitted ultra-  sonic frequency, V is the speed of blood cells, a the angle be- tween the directions of the ultrasonic beam and blood cell mo- tion, and c is the speed of ultrasound in tissue. Due to a fortuit- ous accident, when the US frequencies usually employed in diagnostic imaging (2.5?10 MHz) are backscattered by blood cells moving along human circulation, the Doppler frequency falls in the audible acoustic field, so that we can actually listen to blood flowing in the vessels.

Ultrasound (US) is an accessible, non-invasive and relatively inexpensive technique, ideal for longitudinal, in vivo, investi- gations involving a large number of subjects [5] Using the pre- sently available US instruments, the Doppler signal can be represented by different sophisticated modalities, including duplex, colour and power Doppler.

Colour Doppler US is able to detect tumour neovascularity and the model of the tumour vascularization (Fig 1 and 2). This is important because there is a strong correlation between the index of flow resistance and histological features of aggres- siveness [6].

US imaging allows the location of the sample volume into the vessel in duplex Doppler, to obtain the Doppler frequency spectral trace, which reflects the velocity distribution of blood cells across the diameter of the vessel over successive cardiac cycles. The parameters peak frequency, spectral broadening and resistive index (RI) derived from the spectral analysis pro- vide information on blood flow velocity, turbulence and vascu- lar impedance, respectively, and may be useful to characterize flow patterns observed in the different tumours.

Colour Doppler displays a map of vascular spaces in a se- lected portion of the real-time US scan, with the advantage of rapidly assessing the presence and direction of blood flow and the spatial distribution of vessels, the latter being helpful in the mapping of tumoural angioarchitecture (Fig 3 and 4).

Power Doppler displays the integrated amplitude of the Doppler signal, and it is inherently more sensitive than conven- tional colour Doppler in displaying presence of flow in very small vessels [7], increasing the depiction of both benign and malignant liver lesions vascularization [8].

The relative limitation of power Doppler is that it does not provide any information regarding flow direction, velocity and turbulence. Despite the advancement of technology, there are some limits on performance of Doppler US, particularly in the evaluation of deeply located lesions, such as tumours of the  posterior segments of the liver, of low velocity flows and of very small vessels (as it occurs in tumoural vasculature).

US contrast agents have been developed in the attempt to overcome these limits, and there are now several agents which are in use or under investigation for enhancing liver vascular imaging.

Fig 1. A- Grey scale: Liver hyperechoic tumoural mass in  segment 6, well-delimitated from the liver parenchima through a transonic halo.  B and C ? Tumoural vascularisation is pre- dominantly peripheral, with an anarchical disposition, origi-    nated from a lot of vascular pedicles (Colour Doppler and B- flow, respectively).

Fig 2  A- Grey scale: tumoural mass, encefaloid, homogene-  ous, hyperechoic, developed on a liver with inhomogeneous structure and irregular contour.  B and C ? Tumoural angioarc- hitectural modell : increased, anarchical vascularisation, origi- nated from a lot of vascular pedicles (Colour Doppler and Power Doppler, respectively).

Quantitative analysis of the raising vascular signal after con-  trast-enhanced administration and kinetic vascular studies al- low the differentiation benign/ malignant tumours with similar  results to contrast-enhanced CT [9], the measure of the angi- ogenesis extent by the type of the tumour, the metastasis poten- tial of the lesion and the efficacy of the treatment.

Fig 3. Hypervascular HCC (gray scale US, power Doppler,  3D reconstruction and pulse inversion imaging)  Using contrast-enhanced agents US is more sensitive in an-  giogenesis detection and depicts vascularity on the scarring tissue for diagnosing the local relapse [10,11,12,13]. The me- chanism of action of microbubbles is related to its main acous- tic property: to be many times more reflective than blood, thus improving the amplitude of Doppler signals up to 20?25 dB. In experimental studies microbubbles have been able to detect flow velocities of 2 cm/s or less in a phantom tube of 200 mm in diameter [14,15]. However, this velocity is largely over the upper limit of human capillary flow (0.03?0.08 cm/s) [16], whose assessment remains  therefore unfeasible with the pre- sently available technology.

Figure 4  HCC- intratumoural vascularization at Doppler US  Pulse inversion imaging and harmonic techniques with con-  trast-enhanced agents raise the accuracy of angiogenesis evalu- ation [17]. Intermittent US allows to indirectly asses capillary    blood flow and to quantify functional parameters of the tumour vascularization. Recently has been developed intermittent con- trast-enhanced US which is able to quantify tumour neovascu- larization [18].

All these studies show that there is a huge interest in the de- velopment of new US techniques to detect tumour angiogene- sis. A non-invasive imaging technique that could identify tu- mour blood flow would represent a valuable method for depic- tion the functional tumour status and therapy response. The progress in oncological treatment involves new strategies tu- mour angiogenesis inhibitors. US would have an important role in following-up the therapeutic response. The change of tu- mour vascularization has more accuracy than tumour growth because of its irregular form.



IV.  Mathematical modelling of angiogenesis  Mathematical modelling of various aspects of tumour angi- ogenesis is important both for the understanding of the process and for the development of intelligent diagnosis and prognosis systems, but it has some difficulties. The number of parameters that can be determined and have informational content is very large, and the processes involved are not fully known or un- derstood. The difficulty to reliably forecast the risk of cancer metastasis for individual patients stems from the fact that can- cer is the result of a complex interplay between numerous fac- tors, namely: cellular parameters?altered rates of cell prolifera- tion, apoptosis, migration, adhesion, metabolism and mutation? and microenvironmental parameters?extracellular matrix (ECM) composition, angiogenesis, inflammation and proteases.

Tumour-induced angiogenesis provides the crucial link be- tween the avascular phase of solid tumour growth and the more harmful vascular phase, wherein the tumour invades the sur- rounding host tissue and blood system [19]. However, these apparently insidious features of tumour-induced angiogenesis are now being used to combat cancer growth and the clinical importance of angiogenesis as a prognostic tool is now well- recognised [20]. Anti-angiogenesis strategies are also being developed as a potentially powerful, non-invasive weapon against the spread of cancer [21].

Over the last decade, many mathematical models of tumor growth, both temporal and spatio-temporal, have appeared in the research literature. The results of numerical simulations provided successfully the structure and morphology of capil- lary networks and have been also used to examine some control strategies by therapeutical intervention. Partial differential equ- ation modelling was first applied in tumour-induced angioge- nesis by Balding and McElwain [22] and developed by Chap- lain and Sleeman [23], who studied the concentration profiles of the tumour angiogenic factors (TAF).

Much of the experimental data that exist on the growth ki- netics of avascular tumors have been integrated into mathemat- ical models using various growth laws such as Gompertzian growth, logistic growth and exponential growth, to name a few.

More recent studies have shown that the pattern of capillaries depends on the interaction between the TAF profiles and local gradients of extracellular matrix components [24]. In addition to continuous and deterministic models, discrete, stochastic  models have also been considered [25]. Modeling of the vital process of tumor-induced angiogenesis and capillary network formation has also been undertaken. A discrete modelling ap- proach used the theory of random walk. The chemotactic re- sponse of the endothelial cells to TAF and the haptotactic re- sponse to the extracellular matrix are modelled through func- tions which assign directional probabilities for the movement of endothelial cells [26]. Deterministic reaction-diffusion equa- tions have been used to model the spatial spread of tumors both at an early stage in its growth and at the later invasive stage.

Typical solutions observed in all these models appear as invad- ing traveling waves of cancer cells. The studies developed so far could only track the movement of the endothelial cells and estimated where they migrate and how fast they do this. Some of these  models have studied the tumour growth before it be- comes invasive or during the early stages of invasion [27]; oth- ers analyze the stages in tumour development [28]. Several models are based on the spheroid model or other related mod- els to analyze the dynamics of antibody-drug therapy. These models consider the diffusion of an antibodydrug into the tu- mour mass followed by the binding of the antibody to the tu- mour cell, and subsequent internalization of the antibody-drug complex. However, these models study the dynamics of an individual tumour without considering the effect of other tu- mours growing simultaneously in the body, i.e. the dynamics of the process as a whole is not considered. Therefore, although these models may be mathematically valid, they are difficult to test experimentally and, consequently, of limited impact. The potential impact of the mathematical modeling of angiogenesis is the possibility for the data to be applied for other tumours, the improvement of the diagnosis and  monitorization in a fieldwith high morbidity and mortality, the reduction of the medical care expenses.



V.  Conclusions  Mathematical models might be used to investigate promising US techniques for an in vivo, non-invasive, globally quantifica- tion of tumour?s morphological and functional changes.

Because of the complex cancer physiopathology the cancer research needs a multidisciplinary and complex aproach with a central role for computational models. These models will al- lows us to understand the impact of the spacial and temporal model of angiogenesis on efficacy of cancer therapy. The algo- ritms of these processes might apply in experimental and clini- cal research (the treatment?s results prediction) and virtual tri- als for pharmaceutical industry.

Vascular imaging makes it possible to quantify the number and spacing of blood vessels, measure blood flow and vascular permeability, and analyze changes in blood vessel walls. Imag- ing methods also have potential utility in assessing the efficacy of angiogenesis inhibitors used in the treatment of cancer.

The potential broad applicability of the US techniques makes it possible to explore the range of the morphological variability of vasculature that can be produced in nature, thus increasing its diagnostic importance in cancer research.

