

An Interactive Mobile Amphibious Probing and Surveillance System    Ying Tang  Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering Rowan University, Glassboro, NJ 08028  Email: tang@rowan.edu  Hong Zhang Dept. of Mechanical Engineering  Rowan University, Glassboro, NJ 08028  Email: zhang@rowan.edu  Abstract - Ecological studies of shallow water and wetland habitats are often hindered by difficulty accessing remote sites.

Current methods of data acquisition, are either lack of the flexibility that is critical to characterizing conditions or organisms in dynamic habitats (such as physical sampling, mounting sensors in the field), or too big and expensive to work in shallow water or wetland habitats (such as Remotely Operated Vehicles, and Autonomous Underwater Vehicles). This paper presents an original robotic design to cover shallow-water and difficult terrain with amphibious capabilities and a self- adjustable sensor holder with camera for enhanced underwater testing, called Interactive Mobile Amphibious Probing and Surveillance System. Experimental results show that the system is highly efficient and is ready to perform many demanding tasks in various water and weather conditions.

Index Terms ? Amphibious robot, Mobile robot, Shallow water.



I.  INTRODUCTION  Shallow water and wetland habitats are among the most productive and ecologically significant habitats in nature.

Their intrinsic ecological and economic value and the pervasive threats to these habitats place a premium on scientific research that examines their functioning, interconnections, and their role in regional and global ecosystems. However, current methods of data acquisition in shallow-water and wetland habitats are ill suited for capturing data continuously in time and space. For example, manual sampling by workers in the field [4] or continuous monitoring at permanent installations [1, 2] are sensitive to logistical conditions (e.g. season, weather, terrain, access), can be expensive, and lack of flexibility that is critical to characterizing conditions or organisms in dynamic habitats.

Although existing mobile sensor platforms such as Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROV) and Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUV) are capable of dynamic remote data collection, they are often designed for use in the deep environs of the open ocean such that their size and limited agility are not suitable for work in shallow water or wetland habitats [3].

Motivated by these remarks, we design and build an Interactive Mobile Amphibious Probing & Surveillance System (IMAPS2) that extends our ability to autonomously sample in shallow water or complex terrain. Since it is small in size, powerful in computing, flexible on sensors, and manoeuvrable in the field, our design presented in the paper enables educators and researchers to conduct field tests and surveys with minimal disturbance.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the IMAPS2 design. Section 3 presents its experiments and applications, followed by our conclusion and future directions in Section 4.



II. DESIGN OF IMAPS2  IMAPS2 is a mobile amphibious robot that is designed with the following goals:  1) Modular and scalable design: The design should minimize the effort required to reconfigure sensors, electronics, and control systems. The entire design is partitioned into several subsystems that are easy to upgrade with users? input, which has no or little impact on others.

2) Small size and portability: The vehicle should be light enough to be handled by just one person and small enough to be easily put into the back of a midsized SUV or minivan. Therefore, no special equipment or vehicle will be required to use the robot.

3) Minimum maintenance: The susceptibility to corrosion and electronic faults should be minimized. The internal equipment (e.g., camera, sensors, and computer) should be protected.

4) Long operation time: The robot should be able to operate in water for at least four hours, enough for a regular morning or afternoon session. Extra battery pack can be added or replaced for longer time without affecting the performance of the robot itself.

5) Flexibility: For different tasks or applications, the robot should be able to work on different kinds of water bodies. Its operating system should also be open to accept and adapt to multiple control algorithms.

Following the above key characters, the IMAPS2 is designed using host-agent approach. The host is a high-end computer that stores and displays the data transmitted from the agent. It receives instructions from an operator and sends control signals to the agent. Fig.1 shows the block diagram of the land-based host. The agent is a tele-operated vehicle commanded by the host. It navigates in the field, collects data and transmits the information back to the host.

For easy configuration, the design of the agent robot is partitioned into several modules: (1) actuating module, (2) winch module, (3) computation module, (4) and bio-data collection module. As shown in Fig. 2, all these modules are controlled by an onboard computer, Mini-ITX [5], for concerted operations.

Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE  June 20 -23, 2008, Zhangjiajie, China     Figure 1: Block diagram of the land-based host     Figure 2: Block diagram of the agent   The rest of the section focuses on the mechanical structure, modular design, and software implementation of the agent robot.

A. Structure Design  The agent is a pontoon-style double-hulled boat as shown in Fig. 3. It is stable on moderate waves and also provides enough buoyancy to carry the onboard equipment. The boat is propelled by two thrusters on the back to achieve 2 m/s at steady state on calm water. In order to obtain maneuverability on soft land such as mud or sand, a pair of all-terrain rubber tank tracks is installed on the bottom. They are powered separately but controlled concurrently with the propellers. The combined effort of propellers and tracks enables the agent to easily move on complex terrain, such as marshes, beaches, bay, rivers, and creeks.

Considering that the hull itself has to be both lightweight and substantially strong to endure the extra abuse associated with amphibious operation, we choose a frame-based hull design with independent water tight compartments. As shown in Figure 4, the left and right compartments provide the most buoyancy and supporting force for the robot. The center frame includes a water-tight cell to host the computer and other onboard electronics and a strengthened structure to carry the winch module. The frame is made from 1? aluminum L- channel with a thickness of 1/16?. It is covered by 1/4? luan plywood with fiberglass coating. The center cell is covered by  1/4? lexan polycarbonate to provide transparency to the onboard forward looking and downward looking cameras.

Figure 3: A computer rendering of the IMAPS2 agent          Figure 4: The skeleton of the agent  B. Actuating Module  To navigate the robot, two 550 size ?stinger? motors as shown in Fig. 5 are used on each propeller mounted in the rear of the side compartment.

Figure 5: Electric motors used on each propeller   In view of powerful maneuverability needed for the agent  on soft terrain, a pair of tank tracks is added on top of two propellers. The idlers are hollow and filled with foams to offset most of the extra weight brought by the treads and their frames. Please see Figure 6. Due to the higher torque requirement, the tracks use separate electric motors and speed reducers from the propellers.

Figure 6: Thread design   The electric DC motors are controlled by their individual  digital speed controllers (DSC). Each DSC in turn is wired to the on-board computer, which give the commands to change the speed of the motors. A force sensor on the track frame gives the system a feedback whether the robot is fully buoyant on water, or riding on the land, or somewhere in between.

Then the computer will turn on or off the motors accordingly.

Meanwhile, differential control is used to set the speed of individual motors. So the robot can achieve complex maneuvers.

C. Sensor Module  Two sets of sensors are mounted on the agent. One set is fixed onboard that will be discussed in the next session. The other set is a removable sensor package (multi-purpose water quality sensor, a high quality underwater camera, a remotely- operated water sample collector) that can be exchanged for different projects. The one used in our prototype is Sonde from YSI, a multi-parameter spot sampling device with field- replaceable sensors [6]. Finally, the sensors are placed in a sensor holder.

There are two possible driving conditions for the agent.

On land or in very shallow water, the tracks of the boat will touch the bottom as shown in Fig. 7; in this case, the sensor holder will be lifted such that only the tip or the reacting parts of the sensors are immersed in water. Both the propellers and tracks will be powered on to provide sufficient driving force.

Figure 7:IMAPS2 crawls along the combination of land and very shallow water while the tip of the sensor is in water.

When the water is deep enough to keep the boat fully  afloat, the agent will be driven like a regular surface vehicle, and the sensor holder will be lowered down into the water to the desired depth and orientation as shown in Fig. 8.

To fulfill these functions, four propellers are added to place the sensors in a particular position and orientation while a camera, a light, and a pressure sensor provide some basic feedback for more accurate placement. In particular, a built-in sonar depth finder in the computation module provides instantaneous depth of the water column at the location of the  agent, while the pressure sensor on the sensor holder gives the depth of the sensor below the surface. This ability to measure depth two ways helps prevent the sensors from making contact with the bottom of the water body, which could result in damage to the sensors; the ability to maneuver the sensor holder with the propellers helps to orient the sensors and also to prevent them from touching the bottom.

Figure  shows the structure of the self-propelled sensor holder.

Figure 8:IMAPS2 cruises on the surface of the water while the sensor holder (with sensors) is lowered into the water.

Figure 9: The self-propelled sensor holder with Sonde  installed   D. Computation Module To accurately position and navigate the agent robot, a set  of sensors is equipped onboard, including a compass, a GPS unit, and a depth finder.  The digital compass is used to detect the robot orientation. The heading information is provided to control algorithms to adjust thruster powers. With a digital GPS, the precise location of the robot can be obtained to deploy the robot in known sampling locations. As stated early, the depth finder, together with the pressure sensor in the sensor holder, can deploy the sensors at desired depths to collect bio data. In addition, two on-board video cameras, one forward-oriented and the other downward-oriented are mounted to visually monitor the field condition and provide visual feedback to the operator in manual control mode.

E. Software Design  Sonde  Sonde holder  Propeller  Camera  Connector  Pressure Sensor  Light     For the convenience of operating the robot, an easy-to-use graphical user interface (GUI) with two panels is developed.

As depicted in Figs. 10 and 11, the right panel allows users to choose either manual control or autonomous control of the field agent, and the left panel displays the GPS, depth, and bio-sensor readings.

Figure 10: GUI of the IMAPS2 in Manual Control.

Figure 11: GUI of the IMAPS2 in autonomous control Under manual control, operating the left/right motor turns  the robot right/left. With the same speed for both motors, the robot goes straightly forward or backward. The Sync Motors button is also designed to ease this process. The Up and Down buttons with the water and Sonde depths shown on the left panel are to raise or lower the Sonde without touching the bottom of the water body.

With the autonomous control where the PID control algorithm is currently deployed, users can send the robot to a particular GPS point or multiple points by manual entry of desired GPS stations in the top and bottom dialog boxes. Note that several other control algorithms are under development to be integrated into the software.

By default, the robot is set to be 50% power. With different proficient level of the users, the maximum power can be set at anywhere between 0 to 100% in the setting mode as shown in Fig. 12. In addition, users can set autonomous threshold distance, indicating the radius of how close the robot needs to be to the destination. Considering the current of  water, this function of dynamic anchoring is necessary since the robot will never be at the exact point.

Figure 12: GUI of the IMAPS2 in setting mode

III. EXPERIMENTS We have conducted a number of experiments to  demonstrate maneuverability of the IMAPS2 and its applications. Fig. 13 shows the robot cruising on water to reach the testing point.

Figure 13: An IMAPS2 prototype in action   The autonomous navigation was first tested with a  particular GPS coordinates and then with a set of waypoints. The IMAPS2 successfully navigated itself to these coordinates within a preset distance.  As stated early, such preset distance was used to avoid the possibility of the GPS coordinates being read by the computer never equaling exactly the values given for the coordinates in the GUI.  The results of one of these tests can be seen plotted over a satellite image of the test site in Fig. 14, where the orientation of the robot is facing southwest at the starting point, and then facing the destination while gliding on the water surface to reach it.

Gusty wind and moving water are apparently the two most significant disturbances on the control.

Another series of experiments were performed to monitor characteristics of a given water body, such as pH, DO, and temperature, etc. Such data was then filtered and plotted in three dimensional space using Matlab. One set of test results are shown in Fig. 15, where the depth data was collected while the robot was moving along the given trajectory.

Figure 14: Autonomous navigation of the IMAPS2 on a local  lake.

(a)       (b) Figure 15: (a) The trajectory of the IMAPS2 superimposed on a satellite image of the area. (b) MATLAB plot of depth profile of the given water body.



IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  This paper presents the design and implementation of a prototype IMAPS2, intended for the ecological study of aquatic habitats, especially those in shallow-water and wetland. A series of experimental results show that the IMAPS2 is capable of autonomous navigation on a given water body and remote data acquisition of its aquatic habitat.

Future development will focus on advanced high-level control algorithms (e.g., automatically seeking out the source of a pollutant by measuring the pollutant and identifying a concentration gradient, and navigating up-gradient) to be integrated into this field-deployable unit, and large-scale field testing.

