MIRG: A Multimedia Information Retrieval GRID System

Abstract   Advanced in IT technologies change everyday people's life and also bring big change in the way of doing businesses and manufacture. Nowadays people faced with full of data that cannot be traced and managed by one person. Especially, digital multimedia contents are created and distributed by virtually everybody in the internet environments. And the information that the user want usually scattered around the multiple service providers and other user?s personal devices. We believe GRID is one of the good ways to find and acquire the digital contents easily, accurately and quickly among different storage resources. This paper proposes a new GRID (MIRG: Multimedia Information Retrieval GRID) system which provide fast and reliable multimedia information retrieval service based on the ETSI 102 822 standard in Web-Service environment.

1. Introduction   Grid computing [19] [20] is a framework to share existing heterogeneous resources from different locations to resolve problems like digital contents search, retrieval, and analysis. Traditional digital contents area used to use a system and software stack developed by own projects. Weak point of this approach is comparability issues with existing systems.

It is very difficult to use such system with other existing systems. By using grid system, we can resolve  this problem easily and also we will have better reliability and performance. When there are multiple service providers to each of which a user can send a request for information regarding the multimedia content of desire, the response time and the reliability of the response are critical measures of the system usability.

In the broadcast environments, base technology of processing, storing, and transmitting contents is changed from analog to digital, and the digitalization of contents can support users with various opportunities such as viewing high resolution contents, storing digital contents without losses, accessing contents easily, getting more information concerned with contents, etc. As the broadcast environments and the internet environments are being converged, many broadcast service providers can provide viewers with various, exciting and distinct services from the previous broadcast services. To provide various service capabilities resulted from the convergence of broadcast and internet to the industry, service providers, consumer equipment manufacturers, research institutes, and academy have worked on the development of related standard technologies. One of the results of such efforts is the ETSI 102 822 standard developed by the TV-Anytime Forum. The TV-Anytime Forum is an association of organizations which seeks to develop specifications to enable audio-visual and other services based on mass-market high volume digital storage in consumer platforms - simply referred to as local storage. [1]   DOI 10.1109/ICHIT.20    DOI 10.1109/ICHIT.2008.173     The one of major functionalities supported by the TV-Anytime Forum is the mechanism of searching the digital contents that a user wants to get. The searching mechanism in TV-Anytime Forum defines an operation to express the content of desire, an operation to get the information of the matched contents as a response, SOAP-binding[22] of the operations, and the operational framework including the flow and the interface of resolving the contents location and selecting the contents in the uni- and bi-directional networks. But, the standard does not provide detailed guideline of implementation.

As the number of contents, various types of service providers, and the TV-Anytime supporting PDRs (Personal Digital Recorders) increase, the response time of the searching and retrieval of the content and the related information could also dramatically increase.

This paper proposes a new GRID (MIRG: Multimedia Information Retrieval GRID) system which provide fast and reliable multimedia information retrieval service based on the ETSI 102 822 standard in Web-Service environment.

2. Background  2.1. ETSITS 102 822 Standard   The European Telecommunications Standards  Institute (ETSI) is an organization for producing telecommunications standards in Europe. Currently, ETSI is organized by 655 members from 59 countries, including manufactures, network operators, administrations, service providers, research bodies and users.

Specially, ETSI has adopted a set of specifications established by the TV-Anytime Forum for the functionalities that enable the search, selection, acquisition and rightful use of content on local and/or remote personal storage systems from both broadcast and online services. The set of ETSI TS 102 822 specifications was published in two steps, which are the phase 1 specifications and the phase 2 specifications. The phase 1 specifications were published in October 2003 to provide basic search and retrieval of contents with personalized service based on the personal digital recorder, and the phase 2 specifications were published in January 2006 to provide more advanced services including targeting, sharing and transfer of contents with new type of multimedia contents support.

TS 102 822 standard is organized in 9 parts: Benchmark Features(TS 102 822-1[3]), System Description(TS 102 822-2[4]), The specifications for  Metadata (TS 102 822-3 sub-parts 1 [5], 2 [6], 3 [7] and 4 [8]), Content Referencing (TS 102 822-4 [9]), Rights Management (TS 102 822-5 sub-parts 1 [10] and 2 [11]), Bi-directional Metadata Delivery (TS 102 822-6 sub-parts 1 [12], 2 [13] and 3 [14]), Protection (TS 102 822-7 [15]), Interchange Data Format (TS 102 822-8 [16]), Remote Programming (TS 102 822-9 [17]).

TS 102 822-1 and TS 102 822-2 specify the context and system architecture in which the standards for Metadata, Content referencing, Bi-directional metadata and Metadata protection interoperate. TS 102 822-  3 consists of 4 sub-parts.( ?Phase 1-metadata schema?, ?System aspects in a uni-directional environment?, ?Phase 2-Extended Metadata schema?, and ?Phase-2 Interstitial metadata?) Especially, TS 102 822-3 sub-part3(Phase 2-Extended Metadata schema), TS 102 822-3 sub-part4(Phase-2 Interstitial metadata), TS 102 822-6 sub-part 3(Phase 2 - Exchange of Personal Profile), TS 102 822-8(Interchange Data Format), and TS 102 822-9(Remote Programming) are developed for phase 2 in TV-Anytime environments, and TS 102 822-1(Benchmark Features), TS 102 822-2 (System Description), and TS 102 822-6 sub-part 1(Service and transport) are modified and to satisfy objectives of phase 2 and to improve the previous functionalities. Because the purpose of this paper is to propose a new GRID (MIRG: Multimedia Information Retrieval GRID) system on TV-Anytime environments, this paper just refers standards and technologies related to the search and retrieval of multimedia information.

2.2. Digital Contents and GRID   One of the notable grid projects on the digital contents search area is DILIGENT (A Digital Library Infrastructure on Grid Enabled Technology) project [21] that provides a next generation e-Science knowledge infrastructure for researchers to collaborate by exploiting shared knowledge and physical resources.

DILIGENT uses Grid and Digital Library (DL) technologies as project?s core technology. Based on those technologies, DILIGENT provides four major services: typical DL functions service, third-party application and source access service, shared content and application handling service, and creation and operation of on-demand, transient digital library service. To provide those services, architecture of DILIGENT contains three layers: collective layer, digital library layer, and Digital Library Layer.

The Collective Layer contains services that controls and manage interactions among distributed resources on the grid. Services of the Collective Layer will support the Digital Library Layer to perform complex interactions between services. The Digital Library Layer is working as typical Grid middleware that provides job submission service, indexing and discovery of digital contents service, management and processing service of these contents. Application specific services like migration of third party data and/or provide functionalities to the DLIGENT framework is provided by the Application Specific Layer.

3. Message Formats for MIRG System  3.1. New Requirements   As the applications of multimedia information retrieval and the needs of users diverge, two new requirements of the multimedia information retrieval system are proposed [2].

Two new requirements are MIRG System shall allow users to specify the time limit within which the server should respond with the query result and MIRG System shall allow users to signal the server/service provider whether to use Synchronous or Asynchronous mode.

For the first requirement, aggregation service may issue the request from the client/user to multiple servers/service providers. The aggregation service may wait for the responses for a certain period of time to  avoid excessive delay. In such a case, the delay is not controlled by the user, but by the ASP. However, the clients/users should be able to set the time limit during which they are willing to wait, e.g. three seconds, within which the aggregation service gathers the responses from the service providers and send back the gathered responses to the clients.

And synchronous and asynchronous issues are described in second requirement. In synchronous mode, client is expected to wait to receive the query result within given time limit, if any. In asynchronous mode, client is expected to receive the acknowledgement of the query from the server immediately with the response identifier. After in time, the client may come back with the response identifier for the result of the query.

3.2. The extension to the get_Data operation of ETSI 102 822   To satisfy the new requirements proposed in of the  section 3.2.1, three attributes of ?immediateResponse,? ?timeout,? and ?queryID,? are added to the get_Data operation defined in ETSI 102 822-6-1. The following schema describes the extended syntax of get_Data operation in XML-schema (Figure 1).

The ?immediateResponse? attribute is used to select the mode of operation. The default value of this optional attribute is ?true.? When either the value is ?true? or the attribute is not present, the client expects to receive the response immediately, i.e. to operate insynchronous mode. If the value of this attribute is  <complexType name="get_DataType"> <sequence> <element name="ResourceID" type="tns:ResourceIDType" minOccurs="0"/> <element name="QueryConstraints"> <complexType> <choice> <element name="PredicateBag" type="tns:PredicateBagType"/> <element name="BinaryPredicate" type="tns:BinaryPredicateType"/> <element name="UnaryPredicate" type="tns:UnaryPredicateType"/> </choice> </complexType> </element> <element name="PersonalInformation" type="tva2:ExtendedUserDescriptionType" minOccurs="0"/> <element name="RequestedTables" type="tns:RequestedTablesType"/> </sequence> <attribute name="maxPrograms" type="unsignedInt"/> <attribute name="personalInfoUse" type="boolean" default="true"/>  <attribute name="immediateResponse" type="boolean" use="optional" default="true"/> <attribute name="timeOut" type="mpeg7:durationType" use="optional"/> <attribute name="queryID" type="anyURI"/>  </complexType>  Figure 1  The extended syntax of get_Data operation in XML-schema        ?false,? the client is expected to receive only an  response identifier for response, i.e. to operate in asynchronous mode.

At synchronous mode of operation, ?timeout? attribute represents the time limit in MPEG-7 durationType type to express the maximum expected time of delay. At asynchronous mode of operation, this attribute specifies the time duration during which the searching can be performed. The server expects the client to get the result soon after the duration specified by this attribute expires.

The ?queryID? attribute specifies an identifier that uniquely identifies the request.

3.3. The extension to the get_Data_Result operation of ETSI 102 822   To satisfy the second requirement of 3.2.1, an identifier of a response tightly coupled with ?queryID? given by the get_Data operation is required (Figure 2); so that the client can come back with the given response identifier to get the response after the timeout duration expires in asynchronous mode of operation.

This attribute specifies an identifier to uniquely identify each response tightly coupled with query.

Especially, at the asynchronous mode of operation, the server expects the client to send the query message with previous received responseID again to get the result soon after the timeOut duration expires. The responseID shall be a copy of queryID or be a newly generated ID from the server.

4. Design of the MIRG System   As the related technologies and networks advances,  large amounts of multimedia contents are produced and distributed. The explosive proliferations of multimedia contents make users seek for technology helping to find and acquire the multimedia contents of their desire easily, accurately and quickly. But, the  searching time may increase, because the information  on the multimedia contents supported by a single service provider may also increase as well as the request given by the may become more complex. Also, the information of user?s desire may be scattered around the multiple service providers and other user?s personal devices (NDRs). This paper proposes a GRID based framework to provide fast retrieval of multimedia information for TV-Anytime like service over distributed service providers and NDRs.

The figure 3 shows the architecture of the Multimedia Information Retrieval GRID (MIRG) system framework. The MIRG framework is divided into four layers, which are application layer, service layer, middleware layer and resource layer.

In the application layer, there are application user portal and the content service provider portal. Through the application user portal or the client application, users request the information of their need to the MIRG framework and receive the requested information from the MIRG framework. Through the content service provider portal, each service provider can register their service capability and additional information based on which each of them can be registered as a node of appropriate GRID system.

In the service layer, there are three types of services available, which are TV-Anytime Searching and Navigation Service (TVASNS), Reliability and Similarity Resolving Service (RSRS), and Location Resolution Service (LRS). These services can be provided by one or more of service resource pools. For example, TVASNS is a service provided by the TVA service resource pool, RSRS is a service provided by RSR service resource pool, and LRS can be another service provided by LR service resource pool, with aggregation service provider (ASP) acting as a broker managing these services by three independent service resource pools.

The middleware layer and the resource layer are sub layers of each GRID system to provide their service,   <complexType name="get_Data_ResultType"> <sequence> <element name="TableSortingInformation"  type="tns:RequestedTablesType" minOccurs="0"/> <element ref="tva:TVAMain" minOccurs="0"/> <element ref="cr:ContentReferencingTable" minOccurs="0"/> <element name="InvalidFragments"  type="tns:InvalidFragmentsType" minOccurs="0"/> </sequence> <attribute name="serviceVersion" type="unsignedInt" use="required"/> <attribute name="truncated" type="boolean" use="optional"/> <attribute name="responseID" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> </complexType>  Figure 2   The extension to the get_Data_Result operation of ETSI 102 822        Resource Layer  Resource Layer  Middleware Layer  Middleware Layer  Application Layer  Application Layer Application User Portal/Client Application  Application User Portal/Client Application  Scheduling Job / FileMgmt Information  ServiceSecurity  Contents Service  Provider Portal  Contents Service  Provider Portal  Service Layer  Service Layer  Contents Registry Service  Contents Registry Service  R & S Resolving  service  TVA Searching & Navigation  Service  Location Resolution  Service  Metadata DB  Aggregation Service Provider  TVA Service Resource Pool  RSR Service Resource Pool  TVA Service & Contents  Server  TVA Service Server NDR  NDR  LR Service Resource Pool   Figure 3 The Architecture of MIRG System Framework   where middleware layer provides functionalities of security of the transaction, job/file management, scheduling of the requests and jobs, and the additional information service.

The resource layer is designed for resource pools to manage the actual resources required for the service.

And also each resource pools can be viewed as another grid system. For example, TVA Service Resource Pool contains TVASNS GRID that is including TVA metadata servers, TVA content servers and various Networked Digital Recorders (NDRs) through which actual search process can be performed. RSR Service Resource Pool contains the RSRS GRID through which RSRS GRID can compare and rank results based on the reliability and the similarity returned with the search results from various nodes of TVASNS GRID.

5. The flow of messages in MIRG System   The figure 4 illustrates the flow of messages among a client (PDR), Aggregation Service Provider (ASP), the Contents Service Providers, TVASNS GRID, RSRS GRID, and LRS GRID.

First step is the content service provider creates contents and edits metadata related of contents, and store contents and metadata to each DB, and then the contents service provider publishes metadata to Aggregation Service Provider (ASP) through Registry Service (1). And the user (PDR) sends a query message describing the information that he or her wants (2).

After the search and navigation module receives the query message from the user, it estimates whether the query can be processed by itself or not. If this module can process the request by itself, it processes the   request and returns the result to the client (3). If it cannot process the request by itself, it sends out the request to the TVASNS GRID TVASNS GRID utilizes its nodes including the metadata service nodes of (3??), and gathers information and returns them to the search and navigation module of the ASP.

Client  Search & Navigation  Module  Metadata DB  Location Resolution  Module  TVA Searching and Navigation  Service GRID  Reliability and Similarity  Resolving Service GRID  Contents Service Provider  Contents DB  Aggregation service  Provider  (1)  (2)  (3)  (3?)  (4)  (5)  (6) CRID Selection  (7)  (9)  (10) Location Selection  Metadata DB  (3??)  Location Resolution Service GRID  (8)   Figure 4 Behavioral Flow of MIRG System   ASP passes the reliability and the similarity  information received from various nodes of TVASNS GRID with node identifiers for each result to the RSRS GRID. RSRS GRID ranks the results from the various nodes in reliability and similarity order using its own resources as the similarity and the reliability from different nodes cannot be simply resolved. (4). After ASP gathers the information from the TVASNS GRID and RSRS GRID, it generates the list of CRIDs (Contents Reference ID) with requested information and sends the list to the client (5). Based on the list returned, user selects a record with CRID from the     provided list of information (6) and the client sends the selected CRID to ASP to get the content (7).

The ASP either resolves the CRID to acquire the actual location of the selected content or sends the received CRID to the Location Resolution Service GRID to get the list of actual location of the content (8) and location Resolution Module of the ASP returns the list of Locators to the user again (9).

Finally, User selects a Locator from the list of Locators, and acquires the contents (10).

6. Conclusion and Future Work   To provide fast and reliable multimedia information retrieval services based on the ETSI 102 822 standard in Web-Service environment, this paper proposes a new GRID (MIRG:Multimedia Information Retrieval GRID) system which integrate three sub GRID systems which are ?TVA Search and Navigation Service GRID?, ?Location Resolution Service GRID?, and ?Reliability and Similarity Resolving Service GRID?. The proposed framework has four layers, which are application layer, service layer, middleware layer, and resource layer. Finally, this paper also extends two operations of ETSI 102 822 to provide functionalities that allow users to specify the time limit within which the server should respond with the query result, and to select one of two query modes. One is the synchronous mode in which a user is expected to wait to receive the query result within given time limit, and the other is the asynchronous mode in which a user is expected to receive the acknowledgement of the query from the server immediately with the response identifier, and may come back for taking the result of the query after in time.

The proposed GRID framework for multimedia information retrieval provides new services such as the modes of operation with fast and reliable retrieval of multimedia information based on the ETSI 102 822 standard.

One of the future work can be studies on distributing the queries to members of ?TVA Search and Navigation Service GRID? based on those histories of response accuracy that is computed by ?Reliability and Similarity Resolving Service GRID? are necessary.

7. References  [1] TV-Anytime Forum home page: www.tv-  anytime.org [2] ?MPEG7 Query Format Requirements?, N8780  ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 [3] ETSI TS 102 822-1: "Broadcast and On-line  Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content  on personal storage systems ("TV-Anytime"); Part 1: Benchmark Features".

[4] ETSI TS 102 822-2: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV-Anytime"); Part 2: System description".

[5] ETSI TS 102 822-3-1: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV-Anytime"); Part 3: Metadata; Sub-part 1: Phase 1 ? Metadata schemas".

[6] ETSI TS 102 822-3-2: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV Anytime"); Part 3: Metadata; Sub-part 2: System aspects in a uni- directional environment".

[7] ETSI TS 102 822-3-3: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV-Anytime"); Part 3: Metadata; Sub-part 3: Phase 2 ? Extended Metadata Schema".

[8] ETSI TS 102 822-3-4: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV-Anytime"); Part 3: Metadata; Sub-part 4: Phase 2 ? Interstitial metadata".

[9] ETSI TS 102 822-4: "Broadcast and On line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV-Anytime"); Part 4: Content referencing".

[10] ETSI TS 102 822-5-1: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV- Anytime"); Part 5: Rights Management and Protection (RMP) Sub-part 1: Information for Broadcast Applications".

[11] ETSI TS 102 822-5-2: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV- Anytime"); Part 5: Rights Management and Protection (RMP) Sub-part 2: RMPI binding".

[12] ETSI TS 102 822-6-1: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV Anytime"); Part 6: Delivery of metadata over a bi-directional network; Sub-part 1: Service and transport".

[13] ETSI TS 102 822-6-2: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV- Anytime"); Part 6: Delivery of metadata over a bi-directional network; Sub-part 2: Phase 1 - Service discovery".

[14] ETSI TS 102 822-6-3: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of     content on personal storage systems ("TV- Anytime"); Part 6: Delivery of metadata over a bi-directional network; Sub-part 3: Phase 2 - Exchange of Personal Profile".

[15] ETSI TS 102 822-7: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV- Anytime Phase 1"); Part 7: Bi-directional metadata delivery protection".

[16] ETSI TS 102 822-8: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of content on personal storage systems ("TV Anytime"); Part 8: Phase 2 - Interchange Data Format".

[17] ETSI TS 102 822-9: "Broadcast and On-line Services: Search, select, and rightful use of  content on personal storage systems ("TV- Anytime"); Part 9: Phase 2 - Remote Programming".

