

Abstract?Political and social issues play a big role in economical systems. Macroeconomic variables which are affected by the above mentioned factors can be used in economical forecasting. Time series are used as a very powerful tool in economical systems for short time predicting. As time series predict the future output according to the past behaviors of the system, therefore they can not sense sudden changes in the behavior of the economical system. In this paper, macroeconomic variables are used as exogenous variables in forecasting model. Traditional methods using transformation and differentiation suffer from a decrease in accuracy forecasting. To get rid of the problems in the above mentioned methods, a Neuro-Fuzzy (NF) structure is used as a strong nonlinear mapping tool even on nonstationary time series.

Combination of statistical methods on time series and other dynamical models with NF structure, provide a better model in forecasting. Using ?NF-ARMAX?,?NN-ARMAX? models and implementing them on real-life data of ?Tehran Stock Market? show a good accuracy in our new designed predictive model.



I. INTRODUCTION  t is obvious that bolstering the stock market has a very important role in reinforcing the economical institutes.

Forecasting share prices of companies provide  information about their growth rate and stability in future.

For instance, this case cause economical decision in such a way that decreases its risk and probable loses, therefore predicting in the stock market is valuable not only for the investors but also for institutes and even the dealers. The stock market can be described by nonlinear and complex time series [1]. These time series may be nonstationary or have seasonal behavior. Since the structures such as neural or NF networks benefit from nonlinear mapping and behave rather well in encountering nonstationary time series (i.e., having learning ability). Using these structures in the stock market prediction systems avoids transformation and differentiation on data Neural networks benefit from the learning property and can predict the system output by learning from training data [2][3][4] but the problem is that  neural networks are not interpretable while fuzzy systems try to mimic the human logical decision which makes it very interpretable [5][6].

Mehdi Roopaei is with the Dept. of Computer Science and Eng., Shiraz University, (corresponding author, Post Box: 71955-177  SHIRAZ-IRAN, phone: +98-711- 6309641 mobile: +98-9177137538, Mehdi Roopaei, e-mail: mehdi.roopaei@gmail.com)  Mansoor zolghadri is with the Dept. of Computer Science and Eng., Shiraz University, ZAND street, SHIRAZ, IRAN, (e-mail:  zjahromi@shira zu.ac.ir)  Abbas Emadi is with the Dept. of Electrical Eng., Virtual Shiraz University, e-mail: abbas.emadi@gmail.com)  The combination of these two methods provides a powerful tool which is called NF.

In system identification, many statistical methods have been developed to model stochastic system and time series [7].

Time series and system identification models provide more precisely forecasting response than econometric models in short period [8]. Autoregressive Moving Average eXogenous (ARMAX) is one of these models. In this paper, by combining this model with neural network structure [9], "NN-ARMAX" and also with NF structure [11][12][13], "NF-ARMAX", the share prices in TEHRAN stock market can be forecasted.

In section II, NF structures are discussed. In section III presents the effect of exogenous variables on economical forecasting. Section IV discusses time difference in various economic markets and simultaneous forecasting. Section V, shows our simulation results. And finally, conclusion is included in section VI.



II. NF DYNAMIC STRACTURES  In economical systems, it is common to use "ARMA" and "ARIMA" models but there are no parts as inputs among them. For the reasons which are explained in the next section, we use the combination of "ARMAX" model which has input term and its structures is shown below, with the Neural Network (ANN) and NF structures for forecasting.



II. ARMAX MODEL  This model in linear form is as follows  )()()()()()( teqCnktxqBtyqA                     (1)  Where in the above relation, y(t) is output, x(t) is Extra Input or Exogenous Variable and e(t) is the white noise. A(q), B(q) and C(q) are the polynomials in terms of time shift operator, of the orders na, nb and nc respectively and nk is the delay.

This structure is shown in the Fig-1.

Fig.1- The ARMAX model block diagram  Economical Forecasting by Exogenous Variables Mehdi Roopaei, Mansoor Zolghadri, Abbas Emadi  I      Neural Network ARMAX  This model is the combination of the MLP neural network with ARMAX model. The estimated value of y(t) shown by  )|( ty is expressed as follows.

))(),...,1(),(),...,1(  ),1(),...,(()|(  ncttnatyty  nknbtxnktxfty       (2)  In which, a neural network provides the mapping for nonlinear function f [9].  issued to denote the model parameters. This structure (show in Fig. 2) is the same as the structure of Fig.1 but, instead of using a simple summation block, a neural network structure is used to provide the mapping.

Fig.2- NN-ARMAX model block diagram  NF ARMAX  This model is the combination of NF structure with the ARMAX model. An Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) is used to provide the mapping of equation (2). This model is shown in Fig. 3.

Fig.3- The NF-ARMAX model block diagram

III. THE EFFECT OF EXOGENOUS VARIABLES ON ECONOMICAL FORECASTING  Many factors such as the word political and social events and the way people think about a social issue affect economical systems. For instance, share prices may decrease enormously due to a political change or increase dramatically because of a social issue. "ARMA" and "ARIMA" time series, having no variable to measure these factors as mentioned above, which are called exogenous, are appropriate models for forecasting the future based on generalizing the series past behavior. But to increase the accuracy of the forecasting, the effect of these factors should be considered quantitatively.

It seems that quantitative variables could be found in such a way that they would be affected from the above qualitative factors and at the same time, they themselves have influence on stock market. Therefore, if these quantitative variables are used as inputs for forecasting model, the effect of these factors is considered in forecasting and the accuracy of prediction is improved.

It is clear that these factors have influence on other markets such as oil, gas, gold, and exchange as well. But the intensity of influence is not the same. So indicators, whose markets have more influence than the above factors, are used as representative of these factors for implementing the forecasting model.

Fig-4 shows the above case. The main effect of these factors while being applied compared to the case in which it is not applied is distinguishable in the simulations.

Fig. 4- The effect of exogenous variables on economical forecasting

IV. TIME DIFFERENCE IN VARIOUS ECONOMIC MARKETS AND SIMULTANEOUS FORECASTING  As stated in section II and shown in Fig.1, Fig.2 and Fig.3, x(t) is used to forecast )|(? ty .

)(txi variables are not the main inputs for generating data,  and are affected simultaneously from those qualitative factors (Fig-4). These variables can be representative of common factors among the markets. The mentioned qualitative factors are also part of above variables and their variations have a big role in stock market. Therefore to consider their effects, x(t) should be added to the inputs and non-compliance, may cause delay in the forecasting model and making the model invalid.

At first glance, it looks like that x(t) is not reachable, but if x(t) is chosen in a place in which the input variables prices could be found a few hours before opening the stock market in a specific location where the forecasting is needed and implementing them to the model which is trained based on these variables before(it is necessary that the forecasting model be trained using such x(t)), therefore a good forecasting is obtained. Nevertheless is necessary to say that some social mental factors which affect the stock market intensively are the local factors. So, one method can use both global and local market variables simultaneously. In conventional methods such as "Cointegration" method under specific conditions, synchronized equilibrium relations are used, but if the needed conditions are not satisfied then, our dynamic model explained in this paper can be useful in this situation.

REMARK 1 Since the predicting model faces an increment in forecasting error after a while, (because the model is trained only once and is used for some period of time), so the model should be updated, (trained and tested), with the new data after intervals. The updating intervals depend on the testing phase of result. i.e. , if the predicting error between the forecasting and the actual value in testing phase is reasonable for 50 steps, the forecasting model must be updated after 50 steps, though it is better to be updated earlier.

Fig. 5- The updating time in which the model is valid  REMARK 2 The effects of exogenous variables are different in the modeling. i.e., for the simulations used in this paper, the oil price is mostly effect compared to the exchange market variable which has the least influence. Therefore, to increase the speed of the modeling computation, the exchange market variable could be ignored. Particularly in "NF-ARMAX" model which allocates along time to train the model.

REMARK 3 The "NF-ARMAX" model has acceptable results when the data are not normalized. The main problem is the massive computation created in the training phase. Especially by increasing the number of membership functions and the  order of the model, (increasing the ba nn ,  and cn  causes,  increase in presence of lags in xy, and ), the  computational volume increases exponentially.

REMARK 4 Since the applied model in this paper is only used for forecasting and not for econometrics analysis, therefore the purpose is not the parameter estimation uniquely and the whiteness and smallness of error plus the convergence of the error covariance matrix are of the great importance. (in testing phase)

V. SIMULATION RESULTS  To be sure of desirable performance of the models being discussed, it is necessary to use them practically. The data applied in this paper are related to "Arak Machine Manufacture" shares price in "Tehran Stock Market" from Nov. 2003 till Jan. 2005.

The forecasting model input variables, correspond to this time depend on the price of oil, gas, gold, dollar and euro.

The data are based on the average daily prices but the holidays and the days with no dealing are omitted. Since the ranges of the data are very different and usually big in various variables, therefore normalizing the data has an important role in forecasting model improvement. This has been verified as below, though other methods for normalizing are also existed. If  r(t) is a time series and M=max{r(t)}, m=min{r(t)} and )(trN is the normalized  signal, it can be formulated as below  mM  mtr trN  )( )(  The fitness criterion being used in this paper is: Fit = 100 (1 - norm ( y?  - y)/norm(y-mean(y)))  Where in the above relation y?  is the predicted value of the  real output y and the used norm can be chosen as 2-norm.

TEST 1- NN-ARMAX  In this experiment, MLP neural network with a hidden layer, "Levenberg-Marquardt" training algorithm [10] and "MSE" criterion are used in "NN-ARMAX" model.

Figs. 6 and 7 illustrate one-step ahead prediction compared to the actual data. In this simulation, all of the five inputs are being used.

In TABLE-I , the simulation results for any various inputs are shown. In any case, the fitness value indicates the more better forecasting results obtained by our designed model (NN-ARMAX), and as it is clear, increasing the inputs cause an increase in forecasting accuracy.

Fig. 6- One-step ahead forecasting with NN-ARMAX model in training phase ? using five mentioned inputs and the fitness is %94.2.

Fig. 7- One-step ahead forecasting with NN-ARMAX model in testing phase ? using five mentioned inputs  and the fitness is %83.3.

TABLE I Experiment Results for ?NN-ARMAX?  Model  Number of utilized extra  inputs  Fitness in  training phase  %  Fitness in  testing phase  %  Model order  Number of hidden neurons  No extra input83.563.1na=1  nc=39  1x90.375.4 na=1 nb=2  nc=3  2,1 xx91.677 na=1 nbi=2 nc=3 i=1,2   3,2,1 xxx94.577.7 na=1 nbi=2  nc=3 i=1,2,3   4,3,2,1 xxxx9480.3 na=1 nbi=2  nc=3 i=1,2,3,4     ,  ,,,  xx  xxx 94.283.3  na=1 nbi=2 nc=3  i=1,2,3,4,5  TEST 2- NF-ARMAX  Similar to test-1, Figs. 8 and 9 illustrate one-step ahead prediction compared to the actual data for " NF-ARMAX"  model. In the above model, all of the five inputs are being used and their applying effect of such input variables with the fitness criterion for any input are being discussed in TABLE II.

Fig.8- One-step ahead forecasting with NF-ARMAX model in training phase ? using five mentioned inputs and the fitness is %93.5.

Fig. 9- One-step ahead forecasting with NF-ARMAX model in testing phase ? using five mentioned inputs  and the fitness is %85.3.

TABLE II Experiment Results for ?NF-ARMAX?  Model  Number of the utilized extra  inputs  Fitness in  training phase  percent  Fitness in  testing phase  percent  Model order  Number of Membership  functions  No extra input90.865.1 na=1 nc=3   1x92.876.1 na=1 nb=2  nc=3  2x,1x93.777.3  na=1 nbi=2 nc=3 i=1,2   3x,2x,1x9478  na=1 nbi=2 nc=3  i=1,2,3   4x,3x,2x,1x93.181.2  na=1 nbi=2 nc=3  i=1,2,3,4   5x,4x  ,3x,2x,1x 93.585.3  na=1 nbi=2 nc=3  i=1,2,3,4,5

VI. CONCLUSION  In this paper, by using the macroeconomic variables as representative of exogenous variables for forecasting model and implementing the "NN-ARMAX" and "NF-ARAMX" models, high capability of the mentioned models in the share prices forecasting of the stock market has been evaluated.

