The Design of Intelligent QA platform Based on Model of Learner?s Personality

ABSTRACT  With the development of network technology ,online learning becomes easier. But how to meet the need of learners? personality in network study is still a big problem.

In order to support the personalized study better in the network environment, we take the personalized learning system as the research background. The artificial intelligence and cognitive technology were employed in the design and research of intelligent QA platform based on learners? personal model. Such issues as the model building based on learners? personality,  and the designing of Intelligent QA Systems based on this model to present adaptive knowledge are mainly explored.

1. INTRODUCTION  QA system is a necessary component of online learning platform. It can promptly solve learner?s puzzles to a certain degree, and help to eliminate their learning barrier, In addition, it plays an crucial role in strengthening communication between teachers and learners, which is quite helpful for the learners to clear about the question, and hence aquire the knowledge they really need. At present, a lot of researches have been conducted in this area.

According to related literature report, these researches mainly concentrate on key word match, dynamic question connection, FAQ production as well as the feedback of teacher?s teaching issues. Relatively speaking, the QA sytems designed by foreign experts are more intelligent.

For example, they support the inquiry by natural language, and provide richer content with higher quality. The most distinctive feature is that the excellent intelligent QA sytems abroad is running independently, and they don?t belong to any teaching or learning platform. They act as resource providers in professional fields, and don?t link to teaching process. On the other hand, domestic QA systems are basically assistant of online education, which help the teachers and learners in teaching and learning.

Obviously, online education has become increasingly popular. Although the model of keywords extraction and problems matching strategy has been extensively studied in the designing of QA system, personalized interaction has been blowed over. Most advanced system through the  keyword matching method has been looking for answers from the resource library, or providing FAQ to discussion areas such as BBS. The reason for this consideration is that the people in information acquisition process will be similar to some of the problems. In fact, questions must be quite different since the inquirers are quite different in learning background, cognitive ability, and basic level and so on. These differences lies only in information and knowledge, and more importantly, in the depth of knowledge presentation. The traditional QA system take little consideration in the individual difference since it provides the same response to different inquirers, which inevitably limits its implication area.

In this paper, we discuss the designing of an intelligent QA platform based on the model of learners? personality.

The main research point is on the use of data mining technology and other methods to extract the learners? personality, and auto-adapted answer of question which inquirers provide based on questions of personal model. All these will involve the auto-adapted adjustment strategy based on connection with presents of questions. It has the extremely important theoretical significance for us to design a human, personalized intelligent QA system. The information acquired process involves in inquires and replies. Without the design based on model of personality, the quality of individualized information would not be ensured.

2. Research on the mining of learner personality   The learning model is a user model aiming at online  education. It is the abstract of one or a group of learners in online education environment, which describes such information as cognition level, the personalized characteristics of the learners. The learner model is the basis of implementing personalized learning. Nowadays, the PAPI model established by IEEE LTCS is comparative mature. The model can meet the needs of teaching management well. However, it isn?t comprehensive enough in describing the learning behavior.  For example, it is lack of the description of some non-intelligence factors (such as personality, motivation, learning style) .Therefore, we extend some property of individuality to this model so that it becomes the basis of the personalized intelligence QA   DOI 10.1109/WGEC.2008.112     system. What?s more, we conduct research on mining the personality of learners to achieve the relationship between learners? personality and learning behavior. As the foundation of auto-adapted answering, all these will provide more comfortable service for online learners.

2.1 The learning model aiming at personalized learning  The traditional PAPI model contains the following information: statistic information of population, learning information, management information, relationship information, security information, preference information, performance information and collective works information.

Among them, the description of the information about learners? cognitive level was insufficient enough. For example performance information includes the resume of  learners, the objective of current and future work situation work. Collective works information describes and testifies learners? learning ability. However, this model shorts of the description of learners? personality. Actually, the personality of learners will make a great contribution to study effect. For example , for a less self-confident student, when he makes a right answer for a question, the human teacher would respond actively by such praise as "you are very good" to encourage him to go on to the next learning procedure; Comparatively, when a self-confidence student makes a right answer, teachers would respond like "not bad, could you come to a higher challenge?" This kind of words encourages him to enter the next phase. Therefore, based on the traditional PAPI model, we extend a personality attribution to this model, which helps us to get a learning model based on learners? personality as in the following table.

Table  1.  The learning model based on learners? personality  the learning model based on learners? personality  PAPI original model  The expansion attribution of PAPI original model  Statistic of population  Name, age, sex, etc. Academic Background Major, subject, curriculum, etc.

Learning information, Brief information on learning Learning basis Score of Corresponding content scoring (Master, understanding, knowledge, know what, know so little)  Management Brief management information Character Cartel 16 kinds of character attribution  Relationship Relationship with teachers, etc Habit of learning Fast reading intensive  reading , general reading, etc  Security Password Learning dependence Extensive reading, intensive reading, etc.

Preference Parameters of promoting interaction between human and computer  others Health situation, etc  performance resume current work situation and objective in future, etc.

Collective Works  magnum opus and proof, etc.

2.2 Research on mining learners? personality  The measure of mining learners? personality is to  gather learner sample from internet, collect some basic information of the sample, and analyze the relationship between learner?s personality and his learning behavior.

2.2.1The Personality Mining Method  Definition 1  Let C={c1, c2,?, cn} be an attribute set and Vi be the ci?s range ( ci?C ), then  (1)For arbitrary vij?Vi, the two-tuple (ci, vij) is called an attribute pattern of {ci};  (2)If pattern k and pattern l respectively are the  attribute pattern of attribute set Ck and the Cl, Ck Cl is  not empty and Ck, Cl belong to C, then patternk patternl is an attribute pattern of the attribute set Ck Cl.

?  ?  Definition 2  Let P={p1, p2,?, pm} be an personality attribute set with 3 aspects related with the learner?s personalized learning--the characteristic, the motivation and the style. Then the personality pattern is an attribute pattern of P?(P ??  P).

Definition 3  Behaviour pattern is the quantitative description of learning behavior characteristic. Let B={b1, b2,?, bl} be the set of the behavior characteristic, then the behavior pattern is an attribute pattern of B?(B ??  B).

Definition 4 The Personality mining refers to that through the analysis of sample learner?s learning behaviour pattern and the personality pattern, gain the rule between them and based on the rule automatically acquire the learner?s personality pattern.

In Internet learning environment, learner's learning     behaviour pattern is heterogeneous and diverse[2]; the personality pattern has many dimensions and most attribute values are numerical. Simply using the conventional data mining algorithm will cause a high level of complexity and low precision.

In view of the problem, we proposed the working mechanism of the personality mining algorithm as shown in Figure 1:  Investigation of personality  Sample database of learner's personality  Analysisi of associative rules  Mergering of personality  attribute  statistical analysis  Obtaining personality  Learning log  Database of personality  after mergering  Pattern of learner's behavior  Rules between personality and  behavior   Fig  .1 illustrative diagram of  personality mining   Obtain the personality pattern through the  investigation of the sample learner?s personality, and reduce its dimensions by combining the personality attributes;  Obtain the study behaviour pattern through statistical analysis of the learning journal;  Through the association analysis of the personality characteristic and the behaviour pattern, mine the behavior- personality rule;  According to the rule, reason the current learner's behaviour pattern, and thus obtain the learner's personality characteristic.

2.2.2 Description of learning behavior pattern   The learning behavior pattern is description of learning  behavior characteristic. Let H={h1, h2, h3,?? hn}, and H is a set of learning behavior characteristic. Among them, hj is a kind of learning behavior (such as number of browsing Courseware). When a person has hJ,hK, two kinds of learning behavior then its learning behavior pattern is the subset of H {hJ,hK}.attention that the description of learning behavior characteristic is a quantitative description.

If the number of browsing courseware is three times, the value of hJ is 3, and so on . Thus the learning behavior pattern could be expressed as a certain number set.

Corresponding each learning behavior ,the set has a  corresponding number value.

2.2.3 Acquisition of Association Rules between personality and learning behavior   The personality characteristic is gained through  matching the current learner?s behaviour pattern with the rule?s antecedent. The process is as follows:  Step1: Match the learner?s behaviour pattern item by item with the rule's antecedent and thus obtain a set of personality attribute values.

Step2: If there is an attribute with inconsistent attribute values, take the one produced by the rule with the highest confidence.

Step3: Use the product of personality attribute value and the corresponding weight to construct the personality characteristic vector.

Step4: According to the personality characteristic vector, classify the learners according to the result of personality clustering. Contrast the data and its result can confirm the accuracy of the personality mining method.

2.3 Evaluation of learners? cognitive level  Because of different learning background, cognition ability, the original knowledge level and personalized characteristic, the question which learners propose would be different. This kind of difference lies not only in the difference in information and knowledge, but more importantly in the depth of information, namely the depth of knowledge presentation. Therefore it can?t simply give the same answer to those different learners through the intelligent QA system. On the contrary, it should offer explaining with different depth according to different learners. Here it involves an evaluation on the learner?s cognitive level, and a certain degree of explanation is to be provided according to the evaluation. Thus, we proposed a kind of evaluation method based on learning background and critical knowledge. It can obtain the approximate cognitive level under the critical knowledge or the question.

By analyzing, statistics the relationship of question and learning background of learner?s. In this foundation, it can realize navigation based on the question explanation about critical knowledge ?that is expansion of the auto-adapted depth.

3. Design of an Intelligent QA platform based on model of learner?s personality  3.1 The frame of QA system and the function of each module  The Intelligent QA platform based on model of     learner?s personality consist of two parts: the traditional QA system and extensive intelligence QA system. The Extensive part includes: acquisition of learner?s personality module; estimating of learner?s cognitive level module; auto-adapted content present QA module and analysis and statistical of question module.

Figure 1.the function frame of an intelligent QA system based on  learner?s personality  3.2 Key issue to the implementation of the system  3.2.1 Auto-adapted presentation of the knowledge   Auto-adapted presentation of the knowledge includes  the acquisition of question auto-adapted connection and the auto-adapting of explanation?s depth. We use the traditional method---matching algorithm based on the keyword splitting to solute auto-adapted presenting of the knowledge. In order to solute the auto-adapting of explanation?s depth. We should provide some explanations with different depth and construct the attribution of the answer?s depth, the variable can be described by fuzzy variable, such as {Shallow, moderate, deep}, at last, we operator the learner?s cognitive level and learner personalized model with corresponding weight. Through these methods, we get the value of the answer?s depth attribution and obtain the auto-adapted answer from the answer depth attribution value.

3.2.2 Statistic and analysis of the questions  We can grasp the distribution status and laws by  statistical and analysis questions. The distribution status and laws can reflect the effect ion and loophole of the corresponding knowledge on network, then we should adjust the teaching contents.

The statistical and analysis of questions in traditional QA system focused on chapter or knowledge. As we have introduced a intelligent QA system based on learner?s personality, the corresponding statistics and analysis should also increase statistics and analysis based on the model of learner?s personality, especially to analysis the relationship between learner?s academic background and distribution status of inquired questions, thus, the algorithm based on learner?s cognitive level and auto-adapted answer under learner?s personality can be optimized well.

4. Conclusion   The intelligent QA system based on learner?s  personality can be used  to realize the communication between teachers and students, help students to be clear about the point of the knowledge and obtain the required answer in network education. Additionally, it can be applied to various fields, such as the building of medical and hygiene website. Regardless of what kind of domain, each learner with different request can get answer in different depth. The intelligent QA system based on learner?s personality is promising in the application.

The emphasis of this paper is to propose an intelligent QA system  based on learner?s personality, and the key technology of how to realize it. We hope that it can offer readers a certain reference.

