Research on Leakage State Classification of Pipelines Based on Wavelet  Packet Analysis and Support Vector Machines

Abstract  Aimed at the problem during the pipeline leakage state detecting process, that the datum which the sensor directly surveys are quite big and the characteristic are not strong, this paper brings forward one pipeline leakage state classification method, which combines the wavelet packet analysis and support vector machines. Through using the wavelet packet to the original data, carrying on the frequency band decomposing and the energy analysis, obtains the characteristic that can most reflect the classified essence. State sorter constituted by the support vector machines, only needs a few training samples, can make signal frequency band energy as the eigenvector to recognize and classify. The experiment datum shows that, this method effectively realizes the classified recognition of leakage state.

1. Introduction  Pipeline transport run through each domain in industrial production, and its decision effect is more prominent in the national economy. The often occur of pipeline leakage already becomes the key barrier of the enterprise run and the economic benefit, so earnest studying the pipeline leakage online monitor technology has important social and economic benefit to guarantee equipment safety operation.

In the leakage state monitor process, the signal get through the sensor are measure data. Therefore the leakage state recognition faces questions as follows: One is how can do effective feature extraction to the measure data; the other is designing an effective sorter, to realize the pipeline leakage state recognition. After these two questions settled, may input all eigenvectors  coming from the test data to the sorter, to realize the pipeline leakage state recognition.

This paper utilizes the wavelet packet analysis method to extract eigenvectors in frequency field of the pipeline leakage state, and adopts support vector machines (SVM), which is a kind of machine learning method, to solve the analysis question of leakage state under the limited samples.

2. Eigenvectors selection of wavelet packet analysis  2.1 Wavelet packet analysis theory  The traditional signal analysis method like Fourier transformation is one kind of overall transformation, is unable to indicate the time frequency nature of the signal, and does not suit the non-steady signal analysis.

Along with the wavelet theory development, by way of the new signal processing method, the wavelet analysis has widely applied in fault diagnosis and other flied.

Although wavelet transformation satisfies this kind of non-steady signal analysis because of its good time frequency localization and the multi-distinguish characteristic, it does not decompose the high frequency part again[1]. The wavelet packet transformation makes up this shortage, it can provide one careful analysis method for the signal. It carries the frequency band through multi-level partition, does further decompose to high frequency part which multi-distinguish analysis does not subdivision, and averagely decomposes the original function frequency range into  entries of the equal size frequency segment. If sampling frequency is known, the analyze layers are enough , then may make frequency range of each frequency segment to be small, thus carries on a  j2   DOI 10.1109/ICICTA.2008.468     more careful analysis to the signal, so that provide a more effective method for the signal characteristic extraction.

The wavelet packet arithmetic of the signal sequence  describes as: Assume together clutches  filter  satisfies: )(tx  )(nh  ? ??? kllnhknh ?)2()2(            (1) ? ? 2)(nh                      (2)  Make , then the recurrence formula  of the wavelet packet decomposition is: )1()1()( khkg k ???  )2()(2)(  )2()(2)(    ktDkgtD  ktDkhtD  k nn  k nn  ??  ??  ?  ?  ?  (3)  )()(0 txtD ? , In the formula  is coefficient of the  wavelet packet decomposition,  )(tDn n is the layer of the  wavelet packet decomposition, ,...1,0?n  2.2 Eigenvector selection  The wavelet packet signal decomposition is incorporating random signal includes the sine signal into the corresponding frequency band.These decomposition frequency band signal all has certain energy, may use signal energy in each frequency band as eigenvector to token pipeline leakage state.

The wavelet packet frequency band analysis technology is the same as the Fourier frequency chart analysis technology, the theory basis also is Parseval energy integral equality[2]. Because the energy of the signal  in time field:  ? ?xf  dxxff  )(	?                  (4)  The  wavelet transformation is: )(xf  ? ? 	 ??? ? ?  R  kkkk kj dxxfjxjWC )()2(22,2 2 (5)  In type (5) )(x is the base wavelet. According to type (4) and type (5) as well as the Parseval energy integral equality, has:  )( ?	 ?  j kj  R  Cdxxf                 (6)  May know by type (6), wavelet transformation coefficient  has the energy dimension, may use as  the energy characteristic extraction in the pipeline leakage state. Supposes restructuring signal , of  which after the wavelet packet decomposition the  kjC  kjS  k  layer and the j entries frequency band, corresponding  signal energy is , then has: kjE    )( ?  ?  ?? N  m jmkjkj xdttSE             (7)  In type (7) expresses data length;  expresses the wavelet packet decomposition level;  N k  pj ,...,2,1,0? ,expresses the serial number of the decomposing frequency band, ;  expresses  the disperse points breadth cost of the restructuring signal .Signal total energy  equals to the sum  of the various frequency bands energy, namely:  12 ?? kp jmx  kjS kE  (8) ? ?  ? p  j kjk EE   After doing energy restructuring of the character gene in type (8), may receive fault eigenvector by wavelet packet decomposition extraction:  kkpkk EEEET /},...,,{ 10?             (9)  3. Support vector machines and arithmetic  Support vector machines is bringing forward by Vapnik et al. acts according to the frame risk minimize principle of the statistics theory, arithmetic first aims at two value classification question. In the industrial equipment fault diagnosis domain, the simple two value classification cannot satisfy the actual needs.

Therefore, in two value classification foundation, establishes multi-classification model of the support vector machines.

3.1 Support vector machines principle  Support vector machines translate the conformation of the most superior hyperplane into seeking the most superior answer with hypo-two optimization, its math form is:  ? ?  ??? l  i iCwww   )(  ),( ??        (10)  s.t. iii bxwy ????? 1))(( , li ,...,1? 0?i? , li ,...,1?  The actual classified question often is non-linear.The basic thought which the support vector machines deal with this question is mapping the sample space to the higher dimension character space, and seeks the most superior hyperplane in character space, this hyperplane actually is corresponding the non-linear hyperplane of the original sample space. Through     possessing special nature nuclear function, support vector machines ably avoid straight dealing with problems in high dimension space, so the complexity of the computer is basically not increase[3]. Through seeking its antithesis question, comes down to a quadratic function extremum problem:  ? jijij l  ji i  l  i i xxKyyW ,2  )(  1,1  ???? ?? ??  ?? ?      (11)  s.t. Ci ?? ?0 , li ,...,1?   ?? ?  i  l  i i y?  Solves the various coefficients in above formula, educes the classified distinguish function is:  ])),([()(  bxxKysignxf ii l  i i ?? ?  ?  ?       (12)  Therefore, may distinguish the sample x  respective category, according to the positive or negative of the classified function.

The commonly used nuclear function includes: Polynomial function ,  is the polynomial coefficient; Radial group function ,...)2,1(,)1(),( ???? dyxyxK d  d  ? ? ?  ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ??    exp),(  ? yx  yxK , ?  is the extent of the  nuclear function; Sigmoid nuclear function ,  and  respectively be  scale and attenuation parameter.

))(tanh(),( cyxbyxK ??? b c  The support vector machines solution process needs to solve a hypo-two programming problem, when sample point number are bigger, directly solving this hypo-two programming problem needs quite large calculate quantity and storage capacity, that will cause arithmetic invalidation [4].Therefore many scholars bring forward the special arithmetic to deal with the large issue, for example, the choosing block arithmetic, the decomposition arithmetic and SMO (sequential minimal optimization) arithmetic. Hereinto, SMO training arithmetic is a simple and fast arithmetic, it will change large-scale hypo-two programming question into a series of the optimization sub-question only containing two variables, and will be able to solve directly by applying parsing method, and causes computing process celerity and nicety.

The SMO arithmetic is as follows: assigns precision ? , , makes  selects optimization variable  , parses this optimization problem about these  two variable, so gets the optimization solution according to the above renews  00 ?? ;0?k kk 21 ,??  ,, 12  ?? kk ?? ? to ;  Among precision  1?k? ? , if satisfies the engine off rule:   ?? ?  l  i iiy ? , ,Cj ?? ?0 li ,...,1?  ? ?  ? ?  ?  ??  ???  ??  ?? ?  }|{,1  }0|{,1  }0|{,1  )),((  Cx  Cx  x  bxxKyy  jj  jj  jj l  i jiiij  ?  ?  ?  ?       (13)  Then takes approximate solution ;Otherwise, makes  1* ?? k?? 1?? kk , renews ?  to 1 , duplicates above  step.

?k?  3.2 Multi-classified question  In order to solve the fault diagnosis and so on the multiple value classified question, needs to establish the multi-classified support vector machines.With the mathematical language describing as, according to training regulations which assigns:  .l ll YXyxyxT )(},),...(,{( 11 ???  Among them, ,},...,1{, MYyRXx i n  i ???? li ,...,1? ,  seeks a decision-making function .Thus it  can be seen, solves the kinds of multi-classification questions, materially is to find a rule, which divides the points in the  yRxxf n ?:)(  nR into M part. At present classification arithmetic mainly has one to one, one to more and etc, this article applies one to one classification arithmetic.

One to one classification arithmetic is based on the classification method of two kinds of problems.The concrete arithmetic is, to all },...,1,,|),{(),( Mjijijiji ??? .

Extracts all iy ? and the jy ? sample points from the training regulations. Composes training regulations  based on these sample points, uses the support  vector machines that solve the two kinds classification problems to get real-value function  and  determines the interpolator of that,  belong to the kind or the  jiT ?  )(xg ji?  Xx? i j  kind[5].

? ? ? ? ? ? ? !

?  ? ?  othersj  xgi xf  ji ji  ,  0,          (14)  4. Pipeline leakage state example analysis  The experiment selects one pipeline that its diameter is 50mm, wall thickness is 2.5mm, the crack and the vent is the artificial simulation. When the pressure is 0.5MPa, flux is 3.525L/min, under such working condition, separately carries on the pipeline equipment state experiment in the normal, the crack and the vent 3 kinds. Hereinto, support vector machine adopts SMO arithmetic, and combines the work collection?s selection policy in the SVMlight arithmetic. The type is     C-SVC, the nuclear function is the radial direction group function, to the multi-classified questions, adopt one to one classified arithmetic.

Figure 1 respectively contains the original signal and the restructuring sketch map of various frequency bands after the wavelet packet decomposing under 3 conditions, Table 1 represents frequency range of every nodes in the 3rd layer after the wavelet packet decompounds.

Utilizing wavelet packet energy method analyzed above extracts signal?s eigenvector. In this example, the signal sampling points are 2048, decomposing to the 3rd layer dispersion points are 256, therefore n=256.Taking various frequency bands energy as element to construct support vector machines? input vector . Takes 12 groups training  datum (see Table 2), there into 4 groups are the normal state, 4 groups are the vent state, 4 groups are crack state. Taking 8 groups test datum to carry through the test (see Table 3).The output of the support vector machines is , when the pipeline is under the vent state, ; when the pipeline is under the crack state, ; when the pipeline is under the normal state,  .

],...,,[ 373130 EEET ?  Y 1?Y  2?Y 3?Y  From table 2, may see in the different frequency range the energy distributing rate is different. Under the normal state signal frequency mainly distributes in E31, under the crack state signal frequency mainly distributes in E32, under the vent state signal frequency then mainly distributes in E36. The experiment indicates that, the wavelet packet energy analysis can reflect obviously the running status of the pipeline, the different fault type is corresponding the different frequency band energy distribution.

May know from the test results (see Table 4), the  Table 4. Result of SVMs in testing Serial number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 State 2 2 2 1 1 3 3 3 Test result 2 2 2 1 1 3 3 3  signal eigenvector extracts with the wavelet packet energy method, take this as the support vector  machines input vector is feasible, also the classified effect is very ideal. The test results in Table 4 indicate the accuracy is 100%.

5. Conclusions  Aimed at the existing problems in the pipeline leakage state detection, this paper proposes a classification method which combines the wavelet packet analysis and support vector machines. The research results indicate that using wavelet packet to original data to do frequency decomposition and energy analysis, can get the most essential character that reflects classification, and the state sorter classification which composed by support vector machines is quite effective. It offers an effective approach for pipeline leakage fault diagnosis, and has a broad application foreground.

Reference  [1] ShingDongFeng, BaoMing, QuLiangSheng. Wavelet envelope analysis in rolling bearing diagnosis application[J].

Chinese mechanical engineering, 2002, 11(12) , 1382-1385  [2] LiangPing, BaiLei, LongXinFeng, FanLiLi. The steamer rotor vibration fault diagnosis based on the wavelet packet analysis and the neural network [J]. Control theory and application. 2007, 24(6),981-985  [3] Nello Cristianini, John Shawe ? Taylor. LiGuoZheng, WangMeng, ZengHuaJun translate. Support vector machines introductory remarks[M]. Beijing: Electronics industry publishing house, 2004.

[4] HeXueWen, ZhaoHaiMing. Support vector machines and its application in mechanical fault diagnosis [J]. South central university journal, 2005,36(1).

[5] DengNaiYang, TianYingJie. New method in data mining - support vector machines[M]. Beijing: Scientific publishing house, 2004.

