13-3

Abstract - The paper presents integrated monitoring system of power supply and air conditioning equipment for almost 10000 sites, which has been put into operation in one of the biggest telecom operators in Europe. This operator offers clients fixed and mobile network services as well as the ones based on broadband access to the internet (VoIP, IPTV, VoD). The paper describes the way, in which the operator has integrated the monitoring system of the technologies mentioned with power supply and air conditioning monitoring system, which at the same time resulted in essential benefits of this integration.

The system, based on client-server architecture, transmits data to main or dedicated monitoring centers. The system server cooperates with dedicated microprocessor site controllers or with technological controllers of monitored equipment. The integration of this system with other, already existing ones is also in progress.

The paper also presents the way of infrastructure monitoring concerning operator's mobile network BTS, due to features of the dedicated, external controller designed specially for this purpose. The communication with the monitoring system, as well as monitoring of all technical infrastructure equipment on site (power system, HVAC, security and access control system, fire alarm system) is possible by means of one controller.

Implementing the system into service has enabled the creation of the open platform for the whole infrastructure integration in one monitoring system.

The further part of the paper presents the possibilities of electric energy meters remote readout by means of the system. This will enable the operator to be prepared for new ED regulations which apply to free market electric energy dynamic purchase as well as enable online electric energy consumption measurements with smaller service providers, which at the same time use the operator's infrastructure, often with distributed architecture.

The possibility of the system in legacy (copper wire) network protection was also presented. Destructions and   robberies of this network cause big losses, which results in the lack of providing services to clients.

This paper is the continuation of the one entitled "Integrated Management System for Technical Infrastructure of Telecom Sites" presented during Intelec 2007 conference in Rome.



I. INTRODUCTION Constantly growing competition on service market forces operators to provide constant accessibility to services offered to clients. The key issue is not only the high standard of services provided for competitive price, but also the creation of such technical conditions in the operator infrastructure so as to minimize the risk of outages, as well as the time limitation needed for the previous state restoration in case of a failure. This situation is especially important for the biggest operators, which offer a full range of modem services. The operator mentioned does not only have to conduct the marketing campaign, but also has to take care of the already possessed clients, who in fact may intend to change the services provider being the consequence of a significant number of slowly solved technical problems. To this end, operators have equipped their staff with adequate monitoring systems, including supervising the equipment which secure proper conditions for power supply and air conditioning for the whole infrastructure providing services. Power equipment and air conditioning securing energetic autonomy and proper environmental conditions in sites are the basis for the whole equipment providing services chain.

There is no question that without proper supervision of power and chilling systems there is any efficient and faultless functioning of the equipment, which provides telephone, Internet or broadband packet transmission service VoIP, IPTV and VoD.

Since recently technical infrastructure monitoring systems has been purchased, frequently by chance, during realization of some investment tasks. The consequence of this situation was the existence of many independent systems in operator networks, delivered by producers of supervised equipment    13-3  Figure 1: General structure of eMS Data transmission to Central Unit from supervised sites is based on so called the push-pull model. It means that during a routine operation, status change data of supervised equipment (for example air conditioner on/off) or actual measurements are transmitted in a strictly defined time regime, mostly twice a day. The server is in this case the initiating transfer party,

III. CMS STRUCTURE The system is constructed in client-server architecture. The central point of this system is the server, working in redundant configuration, called Central Unit (CU). Its basic task is the communication with site controllers, data acquisition and archiving previously received from sites as well as the communication with upper level monitoring systems and data availability to Monitoring Centers workstations.

Figure 2: Screenshot of "thin client" interface

VI. ARCHITECTURE OF CMS The integration of power and air conditioning monitoring systems carried out by the operator last year consisting of five  which is in accordance with a defined schedule, and which in tum sends data request to sites and takes buffered data there (PULL). In case of a hazard in a supervised site, the site controller generates an alarm and initiates a session, which sends the message to the server (PUSH).

The basic workstation version (also called Monitoring Center), together with specialized application in "Professional" version, is dedicated for units which directly deal with sites supervision and monitoring as well as with working power and air conditioning devices. This "Professional" version enables direct connection with a site and direct readout of equipment alarm status, measurements execution on demand and as well as equipment control. In this version there is an extended module for statistics and profile reports creator, based on data saved in the system.

Additionally, the producer of CMS designed "Light" version of Monitoring Center, which can be used by technical teams, solving problems directly on sites. The functionality and graphic interface in this version is similar to "Professional" version, but different from the one based on records and data already saved in the system which does not allow for direct connection with the site.

The Monitoring Center version, working as so called "thin client" was additionally designed on operator demand, and this version is executed in standard web browser The functionality of this version is limited, and enables to browse actual alarms and measurements on site. Furthermore, it does not allow for any reports and statistics creation and is based, similar to "Light" version, on data already transferred to the system server. The possibility of using it on any computer connected to corporate network and on specialists laptops connected to corporate network by means of secure remote access is an advantage of this version.

TSN  MT  TS1 TS2 TS3 TS4 TS5  and cooperating with specific types of equipment, frequently by means of internal controller and dedicated "close" protocol.

Technical knowledge, specific for each system was needed for work with these applications. Maintenance costs of these systems were big expenditures for operators budgets.

From the reasons mentioned above, the operator, whose implementation system has been presented in this paper, decided to introduce one, common system which integrates equipment and different manufacturers systems.



II. COMPUTERIZED MONITORING SYSTEM (CMS) The system which is opt for, is the one designed by the leading producer of monitoring systems for power and air conditioning systems on the Polish market.

The detailed implementation process was described in the paper "Integrated Management System for Technical Infrastructure of Telecom Sites", presented by authors on INTELEC Conference, Rome 2007.

Some basic functions of this system, presented in details in the work mentioned above are developed below.

cooperating servers of CMS, geographically deployed all over the country. Five centers were created, called North, East, South and West, and additionally the Central unit, responsible for equipment installed in close surroundings of Warsaw, the capital of Poland and one of the biggest business center of Middle-East Europe. Servers, responsible for working out analyses and statistics from data derived from the whole network were placed in the same time, in one of the locations.

These servers were also responsible for CMS cooperation with external operator systems such as workflow management system, access network integrated management system (ANIMS).

I ~  .......!!.t..!?~??!!.?.!!.t.!!!....!!.~.....}  Figure 3: CMS architecture

V. INTEGRATIONOFCMSWITHANIMS As it was mentioned, the operator attaches significant importance to issues related to monitoring of broadband access to Internet equipment (DSLAM, IPDSLAM, xPON, MSAN) on which basis services such as fast access to Internet, VoIP and IPTV together with VoD are offered. To this end, the operator implemented Access Network Integrated Management System called ANIMS. By means of this platform, specialists conduct twenty-four-hour supervision of alarms and clarify events in elements of the access network.

Since the majority of events is directly caused by energetic autonomy hazard or improper environmental conditions (high temperature in the summer and low in the winter), the priority for the operator was to provide specialists with the information about events in the equipment responsible for these conditions. Before the integration it was simply the terminal of CMS, on which the operator staff was verifying improper status of supervised DSLAMs. It was an onerous work, due to a huge number of sites presenting in CMS the information about equipment status that was at the same time in excess and often unclear to the operator on duty without knowledge about peculiarity of power equipment operation.

A. Inteiface connecting eMS with ANIMS On the integration stage of CMS, the requirements for the interface between CMS and ANIMS were created in order to  13-3  transmit directly to ANIMS only selected information with critical alarms from point of view of operation autonomy of the site in which the equipment delivering broadband access to Internet is installed.

The information transmitted to ANIMS are as follows:  ? Heartbeat of CMS servers, ? Battery operation of the site, ? Temperature in the site over range (to high or to  low), ? Critical state of batteries (batteries close to the end of  discharge).

The information mentioned above, together with unique site tag allows for easy correlation of the hazard statuses and in significant way improved ergonomics of the work of ANIMS operator and accelerated the process of taking decision concerning what actions have to be taken to clarify the alarm state of the site.

Figure 4: Screen of site status from MC of ANIMS (alarm event from CMS- in dark blue)

VI. BTS SUPERVISION The complete CMS verification in the network real conditions has convinced the operator to consider whether this system can be used for supervision of mobile network infrastructure owned by the operator. Besides sites of MSC type, or BSC controllers, which supervision can be realized in a classical way, similar to supervision of fixed system sites, the big challenge is the creation architecture system for supervision of power and air conditioning systems in several thousands of BTS. So far the supervision of BTS technical infrastructure has been completed by means of binary alarm inputs, in which all transceiver and teletransmission systems of each mast with aerials are equipped. Each system has several free inputs of this type to which alarm outputs of power system, air conditioner or fire system were connected. Generated alarm is sent to monitoring system of mobile network and each time has to be correctly interpreted by the operator on duty. Of course, the remote measurement execution or remote control of the equipment is not possible. The limited number of free alarm inputs causes the alarms to be connected together and in case of alarm from air conditioner it is not possible to    13-3  determine whether one unit has failed and the other may safely operate to the time when service team will react in normal mode of action, or all units have failed and the service team must be called immediately. The decision to visit the site is made just in case, what in many cases means the unnecessary high costs.

A. Controller ofBTSsupervision The situation described above induced the operator to search for a solution connected with taking advantage of CMS possibilities, which in tum will solve problems and give mobile network equipment operators the same possibilities as fixed network equipment operators have. To this end, CMS provider together with National Institute of Telecommunications (NIT) designed and in consequence made a prototype and finally commercial version of controller especially designed for BTS supervision. The designing of this controller was easier, because practically all BTS are equally equipped. Power systems, air conditioners, fire sensors, controllers of security system are of the same type in all sites. This allowed for the integration of all controller modules in one case holding both binary inputs, analogue inputs, control outputs, interfaces for direct connection with smoke and movement sensors, interface of security system controller and double module for communication with CMS.

This communication module uses transmission channel created in a digital stream of radio link as well as GPRS modem which provides connection in case of basic connection failure. BTS controller is equipped with battery which maintains controller supply during failure of basic supply. The use of one universal controller for supervision of the whole site technical infrastructure gives significant savings in investment stage, with all functionality expected by the operator fulfilled.

B. Modes ofBTScontroller operation It is worth mentioning that the controller can operate in transparent mode, transferring the information to the equipment connected to the service connector (mostly RS- 232). This allows for full diagnosis of supervised equipment with use of firmware. The controller is equipped with one interesting feature, activated on demand. This involves direct implementation in the controller the algorithm detecting the fire on site and taking action even without CMS participation.

After smoke detection, the controller resets smoke sensors to prevent system from false alarm and introduces the operation supervision mode. With the next detection of the smoke, the internal contactor switches off ventilation and air conditioning of the site, cutting off the supply of fresh air, which results in fire extinguishing . This is a very useful feature, because even in case of CMS failure and lack of communication with CMS, it is possible to minimize the fire propagation and limit losses.

Figure 5: ZSN-O controller ofCMS

VII. REMOTE READOUT OF ENERGY METERS The next functionality of CMS introduced in the operator network during the pilot installation was the remote energy meters reading (AMR), which is an essential requirement for free market dynamic energy purchase in European Community, controlled with directive 2003/54/EC concerning common rules for internal market in electricity. Central AMR system, providing real, not estimated analyzes of energy consumption enables the creation of "negotiation space" which is the basis for discussion with energy providers.

In order to check technical possibilities of remote readings of meters with maximal use of technical infrastructure existing in the operator network, the pilot installation was put into operation. Owing to that, energy meters are generally placed close to power systems, CMS as a base and transmission medium for communication and data transmission from meters to dedicated systems which analyze readouts, was a justified choice.

Figure 6: Structure of pilot installation of AMR    CMS uses existing site controller for communication with meter interface, which must be equipped in adequate interface, for example RS-485 or CLO.

The data read by the meter are buffered in its flash memory in 15 minutes periods. This period is chosen in order to collect necessary data for power profile of measured circuits analysis, and thus is helpful in power consumption control in order to avoid high contractual penalties due to higher consumption than ordered from energy provider. These data saved are transmitted to CMS during session with the site and saved in data base. They can be immediately read out from Monitoring Center terminal or sent to the external system for analysis, creation of necessary reports and statistics. This system will give the operator a chance for change in the model to account for energy with smaller operators, which use the infrastructure of bigger operator. In this moment charges are flat-rate, independently from power consumption. In some sites the standard meters are installed in circuits used by other operators. Due to the lack of sufficient personnel the readouts are executed once a year. It means that during the whole year the account for energy is done by means of monthly payments from preceding year. In the end of the year, after readout of real energy consumption corrective documents are issued.

Thus, the operator in some way gives credit to the contracting party, while having the access to monthly readouts would account for real energy consumption.

A. Power consumption control An access to global data from energy meters may be used for easy determination of energy-consuming places in operator network. Having an access to twenty four hours energy consumption profiles, and comparing the sites of similar class, it is possible to appoint places where the energy is consumed in an unreasonable way.

The experiences of big energy consumers, which installed in their networks systems of remote energy meters readings, showed that taking advantage from created possibilities allows for limitation of energy consumption from 5% to 20% for stable loads and to 30% for instable loads. Well, there is fight for.



VIII. COPPER WIRE NETWORK PROTECTION One of the important elements of CMS is network hermetization system (see Fig. 7), designed in NIT. Acts of vandalism and terrorism can be the cause of financial losses on an operator part, but also losses on a client part and an increase of client's discontent with inaccessibility to services provided by the operator. The important aspect is the safety matter connected with uninterruptible connection in case of emergency.

In order to protect legacy network against vandalism and interference of undesirable persons CMS of the operator can be equipped with a cable network monitoring and a protection system.

This system enables:  ? To notify the local monitoring center of event,  13-3  ? To send an information to staff on duty responsible for cable network protection,  ? Fast detection of place where the cable was cut or interference in monitored site,  ? To archive data from the event.

The system consists of measuring heads, to which free pairs of supervised cables and sensors installed in supervised sites (cable vaults and cable cabinets) are connected. In case of cable cut or reaction of the sensor the alarm is transmitted to monitoring center and in the same to call the center of the firm responsible for physical protection of network and sites.

The signal of alarm, identification and measuring data enabling the location of the event are transmitted by means of interface RS-232, or in case of longer distances between PC and local monitoring center and measuring head by means of analogue or digital modem.

The result of legacy network monitoring and protection system actions is:  ? Limitation of losses on operator and subscriber side, ? Prevention, by fast reaction on alarm signal, ? Faster recovery of the network to the previous state, ? Keeping up the subscriber's content connected with  continuity of providing services.



IX. FURTHER PERSPECTIVES OF CMS DEVELOPMENT  A. Prediction ofenergetic autonomy ofsites The analytical work on designing the software module for prediction of events which can be implemented in CMS goes on. This will give OPEX savings, realized by optimization of supervised equipment and sites management with use of information about predicted alarm states of the equipment, energy autonomy, plans of exchange, maintenance of batteries.

B. Module for GSM telephones In order to increase the informing promptness of competent technical staff it is possible to use cheap and faultless SMS technology. System server sends directly to telephones of these persons SMS messages with information on status of sites (equipment) they are responsible for. It is possible to form questions on site status by means of SMS commands, set/reset of alarm systems, keeping the principles of security (base of entitled telephones, passwords).

C. CSM integration with security systems ofsites The CMS can be extended with elements providing the security of sites (signalization of breaking in, access control, fire, water leak signalization, CCTV). For not extended sites mentioned above, functions can be realized by site controller equipped with the so called security module (MB).

Security module communicates with site controller, sending data to CMS. By means of this transmission channel the full configuration of module settings is possible (entitled access) and it reviews history events. Security module is also equipped with transmission channel to local alarm call center    13-3  (ACe) of the firm responsible for intervention in case of hazards.

For sites with extended infrastructure standard, professional alarm, fire, CCTV systems are used. In that case the system server and site controller is the integrator of systems mentioned above, including also power and air conditioning systems.

ioptiJm. _.?? __ .; ... ;  Figure 7: CSM with security module

X. SUMMARY The integrated CMS supervises presently power and air conditioning systems in app. 10 000 sites of the operator. As a  crucial element of monitoring system of services end-to-end, CMS has a great influence on providing its accessibility and quality, what has a direct impact on the operator incomes.

Putting into operation of CMS for so great number of sites, allowed to achieve significant reduction of OPEX costs.

In this situation the operator made a decision to equip all new and modernized sites with external site controllers, which enable connection to CMS of the entire infrastructure on supervised sites.

At the same time research work will be conducted on CMS development focused on:  ? Extension of site controllers with security modules with maximal use of existing sources,  ? Introduction of automatic energy meters readings, after positive results of pilot installation,  ? Designing and introducing a prediction module of energy autonomy of sites and expert module of a decision-making support.

All solutions presented in this paper, accepted and implemented in operator network proved that from operational and business point of view, implementation of CMS to monitoring of technical infrastructure was the right and justified choice.

