A Behavioral Classification of Investors in  Shanghai Stock Market

Abstract?In our study, we analyzed a securities clearing dataset from a Chinese brokerage firm, and classified investors based on their behavior. We calculate every account?s market value, number of stocks and trading frequency, then reduce every account?s stock portfolio to corresponding expected risk  and rate of  return. And we cluster these accounts using k-means algorithm, and obtain four distinct clusters, which are small-account investors, big- account investors, medium-account with risk-aversion investors, medium-account with risk-preference investors.

The analysis of the results reveals that small account investors prefer risks a little more than that with scale capital. Furthermore,  among the investors with the medium-account, more people tend to avert risk, and risk- preference investors are more inclined to change their holding stocks than risk-aversion ones.

Keywords-clustering; investment behavior; data mining;

I.  INTRODUCTION Many studies are conducted on securities trading data,  to discover the investors? trading behavior in China?s A Share market. Wang & He[1] applied data mining technology to customer relationship management of securities industry and presents securities business model of CRM based on customer clustering methods. In class classification layer, they use hierarchical clustering model to realize customer classification according to such indexes as trading frequency, trading capacity and interest balance.

In the group classification layer, they adopted dynamic Bayes model in order to group customers, according to customers' operating style.

Wang & He[2] discusses two patterns in data mining: association rules and sequential patterns, and describes the process to find these patterns by mining historical securities trading database. Through the analysis of mining result, their study presents the concept and realization of customer behavior model, and successfully applies the model to advance the performance of Internet securities dealing system.

These research approaches ignore the essential characteristic of investors ? the purpose of purchasing stocks is to earn returns from securities trades. We introduce CAPM into the data preprocess, in this way, the stocks purchased are correlated, and are able to be denoted  with the portfolio?s excepted risk and rate of return, no matter the number of stocks an investor holds. The results are four distinct groups, from these groups, we know more about the investment behavior in Chinese Stock Market.



II.   DATA AND PRELIMINARY STATISTICS In this study, we use a real clearing data from a  Chinese brokerage firm, and all investment accounts in this data are open in Shanghai Exchange.

Securities clearing data contains rich information[3] , covering all the security  types ? stocks, funds, bonds, options, and tremendous accounts information, including daily security alteration, security holdings, capital alteration, opening or closing accounts, as well as every transaction?s stock name, quantity, market value and commission. Our study focuses on the Account Share Holdings(ASH) table, which records all account holders? every security purchasing and corresponding holdings.

There are 70594 accounts in ASH table, and we assume that each account represents an investor, which is the case mostly. By  calculating securities they have bought, securities valued, and times the investors traded during the month we observed, we collected three basic information about each account? account?s market value, number of stocks, and trading frequency. We calculate the preliminary statistics using SPSS, and the result is shown in Table I.



III. METHODOLOGY  A. CAPM based  portfolio transformation In our study, we pay more attention on clustering  investors by the stocks  they bought. However, the numbers of stocks in every account are unequal. To solve this problem, we use the CAPM to correlate the stocks into a package, and use expected rate of return and excepted risk to describe them[4].

Step 1: calculate the every stock?s beta value using equation (1);     ( )  ( ) ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ? ?  ? ? ??  ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ? ?  ? ? ??  =  ???  ???  t t  t t  t tt  t t  t ti  t tti  i  mretmret n  mretmret  mretret n  mretret   313 ., ?  (1)  where reti,t =logof(1+ Stock i?s return rate at time t ) , mreti,t = logof(1+ market rate of return ) ; mret3t= mret-1+ mret + mret+1 ; n= effective observed cases during a year.

Step 2: calculate the expected risk of the portfolio using equation (2);  nnxx ??? ?++?= 11                  (2)  where xi (1?i?n) denotes  stock i, and beta is the corresponding excepted risk.

Step 3: calculate the total excepted return rate of the portfolio using equation (3);  )]([)( fmfs RRERRE ?+= ?              (3)  where Rs denotes expected returns of the portfolio, and Rf and  Rm are risk-free returns and market return respectively.

B. Data preprocess Data exploring reveals  the basic statistics information  of the five attributes, i.e., mean, median, mode, variance, standard deviation, maxim, minimum and quartile distribution. And all these characters are listed in Table I.

In order to calculate the distance between each case, we normalize the investors? attributes, account value, number of stocks, trading frequency, by the following steps.

Firstly, since every account?s market value varies extremely, the maxim value is thousands of times of the minimum one. We transform the account value into their  common logarithm value, ranging from only 3 to 11, which is apparently reasonable to calculate distance.

Secondly, we alter the number of stocks(ns), and reduce all the values into just 4 values.

? IF (ns=1) ns=1 ? IF (ns=2) ns = 2 ? IF (3<=ns<=4) ns = 3 ? IF (ns>=5) ns = 4 Thirdly, for the same reason as discussed above, we  modify and revalue the trading frequency(tf) in the same method above.

? IF (tf = 2 & tf = 1 ) tf = 1 .

? IF (tf >= 3 & tf <= 5) tf = 2 .

? IF (tf >= 6 & tf <= 10) tf = 3 .

? IF (tf >= 11) tf = 4 .

Lastly, considering the weight of each attribute, we  transform all the five attributes into their corresponding z- score values. In z-score normalization [5], the values for an attribute A are normalized based on the mean and the standard deviation of A. A value v is mapped to v? as formula (4).

A  Avv ? ?='                      (4)  where A  and A?  are the mean and the standard deviation of the attribute A, respectively.

C. K-means Clustering with SPSS K-means is one of the simplest unsupervised learning  algorithms that solves the well known clustering problem.

The procedure follows a simple and easy way to classify a given data set through a certain number of clusters (assume k clusters) fixed a priori.

TABLE I.  STATISTICS SUMMARY  Account Value No. of Stocks Trading Frequency Excepted Risk Excepted Rate of  Return Mean 1,339,976.50 2.66 7.41 0.9874 1.1804  Median 52,920.00 2 4 0.9843 1.1959  Std. Deviation 141,799,692.05 2.50 9.60 0.2454 0.3552  Minimum 121.25 1 1 0.0618 0.0001  Maximum 32,305,394,222.22 122 309 2.1339 2.6657  Percentiles 25 18,380.00 1 2 0.8361 0.9815  50 52,920.00 2 4 0.9843 1.1959  75 157,636.25 3 9 1.1108 1.3741  a. The unit of the account value is RMB Yuan.

The objective is to minimize the sum-of-squares criterion  ?? = =  ?= k  j  n  i j  j i cxJ  1 1  2)(  (5)  where  2)( j  j i cx ?  is a chosen distance measure  between a data point )( j  ix  and the cluster centers Cj, it is an indicator of the distance of the n data points from their respective cluster centers[5].

The algorithm consists of a simple re-estimation procedure as follows. Initially, the data points are assigned randomly to the K sets. For step 1, the centroid is computed for each set. In step 2, every point is assigned to the cluster whose centroid is closest to that point. These two steps are alternated until a stopping criterion is met, i.e., when there is no further change in the assignment of the data points.

In this study, SPSS is employed as data mining tool for analysis[7]. We let SPSS to choose initial centers randomly, and we set the ultimate iteration to 30, and set the k =4, which means it will generate 4 clusters.



IV. RESULTS From the statistics of each group, we find that the final  four clusters are distinctly remarkable. Each cluster?s name and the mean of five attributes are shown in Table II.

1 2 3 4    Figure 1.  Mean of each cluster?s account value (Yuan).

The number of investors in cluster 3, cluster 4, sum of cluster 1 and cluster 2 are equal in quantity. So investors are divided into three groups?small, medium, and big account ? according to their account?s market value.

Cluster 3 invest the most capital in stocks, while the cluster 4 invest the least.

cluster 1 cluster 2 cluster 3 cluster 4  1 2 3 4 Trading Records per month  0%  5%  10%  15%  Pe rce  nt   Figure 2.  Percentage distribution of four groups? normalized trading frequency. Trading frequency relates to the number of stocks in the  account.

1 2 3 4 Number of Stocks  0%  5%  10%  15%  Pe rce  nt   Figure 3.  Percentage distribution of four groups? normalized number of stocks. Big-account investors buy more stocks to avert risks, while small  account ones are more likely to focus on one or two stocks.

TABLE II.  MEANS OF THE FIVE ATTRIBUTES OF THE FOUR CLUSTERS  Cluster Name Account Value No. of Stocks Trading  Frequency Risk Rate of Return  Cluster 1 medium-account with risk-aversion 40,000 2.1 1.6 0.71 0.77 Cluster 2 medium-account with risk-preference 63,000 2.6 1.7 1.39 1.72 Cluster 3 big-account 160,000 3.5 3.2 0.97 1.10 Cluster 4 small-account   20,000 2.0 1.5 1.02 1.27  a. The unit of the account value is RMB Yuan.

From Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, we can tell that, big-account investors (cluster 3) prefer to hold more stocks for diversification, consequently they trade more times than small-account investors (cluster 4). While medium accounts (cluster 1 & 2) are between the big and small ones. The numbers of stocks in each account reflects the investors? investment style. More capital invested, more stocks purchased, more frequently they trade.

1 2 3 4 Cluster Number of Case  0.0  0.5  1.0  1.5  2.0  Ri sk   Figure 4.  Box plot for the distribution of excepted risks of the four  clusters. Cluster 1 and cluster 2 represent the two extremes of investors: risk-preference and risk-aversion, respectively.

1 2 3 4 Cluster Number of Case  0.0  1.0  2.0  Ra te  of Re  tur n   Figure 5.  Box plot for the distribution of the excepted rates of return of the four clusters. Investors in cluster 2 are excepted to earn more than the  other three.

In both Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, a huge gap appears between risk-aversion and risk-preference investors with medium accounts, an it implies that customers in cluster 1 and cluster 2 are totally different on their investment attitudes.



V. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we apply a new approach to the real  securities clearing data from a Chinese brokerage firm. We convert every portfolio into its corresponding excepted risk and rate of return, then using k-means clustering algorithm classify them according to their account value, number of stocks, trading frequency and portfolios. Four distinct groups are found: small-account  investors, big-account investors, medium-account with risk-aversion investors, and medium-account with risk-preference investors.

Small account investors prefer risks a little more than those with scale capital. The big-account investors, like the institutional investors, can make profits from their large amounts of capital, and they are under supervision of departments concerned to avert risks. Investors with small- account are less aware of risk aversion for lacking of finance and investment knowledge.

Among medium-account investors, the number of risk- preference people is  64% more than that of risk-aversion ones. Furthermore, the former ones are more inclined to change their holding stocks than the latter. The reason is that the former ones prefer short swing trading.

