An approach to improve information sharing in a  large Information System

Abstract - Actual Information Systems (IS) of big companies  are very complex and sometimes difficult to control even if new techniques and new integrated software appears to give solutions. To get a complete, fresh and relevant information, close to the IS users needs, is a very difficult task, sometime impossible. We try to suggest a non-intrusive solution, facilitating this task and transparent to the users, relaying on some concepts like ?referential repository?, ?a priori? connector and semantic descriptions. Our approach aim to improve the IS organization by combining these concepts and technical information integration solutions.

I.

II.

III.

INTRODUCTION  Our business core is the transport of goods and passengers by rail, but several branches contribute to our main activity. Thus, our company employs more than 160000 persons that work to carry more than one thousand million of passengers and 100 million tones of freight per year, and nearly 150 professions are represented.

Considering these conditions, our internal IS must be suited to all activities responding to a great degree of complexity.

At the beginning of this paper we describe the context and main difficulties encountered in our IS. After that, some solutions to improve its organization and efficiency are suggested and some perspectives are presented.

COMPANY?S CONTEXT  One of the first contextual difficulties comes from the geographical spread of the company to a national level and the dispersion of information all over several remote locations and business units. Thus, information exists, but it is very difficult to exactly know where it is stored.

Moreover information exchange is not suitable. According to the human point of view, exchanges are performed at verbal and informal levels. When there are formal exchanges between applications, they follow a logical point-to-point way and such links are unstructured. Users can?t have an IS overview and it?s impossible to exactly know location of pertinent information.

Another contextual difficulty is the large number of business activities. First, these activities change various information, or properties of a given data. Often, central databases cannot be immediately available. Since nothing better appears, business leaders have created copies of part  of the central databases, according to their needs, without tracing them in the central databases. Finally, nobody is able to identify ?ONE reference for a database?, providing in real time the right information. Secondly, this heterogeneity also involves multiple structures and formats for data storage which depends on computer technology used by different trades, imposing some practices to store and organize information, and we must respect some cognitive practices hardly changeable for users.

So the IS has been considerably developed through time and we must consider the history of its heritage. Our aim is not to reappraise all these developments but to integrate and make all these systems interact. To correct these problems, our way is based on the identification of some key points that considers the human and technological issues.

IDENTIFIED KEY POINTS  Four key elements were identified and defined as essential elements of our project. They are: ?referential repository? (or metamodel repositories), ?ambiguity of the information?, "a priori connector? and ?interoperability?.

We propose to develop a system architecture model, based on these four key concepts.

Referential repository In our company, we find a lot of repositories: data  warehouse repository, knowledge repository, enterprise repository, trade repository etc. But this is specific to a particular trade or company?s branch. Our aim is to make real collaboration between all these company?s actors, in order to discover relevant information, merging all company?s knowledge.

Our purpose is to create a global system based on an ontological model (called referential repository) describing all these repositories. The system must respond in real time to some questions, such as ?where, when, by who and how? data have been changed.

To respect the constraint of the company, our ?common referential repository? must be proposed as a new level over the actual organization. This approach must be combined with a previous solution based on Topic Maps technology (http://www.topicmaps.org/xtm/index.html).

Ambiguity of information This previous implementation [12] has created a  common space where few references of the company have been linked, based on the idea of ontology. This permits the users to visually evaluate the overwhelming quantity of information and the great number of descriptions for a given object, depending on the specific developed trades. It is impossible for a single human to have a precise idea about all this information, and to eliminate all of the ambiguities about information, or data.

For example ?employee? is a main concept used in numerous data exchanges. This concept is related to other concepts such as "Address", ?professional status?, etc. Few people exactly know what involves "professional status", for a "permanent" or for a "contractual employee". The combination or expansion of these concepts provides ?information?. For example we can find: ?agent fiscal address?. It specifies an ?indicator of agent fiscal address? for an application, or an "index of agent fiscal address" for another application. Serious ambiguity problems still exist.

It is difficult to know what the difference of denomination means and if the "index" used for an application is the same as the "indicator" used in another application.

These ambiguities could be reduced by defining an intelligent data description based on domain ontology.

Moreover, to elaborate best solutions, we propose to investigate the areas of knowledge management and Semantic Web [2] [3] [7].

IV.

V.

NEW CONNECTOR?S CONCEPT  Connector?s typology Tools which assure data exchanges between  applications, provides connectors built in their communication layer. For example, an EAI (Enterprise Application Integration) [4] system can provide technical connectors (such as XML, EDI, ODBC, JDBC, COM, CORBA, ORB, etc.?) and application connectors (such as ERP, CRM, G-PAO, e-commerce, BI etc.).

?A priori connector? In our approach, we propose to introduce a new concept  of "connector" closely linked to the notion of "a priori?.

So, for us, an "a priori connector? is a ?logical channel? enabling to share information in a common area, as it is produced, even before defining prior specifications by an end user.

Our problem to define functional ?a priori connectors? refers to the problems of information sharing. In terms of definition, we forget the concept of ?bridge?, to keep the concept of "logical channel?. For the company?s culture, the bridge refers to the concept of physical technical implementations, whereas we are putting emphasis, in a first step, on human practices based on the concept of sharing and collaboration, regardless of the physical  implementation. In this context, the supplier is playing an active role in the same way as the user. He is not passive, nor does waiting for some need specification. He is active; he is providing exactly what he has produced and displaying his information through the communication channels, to the space-sharing, on his own initiative. For example, in the enterprise, there is a basis for data referential of employees. Only very few specialists in the field of human resources, may know the agents code identifying, which permits to access to users data.

However, the goal of most of project managers is not to know confidential data about an agent nor his ID code. The interest is to know employees? competences. Thus, various information channels, and various applications can provide information about employees. So, the idea is to be able to exactly know them. Only one person cannot know all the enterprise applications which can provide useful descriptions on agents, and therefore, she will not be able to define his needs, to specify a query to his information providers. Hence we propose the idea of "a priori connectors? which permits to all applications to provide their information in the common area of the company.

But to make this information readable, it is necessary to have ?a priori? interoperable connectors.

Interoperability A priori connector?s interoperability results in two  forms: trade and technological interoperability. Trade interoperability is related to a common language between different trades, about the same concepts. That involves establishing common knowledge bases to the company where concepts are described and similar meanings should be underlined. Technological interoperability is rather tied to the choice of an infrastructure with an architecture that supports the latest technology for interoperability based on the XML language [5].

MODELING  In order to establish a dialogue with clients, we have formalised a functional IS model, completed by a global architecture model.

Functional model Our representation is based on a layered model (Figure1)      Figure 1 Layered system?s functional model Two layers should be maintained: the existing  company?s legacy layer and the user layer. As indicated, the company?s heritage must be integrated including its history and its technologies. Our proposal is to be the least intrusive or the most transparent possible for these two layers. Currently, users access directly to a third layer, which is the connectors layer. This must be improved and adapted to the next layer?s prerogatives. So, our solution tries to introduce a new layer decomposed in a sub-layer model and another sub - layer metamodel domain. To be able to interact with the customer, we have oriented our study towards technologies and infrastructures provided by the domain dealing with these two layers (?VI. The proposed solution).

Architecture model According to the needs and requirements specified by  the customer, and by mutual agreement, we have developed and formalized an architectural model (Figure 2).

Our added value is related to the referential of data base repository layer that will contain the modeling (model and metamodel) layer of the solution. This referential repository information will serve as an interface between the user and the enterprise assets. Most of the actual problems lie at this level. In this first model, we use the concept of a registry (like UDDI registry1), in order to allow a dialogue with company?s actors. With our study?s refinement and our proposal?s development, we will introduce the two sub-layers of modeling. The first sub layer model will   1 http://www.uddi.org/pubs/uddi_v3.htm   Figure 2. Global architecture model  correspond to the UDDI Registry concept and the second sub layer meta-model will correspond to an ontological description of information domain. That is where the organization of information must be studied and where the Semantic Web can bring a solution.



VI. THE PROPOSED SOLUTION  Several technologies for integrating information emerged with the IS evolution [11]. We carried out a comparative study in order to choose the best solution for our context and our prerogatives.

Technologies comparison The first studied is the ETL (Extract Transform Load)  technology [10]. It has already been developed since 70?s and it is well-known by our customers and different actors of the business area.

Next, we examined the EAI Technology (Enterprise Application Integration) [4], [9] present in the field of research since 90 years and actually considered like an emergent technology in the company. Finally, we studied the EII technology (Enterprise Information Integration) [5], [6] which is really emerging, since the beginning of 2000.

A first comparison criterion is their functioning.

The solution Thanks to a comparison between these technologies, we  have chosen the best one for our solution. So, in our project, the data exists somewhere, but the access is very hard. The project managers or architects especially need fragments of information like a database repository localization containing a given data, its guarantor, the connection mode, the data update frequency, etc. So, an overview of business information and/or data coming from multiple sources is needed. Additionally, we have to respect some data quality criteria, such as freshness or relevance to the context of use. These criteria involve concepts of time and dynamic exchange. In fact, these reasons drive us to select the EII technology. Respective systems are composed of three main parts: the information producer or provider, an assembly and disassembly site and a user (Figure 3).

a priori connector  shared by Figure 3. EII system?s functioning  membership relation    ESB infrastructure The ESB infrastructure supports a SOA-based  architecture, the concept of ?loose coupled? between applications [1] and the services management according to a model domain of these services [8]. Considering our connector?s definition, there are concepts corresponding to a priori connector?s notion. The ESB has been designed for bearing the EAI difficulties. They appear more modular and scalable. We are studying this scalability. The bus manages services thanks to the orchestration, choreography, mediation and discovery. The semantic descriptions of services and their organization make possible these actions. Thereafter our studies will focus on the standard?s implementation of Semantic Web Services [2], [3], [7] and their contributions to our system.

VII.

PERSPECTIVES  Thanks to our solution we can highlight some perspectives which can be organized in two categories: ?formalization and modeling aspect? and ?practical evaluation?.

A. Formalization - Modeling Thus we will focus on the flow of technology and  Semantic Web concepts in international trade applications.

This will be done in part of the ESB infrastructure based on SOA (Service Oriented Architecture) [6], [8]. We will study the semantic standards description of services such OWL-S2 and SAWSDL3. The goal is to define and describe our model and meta-model of the domain involving these services.

B. Experimentation and practical evaluation Another line of work is the research and the comparison  of different orchestration and mediation models, in order to select relevant patterns services bus to our study context.

The purpose of our experimentation is to gradually increase the degree of complexity in the search of a specific service, the size and structure of messages exposed and to explore the limits of the system and its feasibility thresholds. By studying the field gradually, we hope to offer a generic model, adaptable to other contexts of the company, with associated recommendations for use, and functional requirements. And it is precisely here that the two areas must merge. As indicated, we follow an incentive way to integrate our customers in our project. First, we have proposed a bus (ALSB of BEA)4 exposing a very small number of services in order to obtain some visible results immediately noticeable or perceptible by the customer. We wish to increase the number of offered services and move to a domain more and more evolved.

Therefore, the second step will be to put the emphasis on   2 http://www.w3.org/Submission/2004/07/ 3 http://www.w3.org/TR/sawsdl/ 4 http://e-docs.bea.com/alsb/docs20/index.html  composition (simple or aggregates) of services according to criteria such as business management rules or existing bus patterns. In this way, we attempt to increase the degree complexity by creating new business processes through the orchestration of services.



VIII. CONCLUSION  Our research is strongly applied to a big corporation?s IS which has a lot of specificities and exceptions in its profession. That has guided our approach, in addition to the IS users. Therefore, we started with a comparative study between different technologies in data integration to continue with a comparison between various infrastructures supporting the exchange of such data. To optimize these exchanges, to be as least intrusive as possible, and propose a global model of exchange adapted to the size of related IS, we advocate a system that primarily supports information?s descriptions. Indeed, the company has already established systems, tested data exchange, but weaknesses still remain in the exchange of information related to this data.

We believe that information produced by anyone within the enterprise must be seen as a service provided to the whole company. Our problematic focuses on the data access and their federation, the implementation of the common information?s sharing area will take the form of an Enterprise Service Bus (ESB), a scalable infrastructure.

Thus, the management of these services brings us back to the management of shared information. We will therefore continue to explore standards that exist for the organization and management of services and the information conveyed by an ESB.

