The Cost-Constrained Web Replica Placement Design   in Computer Networks ? an Approximate Approach

Abstract ? Paper deals with the resource replication problem which often must be solved in wide area network design process.

It is important especially for big wide area networks, in which huge amount of data is exchanged between users and servers.

Then replication of resources (for example servers) may prevent decreasing the quality of service in the network. Connecting replica to a node of the network is connected with some connecting cost. In practice, the connecting costs are often limited. Then, in the paper, an approximate algorithm for simultaneous server?s replication, capacity and flow assignment problem with limited cost of connecting replica to the nodes of WAN is presented. Important and useful part of the paper are the results of computational experiments performed with the proposed algorithm. Important properties of the considered problem have been described. They may be helpful for planning and optimizing of WAN. Analysis of quality of the approximate solutions is also reported in the paper  Keywords ? network capacity planning, quality of service, resource allocation, CFA problem, packet switched networks

I.  INTRODUCTION Wide area computer networks are more and more important  and useful tools in all kind of business, marketing and communication. A lot of industries decide to build their own wide area networks to ensure a reliable and fast data exchanging. Fast increase of the network users, information (traffic) sent through the network and the number of connected data storages (web servers, databases) implicates the necessary of perpetual expanding of the network. The updating process and the designing process need special optimization algorithms to ensure the quality of service in the network and minimize the building costs.

In practice, a major part of all traffic in the network is data exchanged between servers and users connected to the nodes.

Badly allocated servers could decrease the quality of service of the network causing delays and lost of data. Some proposals of solving the server?s allocation problem can be found in the literature [1, 2]. Since a lot of users, connected to different nodes of WAN, are downloading a huge amount of data from a server, it is beneficially to replicate the server in the network.

Then, we can allocate replicas of server in different parts of the network, so the flow rates on channels decrease. The bigger number of replicas we allocate in the network, the smaller delay (or the bigger quality of service) we can obtain.

From the other side, adding new replicas is connected with certain costs. They are costs of server hardware, costs of node upgrade (for example upgrade of router in the node), costs of service and the other. The connecting costs are often different for different nodes of WAN. The total connecting cost (connecting cost of all replicas at nodes) is usually limited.

Then, very important is to find the solution for replication problem with connecting cost constrain. Some algorithms for the resource replication problem can be found in [3, 4]. In the paper [5] there is an approximate algorithm for replica allocation problem without constraint on maximal feasible replica connecting cost. Problems with connecting cost constrain have not been considered yet.

We consider the replication problem with connecting constrain together with the capacity and flow assignment (CFA) problem. It makes our problem much more general than problems known in the literature (solutions for the classical CFA problem are proposed in [6, 7, 8, 9]). The goal is to simultaneously optimize the routing, the capacities of channels and the allocation of servers replicas in the network subject to capacity budget (total capacity leasing cost) constraint and connecting budget (total connecting cost on replicas at nodes) constraint. Optimization criterion is the linear combination of the total average delay per packet (given by Kleinrock?s formula in [6]) and the total connecting cost of servers at nodes. We denote that the maximal capacity leasing cost is limited and the maximal feasible cost of connecting replicas at nodes is limited. We present an approximate algorithm obtaining the near-optimal solution. We consider a discrete cost-capacity function, most important from the practical point of view. Channels capacities can be chosen from the sequence defined by ITU-T recommendations. Such formulated problem is NP-complete. In the literature such formulated problem has not been considered yet.



II. PROBLEM FORMULATION We use assumptions presented in [5]. Let ),( rr YX  be the selection, where rX  determines the capacities of channels and  rY  determines the replicas allocation at the nodes of WAN.

Let R be the family of all possible selections. Let rkh Yy ?  be the decision binary variable for k-th server allocation equal to     one if the replica of k-th server is connected to node h, and equal to zero otherwise.

Let )( rYU  be the connecting cost of all replicas at nodes. Let ),( rr YXT  be the minimal average delay per packet in the wide area network. ),( rr YXT  is given with the Kleinrock?s formula and can be obtained solving a multicommodity flow problem in the network [6, 9, 10]. The multicommodity flow problem can be solved with efficient FD method [9]. If the formulated above problem has no solution then we perform ?=),( rr YXT .

Let ( ) )(),(, rrrrr YUYXTYXQ ?? +=  be the criterion function (?, ? > 0, ??(0,1) and ? =1-? ). Let B be the capacity budget (maximal feasible leasing capacity cost), and let BU be the connecting budget (maximal feasible connecting cost of replicas at nodes). The considered replica allocation, channel capacity and flow assignment problem in WAN with replica allocation cost constraint may be formulated as follows:  ( )rr YX  YXQ rr  ,min ),(  (1)  subject to:  RYX rr ?),(  (2)  BXd r ?)(  (3)  BUYU r ?)(  (4)

III. CONCEPTION OF AN ALGORITHM The calculation scheme of an approximate algorithm is  following. In first step we solve the considered problem without constraint (4), that means we solve the problem (1-?3) in the network. Then, in consecutive iterations we reduce the connecting cost of replicas at nodes, until the constraint (4) is satisfied in the network.

A. Solving CFA Problem Since users connected to one node can use different  replicas of one server, then solving of the capacity and flow assignment (CFA) problem for the network is very difficult, because we do not exactly know the traffic requirements between nodes i.e. we do not know unique destinations.

Then, to simply solve the capacity and flow assignment problem in the network we create the network model in the following way. We add to the network K artificial nodes, numbered from n+1 to n+K. Node n+k corresponds to the k- th server. Moreover we add to the network new artificial channels <n+k,h>, such that kMh ?  and 1=khy  for  .,..,1 Kk =  The capacities of the artificial channels are equal to infinity. We assume, that k -th server is connected to the node n+k.

In the described above network model we can easily assign the traffic requirements between nodes in the network. Let hka be the average packet rate transmitted from users connected to node h to k -th server, and let kha  be the average packet rate transmitted from k-th server to all users connected to node h.

Moreover let ghr  be the average packet rate transmitted from users connected to node g to users connected to node h. Then, let ghr  be the average packet rate transmitted from node g to node h:  ? ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ?  >=  ?+??+  +??+?  ?  = ?  ?  ng,hh g  nhKngna  Knhnnga  ng,hr  r hng  nhg  gh  gh  for   and  for  ,for  for  for    1,  )(  )(  For such constructed network we can solve the CFA problem. The calculation skills for the CFA problem can be found in the literature [9, 10].

B. Constrained Replica Placement The main problem of the presented approximate  algorithm is the way of reducing the connecting cost of replicas at the nodes of WAN. If the replicas are allocated close to each other (are concentrated in a certain part of the network), then there are long distances between nodes in the network and the replicas. It causes high delay in the network. It is beneficial to allocate replicas uniformly in the network in order to obtain the minimal packet rate and the minimal total average delay. Then, we propose the criterion for replica reallocation. Criterion takes into account not only the connecting cost difference but also the total average delay difference.

Let ghv  be the distance, in hops, between node g and  node h. It means that ghv  is the minimal number of  channels between nodes g and h. Let kgV  be the distance between node g and all replicas of k-th server:  ? ?  = kMh  ghkhkg vyV  Choosing the node for reallocating replica of k-th server we should choose such nodes g, for which the value of kgV is maximal.

Let one of the replica of k -th server is allocated in node g . Let kgl?  be the criterion for reconnecting the replica of k-th server from node g to node l:  klklkg k gl Vaa *)( ?=?  (5)  We will reconnect replicas to those nodes, for which the value of criterion (5) is maximal.



IV. CALCULATION SCHEME OF AN ALGORITHM  A. Step 1. Calculating ),( 11 YX  Solve the problem (1?3) in the network. In order to solve the problem without constraint (4) we can use the method presented in [5] or we can modify the network model (in the way presented in III.A) and use one of the algorithms presented in [7, 8; 9]. If the problem has no solution then stop ? the problem (1?4) has no solution. Otherwise perform 2=r  and go to step 2.

B. Step 2.  Calculating the replica allocation rY  Find such k -th server and such nodes kMlg ?,  that  1=kgy , 0=kly , kgkl aa <  and for which the value of k gl?  is maximal. Perform 0=kgy  and 1=kly . If such nodes do not exist then stop ? if BUYU r ?)(  then an approximate solution ),( rr YX  of the problem (1?4) is found. Otherwise the problem (1?4) has no solution.

C. Step 3.  Calculating channel capacities rX  Modify the network, according to the way described in chapter III.A. Solve the CFA problem in the network, where the replica allocation is given by .rY  To solve the CFA problem we can use either an approximate algorithm or an exact algorithm presented in [7, 8, 9]. Perform  1+= rr  and go to step 2.



V. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS In the Fig. 1 the typically dependence of Q on the  connecting budget of replicas at nodes BU for different values of budget B is presented.

0,0190  0,0220  0,0250  0,0280  125 135 145 155 BU  Q B = 75 000 B = 85 000 B = 95 000   Figure 1. Typical dependence of the optimal value  of Q on connecting budget BU  Conclusion 1. The dependence of Q on BU is decreasing function.

It follows from the Fig. 1. that there exist such connecting budget BU* that the problem (1?4) has the same solution for each budget BU greater or equal to BU*. It means that the optimal solution of the problem (1?4) is on the connecting  budget constraint (4) for BU ? BU* and it is inside the set of feasible solution for BU < BU*.

In the paper we consider two kinds of cost ? the regular capacity cost (cost of leasing of all channels capacities, borne regularly i.e. once a year) and the connecting cost (borne once, when the network is built). Taking into account, that the regular costs must be borne for years, sometimes it is beneficially to increase the disposable connecting cost in order to decrease the accumulated capacity cost. Then, the presented above computational results can be very helpful in making such decisions. In example, if we want to obtain the network with the quality of service Q=0,022 (according to Fig. 1.), we can denote B=95000 [$/year] and BU=125000 [$], or we can denote B=85000 [$/year] and BU=145000 [$]. If the network should be utilized for few years, the second proposal is more economical.

The typical dependence of Q on the capacity budget B is presented in the Fig. 2. It follows from experiments, that the value of B has the critical impact on the value of criterion Q.

Moreover, it is observed for each testified network, that there exist such capacity budget B* that the dependence of Q on B is very weak for each budget B greater or equal to B*.

0,0185  0,0235  0,0285  0,0335  62000 72000 82000 92000 102000 B  Q BU = 125 000 BU = 135 000  BU = 145 000   Figure 2. Typical dependence of the optimal value of Q on capacity budget B  Conclusion 2. The dependence of Q on B is decreasing function and it may be approximated by the function belonging to class  ( ) 321 ??? ++= BQ , where 321 ,, ???  are real coefficients.

The results of computational experiments shows that the value of capacity budget B is more critical for the quality of service (indicated by Q) in the network, than the value of connecting budget BU.

Knowing the dependence of Q on B and of Q on BU, and knowing the desirable value of Q network designer can choose the best values of B and BU in order to optimize the total network cost, combined from disposable connecting (building) cost and accumulated capacity leasing cost.

The impact of the values of coefficients ? and ? on the solution of the problem (1?4) has been also examined. The typical dependence of the value of total connecting cost U,    obtained by solving the problem (1?4) in the network, on the coefficients ratio ?/? for different capacity budget B  is presented in the Fig. 3.

125,000  128,000  131,000  134,000  137,000  0 10 000 20 000 30 000 ?/?  U B = 70 000 B = 80 000 B = 90 000   Figure 3. Typical dependence of the optimal value of U  on coefficients ratio ?/?  Conclusion 3. There exist such division of value of ?/?, that dependence of U on ?/? is increasing function. For huge values of ?/? the total connecting cost U  becomes constant.

To test the quality of our algorithm, solutions of the problem (1?4), obtained with presented algorithm, have been compared with optimal solutions. Let Q?  denotes the distance between heuristic and optimal solutions. Let  [ ] [ ] %100,, ???=? solutionsall ofnumber  Qfor which  solutions ofnumber baba .

The dependence ],[ ba?  on divisions [0%-1%), [1%-5%), [5%-15%), etc. is shown in the Fig 4. As it is shown in the Fig. 4, about 40% approximate solutions differ from optimal solutions at most 1% and about 75% approximate solutions differ from optimal solutions at most 5%.



VI. CONCLUSION It follows from computational experiments that  approximate solutions are not much worse than optimal solutions. Moreover, the approximate solutions may be obtained in shorter computation time than optimal solutions.

The presented approximate algorithm may be used whenever an optimal solution is not necessary or for very big wide area networks (over 50 nodes), when it takes too many time to obtain the optimal solution. Proposed criterion function allows to decide which of the indicators (quality of service or   ? [%]       [0-1] (1-5] (5-15] (15-30] >30 ?Q [%]   Figure 4. The distance between approximate and optimal solutions  connecting cost) is more important. The network support cost and the building (connecting) cost may be limited according to demands. Some properties of considered problem have been discovered and some conclusions has been formulated. The very important dependence between two kinds of cost and the criterion Q has been shown ? it follows from experiments, that the network designer can denote the desirable value of criterion Q and decide, which kind of cost (regular or disposable) should be minimized. It allows to decrease the regular capacity cost, usually born for years.

This work was supported by a research project of The Polish State Committee for Scientific Research in 2005- 2007.

