Method of DEM data?s processing in flood  simulation system

Abstract?Flood simulation and forecasting is a hot topic of flood disaster research. DEM as the basic data plays a crucial role in the field. High resolution grid DEM data is able to supply exact terrain model to this work, but it brings on a bothering problem that the data is too big to reduce running efficiency in computer.

Facing the issue, the paper tries to solve the problem of high resolution DEM data?s processing and transferring. A new flood simulation method is introduced first. It brings a simple and efficient simulate method to simulate flood on high resolution DEM data. And then, a WebGIS based system is designed as flood simulation function?s running platform. Advanced WebGIS technologies lead an efficient transferring way to DEM data and other relative images.

Keywords-DEM; flood simulation; system structure

I. INTRODUCTION Flood is a body of water that covers normally dry land.

Most floods are harmful. They may destroy homes and other property and even carry off the topsoil, leaving the land barren. Sudden and violent floods, which leave people little time to prepare, may bring huge losses. Rivers, lakes, or seas may flood the land. River floods are more common, though lake and seacoast floods can be more serious. So that, the flood simulation and forecasting is an important topic for human being, especially for who lives in the city nearby water resource.

With the development of hydrology, computer science, remote sensing, GIS and others technologies, there are many new methods and advanced concepts using to simulate and forecast flood for people. But most of them are aim at large- scale region, such as a big river valley, server provinces and so on.

In fact, many flood disaster are occur at one or more places on the embankment. If the occur place near the city or downtown, it will lead a terrible disaster to these local people and their homeland. For the reason, downtown flood disaster simulation is another hot aspect.

On the other hand, DEM data is foundation of the flood simulation. As we know, downtown flood disaster simulation need high resolution grid data as data base, because it is able to  supply exact terrain model to simulate accurately flood result.

But high resolution grid data lead to a bothering problem that the data is too big to reduce running efficiency in computer.

The paper tries to solve the problem of high resolution DEM data?s processing and transferring. A new flood simulation method is introduced first. It brings a new and efficient simulate method to simulate flood on high resolution DEM data. And then, a WebGIS based system structure is designed for flood simulation function?s running, advanced web technology are lead an efficient transferring and management way to DEM data and other related images.



II. ALGORITHM OF FLOOD SIMULATION A. Research background  Flood disaster always come form two reasons. The first is rainstorm. In this situation, water is collected by all downfold.

wholly raining region?s water levels are almost the same. So we called it ?no-source flood?. Based on the principle, it is easy to simulate that just used a custom height plane to cover DEM [4].

The other flood reason is by break dam or overflow from water source (e.g.: River, sea, etc.). Water moves from the accident place and diffuses to around place. It is called ?source flood?. The method of the flood region confirmed is different to the first situation. It is a complex process that too many factors have to be considered, such as terrain, flux, drain and so on. Aim at this situation, the paper well discus more at later section.

B. Algorithm principle According to the basic principle of flood, the paper focuses  on the simulation of the ?source flood?. Through the submergence phenomenon, we can find that water?s moving is coming form source point. The moving track likes a loop, diffusing one circle after another (as Figure.1).  It is the basic principle of the ?source flood?. On the other side, the expansion operation of mathematical morphology leads an available idea to flood simulation. Water?s moving is able to be described by theory of mathematical morphology.

DOI 10.1109/CSSE.2008.706    DOI 10.1109/CSSE.2008.706      Therefore, learn from the expansion operation of  mathematical morphology and basic principle of flood, based on the DEM data?s characteristics, a new flood edge detection method, ?Ring? research method are designed. On the grid format of DEM data, the method purposes to simulate the flood diffusing. Point searching begins at the central point (accident point) and the first circle is composed of the 8- neighbour points around that. Finished the first circle?s searching and judgment, the second circle? searching is beginning in a sequence. The second circle contains the points surrounding the first circle. In this order, the ?Ring? method is implemented as the figure.2.

With the searching way, the second research part is how to  judge the point is flooded or not. As we know, water move need two necessary conditions: 1.The region have to connect to flooded area. 2. The region is lower than connective flooded point?s water level. So that, the flood point judgment has to satisfy the two necessary conditions.

On the grid format DEM data, terrain is described as regular and dispersal units. So that, when judging one point flood or not, we have to get two values: the first is the unknown point?s elevation which gets from DEM and the second values are connective points? flood values. These values are the water level of the connective flooded points which come from former result. Based on the searching method, there are four neighborhood points value must to be got. As the figure.2, to judge unknown point A, we need to get he A?s around 4 relative points? values from result array.

According to the 4 connective points? values, if the A?s elevation is lower than the minimum of the 4 flooded points? water level, A is able to be judged as flooded point. But if the 4 points do not flood yet or they are all lower than its elevation, the point is not able to be flooded.

C. Algorithm design As the discussing and analyzing to the basic principle of  ?Ring? method above, detailed application flow is design as follow:  1). Read DEM data to memory as an array. Register the location of accident point in the array.

2). With input parameters, such as time, water flux and other necessary flood parameters, compute the maximum flood region in flood model. The maximum flood region limit maximum search circle number.

3). Get the correlative points? value as contrast array from former circle.

4). According to the ?Ring? method, search point from 1 to maximum circle and judge every point by contrast array.

5). Limit the searching region by maximum searching region. If all points are judged, finish the program.

In the practice application, there are two mainly problems come out. The first is high resolution grid data can supply exact terrain model, but the data lead to a bothering problem that the data is too big to reduce the efficiency in computer. In the research, the flood simulation is aim at downtown region, so high resolution grid data are necessary. To address the problem of large data quantity, partial-read method is chosen.

As we know that, flood simulation computing do not need all DEM data. Based on that, when get maximum region form flood model?s computing, circum-rectangle of maximum region can be get also. In this way, large DEM data separate to two parts by circum-rectangle, one is available part which input to memory for processing, and the other part is useless part which is out of circum-rectangle and do not need to input.

Because of the regular structure of DEM, partial-read method is easy to implement.

The second problem is after once single ?Ring? method processing, many error regions exist, which are the points that should be flooded but not register on the result. Facing the problem, a modify function has to be designed in the program.

The modify function?s implement is based on the ?Ring? method also. It is running after first ?Ring? searching. After the flood simulation compute, first step of modify function is to find error edge points. Edge points are the unflooded points whose 8-neighbour exist one or more flooded point in the flood result. So the error edge point is one edge point which should be flooded but not. The second step is to use ?Ring? method function to process again with the error edge point as central point. Repeat above two step until there are no error edge point. After modify function process, there are no error point exit on the result.



III. SYSTEM STRUCTURE A. system design  In recent years, with Internet growing in unimaginable speed and won the general popularity around the world, WebGIS, a new technology of information management based on web, have been widely adopted by many fields. There are two obvious characteristics belong to the WebGIS. One side, WebGIS, could deal with large quantity of data and supply advanced information management service the same as general GIS[1]; the other side, as the Internet can spread information to a multitude of users, WebGIS is available to a wider range of public users though the Internet [3]. On the other hand, nicer system structure design lead to high-speed data transfer and high-performance network server which should support the   Figure.1 sketch map   Figure.2 Searching way of ?Ring? method     Web-GIS based flood simulation and information management system. In addition, with the fast development of modern network technology, data transfer won?t be an obstacle anymore in the near future [5];  According to the analysis of technical and application characteristics, the flood simulation and information management system is designed based on web-GIS. It is able to satisfy requirements of data?s transferring and users? facility. B/S architecture is adopted as basic framework by system. (Contrasting to Client/Server (C/S), B/S is more flexible and expandable and is easier to maintain, moreover, it can make the information more open to the public [4].) The system selects the product ArcServer 9.2 and ArcSDE 9.1 of the ESRI Company as basis development platform and Visual stdio.NET (.NET) as development tool.

The architecture of the information management system is designed according to the multi-tier middleware mode. It is composed of four tiers: data tier, data service tier, web server tier and browser tier. (Figure.3)  Browser Tier: In the structure, browser tier is an interface of system to users by browsers. With friendly interface, it is a flexible interaction platform between users and system. Facing the users, browser tier receives requests and return result by pages.

Browser Tier actions are handled by JavaScript functions.

Each Client Tool Action on the map and page layout controls, such as Circle, Drag Image, and Drag Rectangle, calls a particular JavaScript function. It is the responsibility of the JavaScript function once executed to post back to the control to execute the server-side action.

Web server tier: The tier is composed of web server application and web service. Web server application contains all applications of system modules which are implemented by web application development framework (ADF) of .NET. Web service is a set of functionality located on a Web server whose methods and properties can be accessed over the Internet. The Web service class methods return values packaged as Extensible Markup Language (XML) documents; therefore, any application capable of reading XML can call the Web service methods and use the results.

Data Service tier: Data service tier is a service to manager data of system. The functions includes: data accessing, data organization, data security and server-object management.

Data tier: Data tier is used for manage and maintain the spatial data (DEM, DOM, etc.) and attribute data by using large database, and data access component access the distributed data resource through ArcSDE and ODBC.

Figure.3 System architecture  B. Data transferring technology As the Figure.3 illustrated, the former three tiers belong to  server side and browser tier belong to client side. Through the Internet, client-side and server-side are connected mainly by Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), XML and Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP). HTML is the predominant markup language for the creation of web pages. It provides a means to describe the structure of text-based information in a document. SOAP, is a protocol for exchanging XML-based messages over computer networks. It standardizes the way a Web service communicates with a client and allows programs written in different languages and on different platforms to be compatible with each other. SOAP brings together XML and Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) by setting protocols for how Web services and their clients communicate with each other. Within a SOAP framework, a client sends a request in XML over HTTP to the Web service, which, in return, sends a response in XML.

In the structure, User?s requests are sent to web server from Internet browser program by HTML and SOAP. Then, the application programs of web server are running to deal with the requests and transfer the data requests to data service.

Accessing data by ODBC or ArcSDE, data service processes the data requests and supports the server application to make a quick response and sent the result back to the server. So that users get the result from browsers after refreshing the page.

In this way, flood simulation result pictures are transferred by internet easily. Not only flood result pictures, but also all other processed result are able to transfer by this structure.



IV. SYSTEM DEMONSTRATE A. Experiment data  Experiment data contain: DEM data, region: QiShi segment of Foshan levee; resolution: 2m, cover region area: 4 km2 .

DOM data, region: QiShi segment of Foshan levee; resolution: 1m, cover region area: 4 km2. (As figure.4).Data supplied by Foshan Urban Geographic Information Center.

On the experiment region, the red point means accident place.

Figure.4 DOM region     B. Result demonstrate In the webpage of the client side, initialization parameters  are custom by users. In the experiment, parameters set like that: flux: 5m3/s, time: 15 min.

As the figure.5, it is the result of flood simulation on the  experiment data. On the result page, it is only a result photo instead of DEM and DOM data form server, so that it need less transfer quantity than original data.



V. CONCLUSION As the introducing of the paper, the system structure and  flood method are fit to DEM data?s application. After the experiment and many times test, it proves performance well. It is efficiency and practical design for flood simulation?s application.

However, it should be pointed that there are also many other problems exist in the flood simulation system. How to improve the veracity and efficiency and how to dear with 3D operation in the internet are two mainly keystones of future research.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The study is financially supported by National basic  research program of China (No. 2007CB714107).

