Design and Actualization of SOA-based Data Mining System

Abstract  Combining SOA (Service-Oriented Architecture) and the latest trend in date mining system development, this paper explores the advantages of service-based Data Mining services and a framework for designing the data mining system based on SOA, and also a way to set up this framework by the use of WCF (Windows Communication Foundation) is brought forward. The detailed analysis into key technologies necessary for achieving this framework is made particularly in this paper. These key technologies includes the implementation methods of the following services, that are uploading big documents service, data cleaning service, data Mining algorithm service, OLAP (OnLine Analysis Processing) service, date management service based on metadata, the realization of data warehouse service and OLAP service through programming with ADOMD.NET and how to make the solution of designing Data Mining system by using WCF.

Keywords: SOA; Data Mining; WCF; SQL SERVER 2005.

1. Introduction  These days, the demand of companies for universal Business Intelligence is increasing dramatically. The introduction of Business Intelligence system enables companies to better know the operating situation of business procedure and enhance the ability of departments to make decision at each level. According to IDC estimation, the market of BI and the application of it in financial performance and strategic management in Asia-Pacific Region (excluding Japan) will reach $724 million by 2010[1].

Meanwhile, enterprise information strategy is also turning to SOA in order to make better use of current IT resources, adapt to more rapidly changes and larger development. IDC predict that as companies are aware of combining IT and business procedure, the use of SOA in Asia-Pacific Region will continue to grow up. Chief Information Officers and IT management have already made it their priority to develop and obtain new products,    integrate application programmes, reinforce hardware infrastructures. End-users also tell that applying SOA will result in optimized and clearer business procedure together with more effective management and supervision.

Taking the above two aspects into account, this paper aims to design a kind of framework for Data Mining service and recommends a method of building Data Mining system with WCF.

2. Brief introduction to Business Intelligence and SOA theory  2.1. Brief introduction to Business Intelligence and Data Mining  BI (Business Intelligence) was initially put forward by Gartner Group in 1996. At that time, it was defined as a collection of technologies and their applications which include Data Mining, Data Duplicate and Recovery and are designed to help enterprises to make decisions. As a key technology of BI, Data Mining is to extract potential, unknown but very useful information, modes or trends out of large database or data warehouse through a series of technologies. It is a combination of Statistics, database technology and Artificial Intelligence [1].

2.2. Brief introduction to SOA theory  W3C(The World Wide Web Consortium) defined SOA as "a kind of application programme architecture in which each function is defined as independent servic~ that is attached with clearly-defined interfaces and could be used in already defined order to form business proceedings.

SOA consists of three parts [3], Service Provider, Service Broker, and Service Requester respectively.

Service Provider offers individual service and responds to the requests for its service. Service Broker registers Service Providers that have already issued, catalogue them and provide searching function at the same time.

Service Requester looks for the service it needs through Service Broker and then uses the service.

Advantages of structuring Data Mining system base on service are mainly as follows [4]:  3. Advantages of structuring Data Mining system base on service  Figure 1. Sketch map of SOA  3.2. Take prompt action  To integrate business procedure and BI tools properly will certainly help users to act appropriately and react to information gained through integrative control panel, report and warning system. For instance, interactive control panel is able to display the conditions of KPI (key Performance Indicators), in which red lights indicate that some indicators haven't been fully met.

In the process of performing traditional manual business procedure, BI tools can be used to help companies make wiser decisions. For example, they can choose proper suppliers through key business objectives such as lowering cost and raising customer satisfaction.

While in the situation where business procedure has already been automated, to integrate BI and business procedure platform enables companies to analyze and make decisions as well as' acquire necessary key business data.

3.3. Ensure business objectives  Fi  Service Provider  Bind FTPIHTTP/SMTP  < > Service Requester  3.1. Better know the operating situation of business procedure  It is a key objective for companies dedicated to SOA to analyze the performance and influence of performing business process in business process management. Once business process data is captured in databases, data warehouses or even in pure text documents, BI tools are able to visit the data through control panel that can display information and further to integrate these data with others got from different channels. This boosts a company's insight into business and enables the company to improve performance by proper decisions.

4. The framework for designing Data Mining system based on SOA  As Figure2 shows, the system is constructed with four levels, which are display level, service level, component level and data level, each correspondent with user interface, software service, software component, and entity class respectively. Of the four levels, software service is the main job to achieve the system. According to the process of Data Mining, it could be divided into four parts, data uploading service, data cleaning service, mining Algorithm service and OLAP service [5].

Interface User level interface  Service Software level services  Compone Software nt level component  Financial data  analysis  non-windows operating platform  Entity class  Data level  Figure 2. The framework for designing Data Mining system based on SOA    4.1. Interface level  Interface level provides interface for users to interact with the system. Since SOA is applied, the interface is various depended on different clients called by data mining service. As a result, this level may include web browser, E-mail systems, windows operating platforms, Linux operating platforms and non-windows operating platforms as well as non-Linux operating platforms.

4.2. Service level  4.2.1. Data uploading services. It enables users to upload self-defined documents, which may include Excel documents, flat documents like text documents, Access files and data documents exported from DBMS.

4.2.2. Data cleaning services. It cleans the data uploaded by users through SSIS (SQL Server Integration Services) functional component that SQL SERVER 2005 provides and allows users to design the data warehouse to their needs.

4.2.3. Data Mining algorithm services. It provides common Data Mining algorithms which are supported by SQL SERVER 2005 Analysis Services, including Decision Tree Algorithm, clustering algorithm, Bayesian algorithms, time-series algorithm, related algorithms, serial clustering algorithm, neural network algorithms, linear regression algorithm, logistic regression algorithm and so on[6].

4.2.4. OLAP services. It provides users the service of on-line analyzing with data and enables them to analyse data by choosing customized Dimensions and measurement, achieving drilling down and rolling up of data in order to find rules from the curves, charts, tables or dashboards.

4.3. Component level  5. Key Technologies and Implementation  Following technologies need paying attention to when implementing Data Mining system based SOA.

5.1. Data management based on metadata  Data Dictionary managing metadata consists of DataNodes and DataProperties. DataNodes are linked into a tree as a whole through ParentId. DataProperties are used to describe the properties of DataNodes, in which entity and field are defined in correspondence with DataNodes. NodeType is used to tell whether DataNodes is to describe a entity or the field of entity.

The data model of metadata management is shown as Figure 3.

~.?. l [ ?.?? HID Id  .....P...",s..-re..-I1tl..--.???..-d-.---.....---:; NIO(FK)  NodeType PrODertyType Name value  Figure 3. Metadata management model  5.2. Data warehouse and OLAP  When setting up Data Mining service, the definition of data warehouse could be achieved through ADOMD.NET 9.0. ADOMD.NET 9.0 is the component that SQL SERVER 2005 provides for users to visit Analysis Services service by coding, sequentially operating data warehouse objectives and achieving targets of the operation of OLAP components.

The following function succeeds in visiting all dimensions of specific data warehouse, with warehouse name and connection string as its parameters.

Public stringD GetDimensions(string connectionString,string CubeName)  (  connectionComponent level mainly provides functional software components. For example, according to different data types in data cleaning service, there are customer data cleaning components, product data cleaning components and sale data cleaning components and so on.

4.4. Data level  Data level is a collection of entity class in Data Mining system. Given different data types, each data entity is defined according to users' demand and configured by users according to business object in metadata-based manner.

AdomdConnection AdomdConnectionO;  connection. ConnectionString connectionString;  connection.open0; int rowcount  connection. Cubes[CubeName}.Dimensions. Count;  strDimensions = new string[rowcount];  for(int i=O;i<rowcount;i++)  {  new     strDimensions[i] connection. Cubes[CubeName].Dimensions[i}. Caption. T oStringO,o  }  return strDimensions,o  connection.close0; }  Apart from this, ADOMD.NET also support MDX enquiry to obtain CellSets.

5.3. Data Mining algorithm  OLE DB for DM specifically dermes enquiry language for Data Mining, DMX. Through the use of MDX sentences, it is easy to achieve the three important steps of Data Mining, which are Model Creation, Model Training and Model Prediction. Meanwhile, MDX is simple in terms of grammar, similar to operating data in a relation data table.

The following codes achieve the Data Mining Model, using Decision Tree Algorithm. This model uses Gender, Income and a series of goods customers purchase and their quantities to predict MenmberCard.

Create Mining model MenmberCard_Prediction  (  CustomerID long key,  Gender text discrete,  Income long continuous,  MemberCard text discrete predict,  Purchase table (  ProductName text key,  Quantity long continuous  )  )  using Microsoft_Decision_Trees  5.4. Solution in WCF  WCF is a SOA-based .NET framework released by Microsoft. WCF (previous called "Indigo") is the common framework that is built through managed code and is to operate Service Oriented application programs [6]. It enables developers to build a secure, reliable and  transactional multi-platform solution which is compatible with currently running system.

WCF is a successful combination of Microsoft distributive application programs development, incorporating all the technologies relevant to distributive system under .NET platform, such as .Net Remoting, ASMZ, WSE and MSMQ. In terms of Communication range, it could be inter-process, inter-machine, inter- subnet, inter-intranet or even Internet; In terms of Host program, it could use ASP.NET, EXE, WPF, Windows Forms, NT Service, and COM+ as its Host. WCF supports protocols including TCP, HTTP, inter-process and custom protocols; it supports many kinds of standards and safe modes such as SAML, Kerberos, X509, User/Password, custom and so on. That is to say, all constituents related are included in framework of WCF, so the development of SOA-based distributive system is more easily.

The Data Mining system solution created in WCF is shown in Figure4. This solution includes subjects such as"DM.Web","DM WebSecurity","DM WorkjlowClienf', "DMServices.Proxy","DM.Business.Services","DMRun time.Services","DMDataModef' and so on. "DMWeb" contains interface between business logic and page logic like Web pages and user input check; "DM WebSecurity" is used to realize custom Provider; "DM WorkjlowClient" which is used to definite the various processes of data mining achieves the SmartClient-based Workflow Designer, "DMServices.Proxy" contains all client agent of WCF service; "DMBusiness.Services" realizes various service of data mining, such as data uploading service, data cleaning service, mining Algorithm service and OLAP service and so on; "DMRuntime.Services" achieves WCF services like metadata model, definition of date warehouse, authorization and certification, defmition of data mining procedure and so on; "DMDataMode" achieves metadata and entities logic.

S OM. Web. Seeurityl S OM. Wei>180 M. WO_OwClleotl ...................... ii,,:, _-------------., " ,.,',..,  ..........................~.// / ..

S OM??_ .... ProsyI  Figure 4. Solutions of date minning-based item inWCF     6. Conclusion  Combining SOA and new natures in BI development, this paper explores the advantages of SOA-based Data Mining system and framework for designing it and makes detailed analysis into key technologies necessary for achieving this framework. In the long term, SOA- based Data Mining system is bound to become a new application mode for BI in companies, which is defined as Saas.

7. Acknowledgement  This paper is supported by National Key Technology R&D Program during the 11 th Five-Year Plan Period, "Key Technology and Platform of the Integrated Management" (2006BAH02A06).

