Analysis on a Microwave Oven Based on User Operation

Abstract  In this paper, considering the features of the microwave oven, we chose interview and non- participate observation as main research methods to analyze the product from user operation viewpoint.

After questionnaire and discussion, we decided the main areas of the research and divided them into four parts. They were semantics, safety, ergonomics and function. We designed three tasks to let nine participants fulfill one by one, which would reflect the problems as many as possible that the users could meet.

Finally, we got the conclusions statistically through observation and analysis on the questionnaires. This microwave oven has the severe problem in Semantic area. In safety area there is no big problem. In Ergonomic area, there are something need to be improved about door and interior surface, for the cleaning andfood taking reasons.

Keywords: User Operation, Microwave Oven.

1. Introduction  Microwave ovens use microwave radiation to cook food. The use of microwave ovens in domestic industrial, commercial and other premises has increased substantially over recent decades. The product that is selected for evaluation is a Touch Control microwave oven, which people can use and control by pressing the buttons.

We used some appropriate research methods to evaluate the existing microwave oven from user operation viewpoint, considered all areas of usage in its broadest sense to find whether there are problems existing in the current design. Then, we analyzed the information that has been collected in order to re-design the product. After all the research process and analyses, we will focus on the important redesign targets with ergonomics, such as the door operating, buttons    touching, interior space, etc. All what we had done are the basis for the redesign of the microwave oven.

Figure 1. The microwave oven used in the experiments  2. Selecting and deciding the appropriate research methods  Considering the characteristics of the product and the features (including the advantages and disadvantages) of the major different research methods types, three methods were selected finally. After discussing carefully, interview and non-participate observation were selected as the main methods. In addition to these two questionnaire will be as the accessorial method. '  The three research methods have their own advantages. Using them together reasonably can compensate each other's drawbacks [1].

A major advantage of the interview is its adaptability.

A skillful interviewer can follow up ideas, probe responses and investigate motives and feelings, which the questionnaire can never do. Questionnaire can not reveal the depth of the respondents' views and experiences in any of their rich detail, while the interview can make up this limitation of the questionnaire. On the other hand, the limitation of interview is that the data analysis can be time consuming and data cannot be statistically analysed because of the qualitative research character.

Non-participant observation suits the study of the exiting product. Because the inexperience users have no idea about the using methods about the product, it is easy to observe the potential problems of the current design. Through recording the proceeding by digital camera and taking notes, the investigators will get the first hand data that are uncontaminated by factors standing between the designer and the user.

Questionnaire is a relatively simple, rapid and efficient method of gathering data. It is a quantitative method. So the emphasis is on collecting measurable information and data can be analysed statistically and quickly, which can make up the disadvantage of the interview.

3. Preparations for the experiments  3.1. Participants of the tasks  The participants are all young people, who have all ever used microwave oven before, but never the one in this case. Age range of them is from 22 to 27. The participant group consists of five Chinese and four whites.

The research methods were let the participants fulfill the task firstly then asked them some questions about the operations in each task. Nine people will participate in the investigation independently one by one, which means they would not know how the investigation was preceded and would not be affected by others' opinions.

By this way the potential of bias was reduced.

According to the research to the product, we could get a large quantity of useful information we needed.

The observation and interview research method were used in this case. Each participant was well cooperation.

3.2. Preparations of the investigators  Before letting the participants use the microwave oven, three research investigators used the product in advance to play the role of respondents. By the usage experiences, the investigators had a primary understanding to the product and found some problems existing in the current design, which the participants could encounter as well during the process of using the microwave oven. For example, one of the most obvious problems the investigators met was related to the menu design of the microwave oven. Parts of the icons were ambiguous and made the investigators confused to the functions of them, especially the icons adjusting and controlling the heating time. Two of the investigators could not identify how to open the door of the product when using it for the first time.

Then the investigators summed up and classified the problems met through trying out the microwave oven and listed all of them on a paper as the basic and reference of the questionnaire design. Then the  investigators conducted group brainstorming to supplement the questions and try to make the questions more comprehensive. Brainstorming can be an effective way to generate lots of ideas and then determine which idea(s) solves the problem best. In the end, the questionnaire was designed by the integration of the results from using the product ourselves and the brainstorming.

We decided the main areas of the research and divided them into four from user operation? viewpoint.

They were Semantics, Safety, Ergonomics and function.

According to the four main areas that we have chosen, we provided a series of questions in each area by using brainstorming again. The questions would be the basic of the task. Thirdly, we designed the relative tasks to let the participants fulfill in tum, which would reflect the problems as many as possible that the users could meet.

3.3. Designing the tasks  We thought over the order of the tasks in order to make them more logical. After operating the product ourselves, we found that semantics is the most important area compared with others. This is because that user operation weights much in this case, and semantics is directly related to whether the users' operation to the product will be convenient and clear or not at the first glance. As a result of this, we put it at primacy [2].

Task A was designed for semantics, letting the participants use it defreeze the frozen bean and then heat the bean until ready to eat. This task included two main functions of the microwave oven, which can cover the most usage. Through the task, we could know whether the participants were satisfied with the menu, button, icons and LCD screen design.

Task B was designed for safety. The participants were assigned to heat a big bowl of soup till very hot, and then take it out. The questions will focus on whether the door would hurt users' hands and whether they were worry about the radiation and the hot interior surface of the microwave oven.

Task C was designed for ergonomics, heating a full cup of milk, which might bespatter the interior of the microwave oven if reaching a high temperature. Then the participants were required to clean the interior. The task was relative complex than the former two and we could get much useful information through it, for example whether it was easy to clean the product, whether the appearance, the outlet, the noise, the interior light and the sound signal was acceptable.

Area four was about the function of the product, because the participants had operated the microwave oven in the former three tasks, only answering questions would be needed. Through the replies, we could know whether the users were satisfied with the power and the existing function of the microwave oven.

4. Task A for semantics of the interface  This task is designed to reflect the two common usages of the microwave oven, defrosting and boiling food. And this is the first contact between subjects and product. All the participants were confused by the complex menu and operation. Four participants set the time by accident while they defrosted the bean. Hence they all made the defrosting bean task directly to the next step, boiling the bean. Only two participants found how to set accurate time at the first task. One Chinese subject learned how to set the temperature and time at this task. The remainder only found the two button's function at the bottom line, STOP and START (default time: +30secs).

Three participants set the approximate time for defrosting, from which it could be seen they have the good practice in using microwave oven defrosting food.

Figure 2. The control panel of the microwave oven  Interview questions reflected information below: (1) Nobody thought this menu design was reasonable.

Most subjects complained that it was ambiguous, lacking text instructions. One subject thought that the menu was designed inappropriately, because it put the icons which are designed for different kinds of functions into the same area.

(2) Similarly, almost nobody agreed the icons were designed to clearly express their function. Five participants could not understand most of the buttons' functions. Three participants thought they understood the buttons, however while they pressed, the buttons didn't work as their expectation.

(3) In the question of the door design, Eight participants deemed it was easy to find the way to open the door. But six of them said it was because that the microwave oven they used before had the same door opening approach. One participant didn't find the right way to open it at the first time.

(4) Three subjects were satisfied with the screen and believed it transformed the sufficient information. None of the remainder was satisfied with that. They complained the screen only displayed the time accounting but nothing else. They hoped they could see more instructions and feedbacks about the oven working status.

5. Task B for safety  This task was designed including a relative difficult application of microwave oven in the daily use. The bowl was big, which enhanced the difficulty ofputting it in and taking it out. This was the second time for the subjects to learn how to use that microwave oven.

About half of the subjects had trouble in resetting time. Four people didn't reset the microwave oven, but heat under the time remained by last task. Over two people learned how to adjust accurate time at this task.

And over two people learned how to adjust the temperature.

No one spilled out the soup while they moved the bowl. All of them did the task very carefully, and slowly.

Figure 3. The state of taking the bowl out  Interview questions reflected information below: (I) Only one participant thought the door might hurt  his hand while he used it, since the distance between the bottom edge of the door and the table ground was too short, which might squeeze the hand if he held the bottom edge of the door to close it. Other people regarded it is fine.

(2) Three people worried about the radiation, they stepped back when they started the heating.

(3) Four people had an unconscious worry about the interior's temperature of the microwave oven. They avoided touching the interior wall of the microwave oven while they put the bowl in. But their worries were not durable. All of them dared to detect the temperature of the interior wall by their hands. All these four participants are Chinese. The remainder only worried about the hot bowl.

6. Task C for ergonomics of the microwave oven  This task that need a more dedicate operation was designed to use a bowl ofmilk. It was the final task.

Three participants spilled out some milk while they placed the milk in. There were still three participants didn't know how to regulate the correct heating time.

They used STOP to adjust the time instead. Five people stopped the heating process in the halfway to check if the milk had been boiled, then, added more time. All the people used tissues to help to take the heated milk out because it was very hot.

In cleaning step, only two subjects took out the glass rolling plate to clean, and one of them even cleaned the iron-circle under the glass plate. Five people just put their arm inside to wipe off the milk remained on the glass plate with tissues. Other two people also cleaned the interior wall and ceiling of the microwave oven  All the people didn't avoid looking at the interior while the light was on. One participant stared at the interior to check if the milk boiled.

All the participants could clearly hear the signal which indicated the end of heating while we kept talking loudly.

Figure 4. The state of taking the glass rolling plate and the iron-circle out for cleaning  Interview questions reflected information below: Two people thought the appearance of the  microwave oven was good. Four participants thought it was just so so. Three people didn't like that for reasons below. The window is black, which looks like a big dark hole, not invitatory. The shape is too straight and shape.

Colour is not suitable. White is easy to dirty, and the blue of the button express a cooling feeling, which is conflict with the function of microwave oven.

Almost none of the subjects liked the feeling of pressing buttons except one thought it was fine. They got the feeling that there were no feedbacks while they were pressing the buttons. "I did not feel anything different when I pressed the buttons rather than other areas of the panel. I do not know whether it is a button or just an icon," a participant said.

Four participants thought it would be better if the outlet could be bigger. Five participants thought it was  ok. Two of them thought the door would get trouble other than the outlet.

Six participants thought the product was easy to clean. Other two thought the plate was easy to clean but the wall was not, because the wall is not flat and there are some small holes on the radiation emission area.

One people felt it is hard to clean the interior.

All the people accepted the noise.

All the people accepted the interior light.

Five people thought they would not have trouble to  move the microwave oven. Other four people thought it was not easy to move it. They had different reasons: Two of them thought it lacks two holders on the sides.

One thought it is heavy and unbalanced. The remained one deems the upper edge of the microwave oven is too sharp to hold.

All the participants thought the signal was enough and clear.

7. Conclusion  From questionnaire we mainly got the participant's personal information. Based on this information we can see the relationship between their choice and their backgrounds. This is very helpful in doing user segmentation [3].

All the participants who use microwave oven the most frequently are Chinese. They have the daily use frequency. The western young people use 3-4 times per week. The people who use microwave oven the least frequently are from Germany.

This microwave oven has the severe problem in Semantic area. Only one people has learned the complete operation methods at the end of the experiment. STOP and START are only two buttons which were mastered by all the people.

In safety area there is no big problem. Some people worried about the radiation.

In Ergonomic area, there are something need to be improved about door and interior surface, for the cleaning and food taking reasons.

The research process and analysis gave us lots of suggestions, and some of participants offered us lots of advices as well. It is a good solution to check all the advantages and disadvantages of the current microwave oven design with the observation and interview method.

By the way, the questionnaire method as an accessorial approach gave us some helps. The product design specifications were designed based on the research information and analyses. After all the research process and analyses, we will focus on the important redesign targets with ergonomics, such as the door operating, buttons touching, interior space, etc. All what we had done are the basis for the redesign of the microwave oven.

Acknowledgement  This research was supported by the Science Research Foundation of Zhejiang University of Science and Technology.

