Long-data DFT and Its Application in Radar  Reconnaissance Receiver

Abstract?Limited by the computing speed of FFT (Fast Fourier Transform), Short-data DFT(Discrete Fourier Transform) is often used in radar reconnaissance digital receiver. But for larger N, the number of sample points, is selected, not only windows effect is reduced and frequency resolution is improved, but also export that the frequency domain signal to noise ratio is N times increase of time-domain. So when N is a greater value, using DFT measuring frequency algorithm can detect small signal submerged in the noise. A realization scheme is given based on the big point DFT radar reconnaissance digital receiver, and export the quantitative relationship about sense pulse modulation radar signals. With the development of component technology and improvement of algorithm, long-data DFT has sufficient computing speed now, which provides the probability of its application in digital receiver.

Long FFT use generally 2-dimension algorithm and its implementation method on FPGA are also talked about.

Key words?digital receiver, DFT, windows effect, signal to noise ratio, FFT

I. INTRODUCTION Radar reconnaissance digital receiver is a embranchment  of modern electron warfare reconnaissance receiver, which used to obtain the enemy's radar information, and it is a important component of electronic intelligence  safeguard system[1]. In order to detect complex unknown signal in a modern high-density, highly complex environment of the electronic signals to demand the receiver to transmit high bandwidth, high sensitivity and resolution, large dynamic information, signal can long-term storage for later analysis and the application of flexible signal processing methods, capable of handling signals arrived at the same time, other information is not lost as fast-Transform targets etc. The scheme commonly used about radar reconnaissance digital receiver are: direct DFT transform digital receiver, lack of sampling multi-channel parallel digital receivers, frequency channel digital receiver and booting digital receivers[2].

DFT is the most commonly used signal processing technology, has got considerable attention since long period.

The application of DFT technology in the receiver can overcome single-bit receivers can not handle multiple signals get simultaneously, nor the broadband signal cross-channel issues in the frequency channel receiver. More important is the distribution of time-frequency signal which bases on the STFT (short-time Fourier transform) is given and can have a  more profound cognition to the signal structure when the data processing subsection. Limited by devices computational capabilities, receiver used to adopt short data DFT measuring-frequency methods. When the reconnaissance target is locked for the pulse radar signals, because of this signal mostly is the unknown parameters of the cycle signals, the time-frequency analysis function of short data DFT isn?t role play. On the contrary, the use of the big points DFT measuring-frequency methods, on the one hand can reduce the effect of window domino effect to DFT and increase measuring-frequency accuracy of the signals, on the other hand through the accumulation of DFT, will be able to detection the weak Radar signal hide the noise. With the level progress of device and improvement of the algorithm, the constraint of the big points DFT is broke through in computational capabilities, it have practical application in radar reconnaissance digital receiver.



II. CHARACTERISTICS OF DFT  A  DFT definition Fourier transform is a transformation tools between the  time domain and frequency domain, Fourier transform, in essence, is constituted of many different frequency sine or cosine waves which time-domain signal will be broken down into , and this could be transform the Research of  signal ( )x n into the study of their weights. But the spectrum by the Fourier is the demographic characteristics of the signal, it is the integral about whole time-domain, any moment of time-domain waveform signals are included all the information in the frequency-domain Signals. So continuous Fourier transform is limited by time-domain function must be able to form that can be closed and difficulties in the calculation of continuous functions integral.

Therefore, in engineering applications, the real Fourier transform translate into the Discrete Fourier Transform to approximate calculation [3].

Discrete Fourier Transform computational formula is :  ( ) [ ( )] ( ) 0 1  N nk  N n  X k DFT x n x n W k N ?  ?  ? ? ?? ? ?    ______________________________________    Direct calculate to complete full point DFT, the total  amount of computation to the  plural multiplication and  the  plural addition. The Fast Fourier Transform  (FFT) through the use of symmetry character and periodicity character the long sequence of DFT divided into short sequences DFT can great extent improve the computing speed. At present there are many fast algorithm for calculating the DFT, including base-2 FFT algorithm, base-4 FFT algorithm, split-base algorithm, the main factor decomposition algorithm, Winograd "small N" algorithm etc.

For FPGA Implementation, base-2 and base-4 algorithm is conformable big points FFT algorithm[4-5].

2N  nk  NW  ( 1N N ? )  B  DFT windows effect In digital signal processing, the actual physical signals  which need detect or process usually non-time limit, but as the restrictions such as computing speed and handle the workload and computer storage capacity, we can only select limited time-long data sample to be handled. This means that in the digital signal processing, the original non-time limit signal must be cut off, which is equivalent to the original infinite raw data sequence data through a window.

Hypothesis enter sequence ( )x n  ) which length is N, its  Fourier transform is ( jX e ? , the choice of spectrum of  window function  is ( )w n ( jW e )? , well then the Fourier  transform resultsY e( ) j?  of the sequence which comes  from  ( )y n  ( )x n  addition window is: ( )1( ) DTFT( ( ) ( )) ( ) ( )  j jY e x n w n X e W e d  ?? ?  ?  j ? ? ? ?  ?  ? ? ?  )      By the theory of DFT, it is known that the DFT results of  is a uniform N discrete sampling points on the circle in fact. The effect of addition window on the DFT performs in reducing the frequency spectrum resolution and producing energy leakage. DFT resolution refers to the capacity of the two neighboring peak which can be distinguished in the real spectrum of the signal. The size of the resolution after addition window depends on the main valve width BW of the spectrum window, only the distance of two frequency spectrum more than the width of the main valve about the spectrum window, the two peaks can be resolved out; leakage of the spectrum is power or energy which concentrated in a narrow-band frequency Domain spreads to the nearby bands, this is the result which true signal  spectrum  ( )y n  ( jX e ?  and the Side lobe of the spectrum window ( jW e )?  convolves.  As the existence of leakage domino  effects, in the larger side lobe of spectrum window ( jW e )? sometimes can cover up the smaller peaks of true  spectrum ( j )X e ? , or produce spectrum peaks does not exist  in the real spectrum peaks at all. In order to reduce leakage domino effects, you can choose other smaller Side window function than the rectangular window. the main lobe of Window function spectrum is elected should try to narrow as much as possible so that energy can concentrated in the main lobe, so in spectrum analysis there has a higher frequency resolution, the height of the window spectrum side lobe as little as possible and with the frequency as soon as possible attenuation, accordingly reduce the leakage distortion in the estimated spectrum.

When the sequence length N is larger, it equivalent the time-breadth of the window function which multiplied is longer, this can reduce the truncation function of the window signals contained in the sequence. From the frequency domain perspective, the frequency spectrum of window function becomes narrow and the frequency resolution is improved.

C  DFT signal Signal-to-Noise ratio on the increase For the plural Sine-sequence of Gaussian white noise,  expressed as 0j nx Ae ??( ) + ( ) 0,1, -1n v n n ? ?N       3  0?  is the signal?s digital frequency, then  when 0 2 k0 / N? ?? , signal frequency matching the output spectrum of one DFT. Assumed that the noise in time-domain is not relevant, and in time-domain the noise  power can be written as ,Then corresponding noise  power  f in the frequency-domain is expressed as *1 1  2 * 2 / 2  0 0  * 2 ( ) / * 2  ) ]  [ ] [ ( ) ( ) ]  N N j mk N j nk N  f m m n  j n n k N  k E v e v e  e NE v n v n N  ? ?  ?        ? ? ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  / n    [ ( ) (  N  n n n  E V k V  E v v ?  ?  ? ? ? ? ?  ? ? ?? ?? ? ??  ? ?? ?? ?  ? ? ?  ? ?  ?  This shows that in the frequency domain, the noise has the same distribution, but the variance increases N times.

Therefore there is  m  f  X ? ?  2 2  2 2 2  ( ) 2 2 2f  S NA A SN N N N N     ?  ?? ?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 5  At 0 02 /k N? ??  time, the frequency signals do not match the output spectrum lines of a certain DFT and will reduce. The proper range of NA Can be gotten through  the emendation algorithm by  and  ( )X k  ( )X k ( )1X k ? [6] .

Formula (5) indicates that the frequency domain signal to  noise ratio is N times increase of time-domain. Especially when N is a greater value, reconnaissance receiver using DFT measuring frequency algorithm can detect small signal submerged in the noise. From another perspective, N point    DFT equivalent of a coherent direction for accumulation. For the signal it has accumulation function, and the noise with stochastic range and phase is not accumulated.



III. DFT BIG POINTS IN THE APPLICATION OF RECONNAISSANCE RECEIVER  Despite the method of measuring the frequency based on DFT has disadvantage effect of the window domino effect, it also have the merits to overcome measured signals? low signal to noise ratio and can detect signals at the same time reach.. Particularly with the development of FPGA devices, the time which the big points FFT required substantially decline, so measuring frequency surveillance system based on the big points FFT, can greatly increase the detection probability of space weak signals and solve the problem about signal arrived at the same time.

A  application algorithm and quantitative analysis A big point DFT radar reconnaissance receiver designs as  shown in Figure 1. Broadband analog signal is converted by the A / D, at the first pass time-domain multiply window module, a re-N-point FFT computing (N ranged from 256 K ~ 1M) transforms to the frequency domain. After completion, the frequency spectrum detection module searches whether radar signal is there. If the signal is detected there, then the more the signal separation, after the completion of separation using M point IFFT computing (M adopt 64 K) of the time-domain signal reconstruction. The signal is the narrow-band signal after the separation in general, so it can only take effective bandwidth of the frequency domain data (M needs to fill zero to M point), and finally give a complete pulse description of the word (PDW) after the signal separation through the time-domain detection module.

Fig 1.  Operating flowchart of system  Below is derived detection radar signal pulse modulation of the quantitative relationship, Assuming a sampling  frequency Sf , FFT points N, IFFT points M, sampling interval and with the resolution frequency, respectively is  1/ St? ? f               6 /Sf f N? ?              7  In FFT spectrum, the corresponding frequency value of the location point k is  sff k f k N  ? ? ? ?  After signal separation, to the FFT spectrum data which contains effectively bandwidth do M point IFFT transform, transform it to the time domain and its resolution time is   s  N Nt t M f Mf M  ?? ? ? ? ?  ?  t  The sampling time of each swatch (or detection time)  0T M t N?? ? ? ?             10 In IFFT results, the corresponding time value of the  location point n is t n t?? ?                11  B  The rapid algorithm of DFT big points In order to improve the degree of parallel of the system  and reduce the needs of memory capacity of the system, can change one-dimensional FFT points into the two-dimensional L M? treatment, that is, at first row transform then to line transform. Select rows transform L = 1024 as a fixed point FFT, adopt base-4 algorithm to realize, in order to reduce the demand of chip ping-pong memory ,  line transform is 2nM ? variable points to transform FFT, use base-2 algorithm to realize, to meet Requirements of the system points changing. In the system, the transformation between line and rows can be realized by two FPGA chip.

Data matrix between the two FPGA chip need to re-order, so the data need to go through cache, after multiplied by the rotating factor ,the transformation from rows FPGA transmit to line transform FPGA [7-8]. Two-dimensional FFT / IFFT process:  Data rearrangement, N point data arrange L M? point format, including fixed L 1024; Each row of the matrix do fast Fourier transform, that is, do the M-L, one-dimensional FFT computing; Output of row Transform multiplied by the rotating factor keep into the middle of a data matrix (L line, M row); Each of the middle of the matrix will do Fast Fourier transform, that is, do L-M one-dimensional FFT computing; The whole sequence output.

For each level of transformation, since the array structure size too large, difficult to achieve, and the processing speed of recursive structure is slower, it will be difficult to achieve system requirements. Although parallel structure can achieve faster processing speed, too much demand about the butterfly computing unit and the wider memory bandwidth. It not only easy to structure the cascade of a pipeline handle mode, enables the processor to achieve 100 percent efficiency, but also when the points need to changed the system easily reconstruct, so it becomes principal choice for structure of a high-speed real time variable-point FFT processor.

Based on the above analysis, FFT / IFFT subsystem major consists of two parts, shown in Figure 2. The main functions of the two modules are one-dimensional FFT processor, also including reading data circulation cascade structure control.

FFT processor modules accomplish line transform or row transform; Reading data cycle control module for the completion of the data generated address, read, reverse order and output variable operation and the realization of the control changing points function. Line transform FPGA holds the output of the first-class FFT (intermediate data)to    Reading data circulation control, and deliver to line transform FPGA. Data temporary memory for storing intermediate data, the rotation factor of memory for storing rotation factor, as the largest processing point for 1024 ? 1024, the number of data and rotating factor is larger, therefore, need to storage intermediate data by using the RAM chip, The ROM chip storage rotation factor. According to the real-time data processing speed of the external circuit decide whether need the import and export memory, if the processing speed of a applications system and processor FFT correspond, you can not use the input and output memory, but need system to input FFT processor according to sequence the length of the system based on data in with the reverse requirements, and in time process the output of FFT processor.

Fig 2.  Composing of FFT/IFFT module

IV. CONCLUSIONS The realization of big points FFT in system-level FPGA,  for the radar detection receiver application the big points DFT provides a core guarantee. DFT using the big point of the channel could reduce the total number of channels, and can also bring into full play the advantages of the DFT points.

Based on the foregoing scheme, FFT transform points to 256 K, IFFT transform points to 64 K,  the pulse radar signals reconnaissance receiver of 1 GHz bandwidth has been successfully applied.

