Association Rule Mining with Domain Knowledge Constraint

Abstract  Mining knowledge from large databases has been the focus of many recent studies and applications.

Mining association rules in medical images is an important part in domain-specific application image mining because there are several technical aspects which make this problem challenging. In this paper, we firstly propose ROI extraction and clustering algorithm with domain knowledge constraint, then we extend the concept of association rule based on ROI and image in medical images, and propose two algorithms to discover frequent item-sets and mine association rules from medical images. Some interesting results are obtained by our program and we believe many of the problems we come across are likely to appear in other domains.

1. Introduction  Advances in image acquisition and storage technology have led to tremendous growth in very large and detailed image databases [4]. A vast amount of image data is generated in our daily life and each field, such as medical image (CT images, ECT images and MR images etc), satellite images and all kinds of digital photographs. These images involve a great number of useful and implicit information that is difficult for users to discover.

Image mining is a growing research focus and is still at an experimental stage. Research in image mining can be broadly classified to two main directions: (1) domain-specific applications; (2) general applications [7]. Data mining in medical images belongs to the first direction. A few interesting studies and successful applications involving image mining have been reported. For example, [2] describes the CONQUEST system that combines satellite data with geophysical data to discover patterns in global  climate change. The SKICAT system [1] integrates techniques for image processing and data classification in order to identify ?sky objects? captured in a very large satellite picture set. A multimedia data mining system prototype MultiMediaMiner [3, 4] uses a data cube structure for mining characteristic, association, and classification rules. However, the system does not use image content to the extent we wanted. In [9], localization of the visual features, their spatial relationships and their motion in time (for video) are presented. A discovering association rules algorithm based on image content from a simple image dataset is presented in [10]. Some algorithms used in the medical images are generally for classification[6, 8, 11, 12] and Similarity Retrieval[5]. [13, 14] propose the methods for mining association rules in relational databases.

They are not suitable to find rules in the medical images because there are important differences between relational databases versus image databases: (1) Absolute versus relative values. (2) Spatial information (Independent versus dependent position).

Another important difference between relational databases and medical image databases is that the implicit spatial information is critical for interpretation of image contents but there is no such requirement in relational databases.

In this paper, we extend the concept of association rule using ROI, ROI-based attribute and relationship predicate, and image-based attribute in medical images.

To detect ROIs in medical images, a progressive water immersion algorithm is presented. Then we propose a new method with guidance of domain knowledge to discover frequent item-sets and mine interesting association rules from medical images. Throughout the paper we try to provide a general framework to understand our approach. We believe many of the problems we are facing are likely to appear in other domains. As such this work tries to isolate those problems which we consider will be of most interest to  ___________________________________     the database community doing research on association rules.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 is pre-processing describing an algorithm to detect ROIs in medical images. Association rule mining in medical images is presented in section 3.

Section 4 briefly reports our performance study.

Conclusions are presented in section 5.

2. ROI Extraction Algorithm  In this paper, we use domain knowledge effectively to remove the noisy data. A brain CT image mainly consists of three parts: noisy data, skull and cerebrum.

The noisy data includes the black background and patient's name etc. These information is not only helpless but revealing patient's privacy. We are only interested in cerebrum. So we use domain knowledge (for short DK1) and cropping technique of image processing to gain it.

DK1 --- human's brain skull has the highest density and surrounds the cerebrum.

(a)                      (b)  (c)                      (d) Fig. 1.  Figure (a) and (c) are two original abnormal brain images. Progressive water immersion algorithm is used to mark ROIs with dotted line in figure (b) and (d).

Brain midline Fig 2. Normal person?s brain image  That is, the skull is a cricoid area in the image with the whitest pixels that separate cerebrum from the noisy data, see figure 1(a). It becomes easy to remove the noisy data by using cropping technique and keep the interesting region with the guidance of DK1.

Unfortunately, simple application of the water immersion technique has the tendency of over-flooding.

To overcome this problem, we firstly give some definitions. Then we use progressive water immersion method with guidance of domain knowledge to detect region of interest (ROI) in medical images, then we combine these ROIs with their location, size and other descriptors to form a table for mining.

Definition 1. We partition all pixels in pixel set P into m blocks. Pixels in the same block have the same grey level and pixels in the different blocks have the different grey level. Let G(P)={g1, g2, ?, gm} be P?s grey-scale (GS) set if G(P) is an ascending sort set of g1?, g2?, ?, gm? and gi? is grey level of pixels in the ith block, where gi (i=1,?,m) is the ith GS, g1? and gm? are P?s minimum and maximum GS respectively. The GS of pixel pi is denoted as g(pi).

Definition 2. We call gmean(P) the mean GS if |P|  gmean(P)= g(pi)/|P|.

i=1  Definition 3. For any P and distance function DisA=|gk - gmean(P)|, mid-value GS is a middle value in the GS set that minimizes DisA. Mid-value GS set is a set of mid-value GS.

Definition 4. For any P, if (1) Mid-value GS set includes one element gmid, and  gs is the minimum value between gmean and gmid; (2) Mid GS set includes two elements, gs is the  minimum value between these two values; gs is called Benchmark GS and another one is  denoted as gs?.

Definition 5. For pixel set P, let g(l)={gi | g1  gi g1+|g1-gs|/2} be low bound GS; g(h)={gi | gm-|gm-gs?|/2 gi gm} be high bound GS; g(b)= g(l) g(h) be bound GS; Our progressive water immersion ignores all those  pixels whose grey level doesn?t belong to the bound GS. Bound GS is defined with guidance of domain knowledge that describes the degree of dark and light.

So the optimality of point in a certain region is defined as follows:  ;set  pixel bound low  tobelongspoint  if level,grey  minimal ;set  pixel boundhigh   tobelongspoint  if level,grey  maximal  =optimality  For each extracted ROI Ri, we need to extract relevant information for features mining to take place. The domain knowledge of the brain image characteristics indicates that the normal persons have nearly the same brain structure that is evident to be bilateral symmetry.

That is, the distribution of density in the left hemisphere of the brain is almost identical with the right, see figure 2. The pathological regions result in irregularly shaped grey level distribution in the CT scan images and destroy the symmetry, see figure 1.

At this point, the following relevant features are able to provide sufficient discriminative power to cluster ROIs     into different groups: (1) grey level of ROI; (2) area of ROI; (3) location of ROI; (4) elongation of ROI; (5) direction of ROI; and (6) symmetry of ROI.

With the above method, ROI extracted from brain image is either brightness or darkness. So we define grey level as GL= 0 (brightness), or 1 (darkness). The second feature we have found useful relate to the size of the region in the form of the area of the region. Area of the region of interest is defined as the total number of pixels within the region, up to and including the boundary pixels. The location of ROI is defined as a ratio. The coordinates of the centroid of ROI are computed with the formula (1).

k  j jxk  x  1 k  j jyk  y  1     (1)  k is the number of the pixels of ROI and the location is ( x /|x|, y /|y|). The fourth feature is the elongation of ROI which is defined as the ratio of the width of the minor axis to the length of the major axis.

elongation = lenmajor / lenminor  (2) where lenmajor is the major axis length of ROI and  lenminor is the minor axis length of ROI. The ratio, elongation, is a measure of the degree of elongation of ROI. We establish a common coordinate with brain midline as y and perpendicular line going through the midpoint of midline as x. With the major axis of ROI, we define the next feature, direction of ROI, as the inclination  of the major axis and x positive direction and [0,180].

Before introducing the final feature, we will give some definitions.

Definition 6. Pixel set of IMp is defined as P={pi|pi is the pixel with coordinate (xi, yi) in the image IMp}, P(L) and P(R) are pixel set of IMp(L) and IMp(R) respectively.

Definition 7. For any pli P(L), prj P(R), they are symmetric pixel if the line between pli and prj is halved vertically by brain midline. They are denoted as pli and pri below.

Definition 8. g(P) is IMp?s difference set if for any symmetrical pixel pli and pri, g(P)={ gi| gi=g(pli)- g(pri), i=1,2,?,|p|/2 }, where g(pli) and g(pri) are grey level of these two pixels respectively.

Now we define the sixth feature as following.

Definition 9. ROI Rpk is symmetrical if for IMp and  Rp1, Rp2, ?, Rpk, , the mean grey level of g(R  k i piRPPP 1 )('  pk), mean( g(Rpk)), and the mean grey level of g(P?), mean( g(P?)), satisfy the following condition:  |mean( g(Rpk)) - mean( g(P?))| < .

After the above process, all the ROIs are detected, see figure 1. Next, images with many different ROIs are represented by transactions, but there exist relationship among these ROIs and identical ROIs (either bright or dark) can repeat in an image.

Therefore, we use a table to describe these transactions, see table 1. In table 1, Part I and Part II is image id and ROI id respectively. Part III is the attribute set of ROI, for example, grey level, location, etc., and Part IV is the relationship predicate set, for instance, next-to, inside and predicate related to domain. Part V is the attribute set of image.

Table 1. Images are modeled by transactions  3. Association Rule Mining Method  The main title (on the first page) should begin 1-3/8 inches (3.49 cm) from the top edge of the page, centered, and in Times 14-point, boldface type.

Capitalize the first letter of nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs; do not capitalize articles, coordinate conjunctions, or prepositions (unless the title begins with such a word). Leave two blank lines after the title.

3.1. Basic Definitions  Definition 10. An association rule in medical images is a rule that associates visual ROI features and the relationship among ROIs in images, and is of the form:  1P1 2P2  ? nPn 1(P1, P2, ?, Pn) 2(P1, P2, ?, Pn)  ? g(P1, P2, ?, Pn) 1Q1 2Q2  ? mQm 1(Q1, Q2, ?, Qm) 2(Q1, Q2, ?, Qm) ? h(Q1, Q2, ?, Qm)  (c%)  where c% is the confidence of the rule, one or more Pi, i  [1..n] and Qj, j  [1..m] are not just features or ROIs, but can also be related descriptors of image and ROI, the mean over their histogram etc., and i, i [1..n], and j, j  [1..m], are integers quantifying the occurrence of ROI or feature or item. nPn is true if and only if Pn has n occurrences. i, i  [1..g], and j, j  [1..h], are relationship predicates indicating the  Part I Part II Part III Part IV Part V Image ID ROI ID oattr1 ? RP1 ? iattr1 ?  IM1 O1 oattr1_v ? O2 ? iattr1_v IM1 O1 ? ? ? ? ? ? IM1 O2 ? IM2 O1 ? IM2 O2 ? ? ? ?  IMn On ? ? ? ? ? ?     relationship of ROI or feature or item. i(P1, P2, ?, Pn) and j(Q1, Q2, ?, Qm) don?t always exist and include all items in the bracket.

Definition 10 leads to the introduction of two notions of support.

Definition 11. ROI-based support of an itemset X in a set of images S denoted by ob_support(X) is the percentage of ROIs in all images S. The image-based support of an itemset X in a set of images S denoted by ib_support(X) is the percentage of images with the same attributes in all images S. The confidence of an association rule X Y is the ratio ib_support(X Y)/ ib_support(X) if X or Y includes the attribute of image.

Otherwise, the confidence is the ratio ob_support(X Y)/ ob_support(X).

Definition 12. An itemset x is sufficiently frequent in a set S if the support of x is no less than its corresponding minimum support threshold ?, and no more than its corresponding maximum support threshold ?.

Definition 13. An association rule X Y in a set of images S is sufficiently strong if X and Y are sufficiently frequent (X and Y  [ ?... ?]) and the confidence of X Y is greater than ?.

We propose two supports based on ROI and image because a ROI maybe appears repeatedly in an image but image is unique. The different supports mean different counting and different interestingness. We will give an example to describe this difference in next subsection.

3.2. Frequent Item-sets Mining Algorithm  The reader is asked to read this subsection carefully as it provides the motivation for the algorithm we will describe later. Several medically important association rules are discussed as well as rules which are not interesting. Here we summarize the main difficulties we have isolated so far trying to discover frequent item-sets in the medical images.

Association size. Associations and rules that involve many items are hard to interpret and can potentially generate a very high number of rules. And further, they slow down the interactive process by the user. Therefore, there should be a default threshold for association size. The biggest size of found associations is a practical bottleneck for algorithm performance. If for a given support the k-itemset X is frequent then all Y  and Y X are frequent and then there are O(2k) frequent item-sets included. It is easy to see that no matter how efficient the algorithm is, the approach above will be slow for a large k.

Associations having uninteresting combinations of Items. This is the case where certain combinations are known to be trivial or have such a high support that does not really tell something new about the data set.

Consider items xi and xj, if the association X1={xi, xj} is not interesting then any other association X2 X1 will not be interesting. Therefore, many of the items can be grouped by the domain expert to discard uninteresting associations. We assume small groups can be identified by domain knowledge.

With all the above problems, we propose the following algorithm. We introduce a function group(), which comes from domain knowledge, to constraint the number of frequent item-sets to be discovered. Let Ck = {O1, O2, ?, Ok} be a set of items to be mined.

We define group(Oi) to be an integer t if the item Oi belongs to a group. The constraint for discovering frequent item-sets was set as follows. Since the brain is composed of the left and right hemisphere, we set group(Oi) = 0 if ROI Oi is only in the left hemisphere, 1 if ROI Oi is only in the right, and 2 if ROI Oi bestrides both brain hemispheres. Let imax be the maximum number of items appearing in one rule.

Algorithm 1 (SFIMI)  Find sufficient frequent item-sets based on two supports in medical images.

Input: (i) S1 a set of transactions without relationship predicate; (ii) the maximum and minimum ROI-based support and image-based support thresholds max_ob, min_ob, max_ib and min_ib;  Output: Sufficiently frequent item-sets.

(1) C1  {candidate 1 item-set}; (2) F1  {frequent 1 item-set from C1}; (3) k = 2; (4) while ( k max ) { (5) Extend Fk-1 by one item belonging to any Fk-1;  let Ck = {O1, O2, ?, Ok}; if (group(Oi)  group(Oj), for i j and 1 i, j k then Ck is a candidate;  (6) Check support of all candidate Ck making one pass over the transactions; let X be item-sets only containing items about ROIs; let Y be item-sets containing items about images; Fk  {c Ck | (c X  (ob_support(c) min_ob))  (c Y  (ib_support(Y) min_ib))};  (7) k=k+1; (8) } (9) Result k{c Fk|(k>1) ((c X (ob_support(c  ) max_ob)) (c Y (ib_support(Y) max_ib))) };     Line 1-3 are done in the same initial scan. In line 5, the candidate item-sets are discovered by joining (k-1) frequent item-sets. We use function group() to prune away the item-sets that probably are frequent item-sets.

In line 6, only the frequent item-sets that are higher than the minimum support are kept. It is only at the end of the loop (line 9) that maximum support is used to eliminate item-sets that appear too frequently.

Lemma 1. Itemset interestingness is anti-monotonic in group(Oi) constraints.

Lemma 2. The group(Oi) constraints can be used to prune away association.

Lemma 3. Let F be a frequent k itemset. Assume imax < k then there are 2k- 2  imax k imax pruned  associations.

3.3. Association Rules Generating Algorithm  Most papers published in the database literature concentrate on optimizing the above phase, but few to improve rule generation. For mining association rule in medical images, there exist the following problem.

Items can appear only in the antecedent, only in the consequent or in either. Note that given the interesting rule X Y no matter where an item appears the association X Y must be a frequent itemset, but where the item appears prunes out many uninteresting rules.

In other words, support is still needed to prune uninteresting associations but confidence is not enough to prune out uninteresting rules because there may be many rules having high confidence containing forbidden items in the antecedent or in the consequent.

Therefore items need to be constrained to appear in a specific part of the rule.

With this requirement, we propose the following algorithm. Let F1, F2, ?, FM be all frequent item-sets obtained in the above algorithm (SFIMI). We propose a constraint function cons() to eliminate the rules to be mined. We define cons(fi) to be 1 if the item fi can appear either in the antecedent or in the consequent, and 2 if it can appear only in the consequent of the rule.

Algorithm 2 (GAR) Generate association rules from the sufficient frequent item-sets.

Input: (i) Sufficient frequent item-sets F1, F2, ?, FM; (ii) minimum confidence;  Output: Association rules.

(1) for m=1 to M { (2) for all non-empty subsets of Fm { (3)    Let fj, fk  Fm;  if (fj fk= ) and (cons(i) 2  i  fj) and (cons(i) 1  i  fk)  and (support(fj fk)/support(fj) minconfidence) then fj  fk is valid;  (4)   } (5) }  Lemma 4. Let F be a frequent k itemset. Assume m items are conf(fi) constrained . Then the upper limit of discarded rules are ( )-  ( ).

CCC kkkk 121 ...

CCC mk mkmkmk ...21  4. Experiments  The goal of the following experiment was to relate CT to brain tumor to validate actual diagnosis rules used by medical experts. In this case the purpose was mainly to confirm the validity of medical knowledge and tried to find new rules.

The dataset utilized in our experiments was real data from hospital. To have access to real medical images is a very difficult undertaking due to legally privacy issues and management of hospital. But with some specialists' help and support, we got 618 precious images and their corresponding diagnosis records which, for simplicity, we generalized to normal(N) and abnormal(A).

The following is the constraint for generating association rules. For the descriptions of the images, like diagnosis record, they were constrained to appear in the consequent of the rule, that is, cons(i)=2, because it is more significant not only to medical doctors but patients. ROIs with their attributes were constrained to appear concurrently either in the antecedent or in the consequent, i.e. cons(i)=1. It is evidently unmeaningful that a ROI is in the consequent and its attribute is in the antecedent.

We ran experiments with both of two max support = 100% and association rule size imax = 6. We varied minimum confidence and minimum support of ROI- based and image-based to get rules. The program can?t be run without constraining and maybe the excessive rules will be generated. Table 2 shows our experiment results.

Table 2. Experiment results with medical images  Min_ob Min_conf_o(ROI-based) Min_ib Min_conf_i  (image-based) the number of the rules  0.3 0.6 0.2 0.6 103 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.5 72 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 13  When the minimum support was lower, many of these rules were not interesting. But when it was     higher, most of them were interesting and even important. We will show two rules that validate the actual diagnosis and domain knowledge.

Rule 1: 2O1 2O2 symmetry(O1,O1) symmetry(O2,O2)  N [90%] Rule 2: 1O1 1O2 homolateral(O1,O2)  2O1 homolateral(O1,O1) A [60%] O1 and O2 in rule 1 and rule 2 are light region and  dark region respectively. The integer is the number of ROIs repetition. Relationship predicate symmetry() represents that two ROIs are symmetrical and homolateral() represents that two ROIs are concurrently in the left or right hemisphere. Rule 1 describes that if there are two light regions and two dark regions in a brain image and they are symmetrical for a pair of regions with similar intensity, then this image belongs to a normal person. Rule 2 describes that if there are one light region and one dark region in one side of the brain image, then there are two dark regions in another side of the brain image and this image belongs to an abnormal person. With constraint function group() and cons(), we eliminate many rules like 2O1  1O2, where O1 and O2 are in the same side.

Many previous works will generate this kind of rules that is not practically significant.

5. Conclusion  In this paper, we have extended the concept of association rule using ROI, ROI-based attribute and relationship predicate, and image-based attribute in medical images. Two different supports based on ROI and image mean different counting and different interestingness. To detect ROIs in medical images, we have presented a progressive water immersion algorithm with guidance of domain knowledge to preprocessing the medical image set. Then we proposed two new algorithms with guidance of domain knowledge to discover frequent item-sets and mine interesting association rules from medical images. We have described the problem with a general form to provide a common framework for other problems appeared in other domains. Some interesting results were obtained by our program and solved the excessive uninteresting rules to some extent.

6. References  [1] U. M. Fayyad, S. G. Djorgovski, and N. Weir.

Automating the analysis and cataloging of sky surveys. In U.

Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth, and R. Uthurusamy, editors, Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 471?493. AAAI/MIT Press, 1996.

[2] P. Stolorz, H. Nakamura, E. Mesrobian, R. Muntz, E.

Shek, J. Santos, J. Yi, K. Ng, S. Chien, C. Mechoso, and J.

Farrara. Fast spatio-temporal data mining of large geophysical datasets. In Proc. Int. Conf. on KDD, pages 300?305, 1995.

[3] O. R. Zaiane, J. Han, Z.-N. Li, J. Y. Chiang, and S. Chee.

MultiMediaMiner: A system prototype for multimedia data mining. In Proc. ACM-SIGMOD, Seattle, 1998.

[4] O. R. Zaiane, J. Han, Z.-N. Li, and J. Hou. Mining multimedia data. In CASCON?98: Meeting of Minds, Toronto, 1998.

[5] Haiwei Pan, Qilong Han, Xiaoqin Xie, Zhang Wei, Jianzhong Li, A Similarity Retrieval Method in Brain Image Sequence Database, ADMA 2007  [6] Hiroki Nomiya, Kuniaki Uehara, Multistrategical image classification for image data mining, KDD/MDM 2007  [7] WYNNE HSU, MONG LI LEE, JI ZHANG. Image Mining: Trends and Developments. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 19:1, 7?23, 2002.

[8] Wynne Hsu, Mong Li Lee, Kheng Guan Goh. Image Mining in IRIS: Integrated Retinal Information System.

Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD, May 2000, Dellas, Texas, U.S.A., pp. 593.

[9] Osmar R. Zaiane, Jiawei Han, Hua Zhu. Mining Recurrent Items in Multimedia with Progressive Resolution Refinement. ICDE 2001.

[10] Ordonez, C. and Omiecinski, E. (1999). Discovering Association Rules Based on Image Content. In IEEE Advances in Digital Libraries Conference.

[11] Maria-Luiza Antonie, Osmar R. Zaiane, Alexandru Coman. Application of Data Mining Techniques for Medical Image Classification. Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Multimedia Data Mining (MDM/KDD'2001).

[12] Osmar R. Zaiane, Maria-Luiza Antonie, Alexandru Coman. Mammography Classification by an Association Rule-based Classifier. Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Multimedia Data Mining (MDM/KDD'2002).

[13] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant. Fast algorithms for mining association rules. In Proc. 1994 Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases (VLDB'94), pages 487-499, Sept. 1994.

[14] Gao Cong, Anthony K. H. Tung,Xin Xu, Feng Pan,Jiong Yang.FARMER: Finding Interesting Rule Groups in Microarray Datasets. In Proc. 2004 ACM-SIGMOD Int.

Conf. Management of Data (SIGMOD'04).

