Evaluation of Risk Factors Selection

Abstract  In the past few years a number of algorithms for  cardiovascular risk stratification have been proposed to  the medical community but a big question has been  remained unsolved: From among alternative sets of  cardiac risk factors which ones are more significant in  cardiac risk stratification? In this paper a hybrid neuro-  fuzzy classifier, IRIDIA Method for Neuro-fuzzy  Identification and Data Analysis, was applied to  determine the cardiac risk stratification. Using the  obtained neuro-fuzzy model, sensitivity analysis of  cardiac risk factors was derived to sort out cardiac risk  factors according their significance - which factor has  great effect on cardiac risk.

1. Introduction  The concept of cardiac risk factors has become an  integral part of the modern medical curriculum and has  led to the development of algorithms for cardiac risk  assessment [1]-[4].

Usually, the cardiac risk stratification methods in  literature are either based on ECG data-driven or patient's  medical data. The former includes QRS detection,  distances in time between waves of RR, PR, and etc [3],  [4]. Age, blood pressure, cholesterol, and ? are  examples of the latter one [1]-[2].

In the previously done researches, data have been  measured, then several score sheets have been prepared  accordingly [5], [6]. These score sheets can be applied to  estimate people risk factor in general. The patient's data  are scored by means of obtained score sheets.

Considering the scores, cardiac risk factor is calculated.

Framingham study is regarded as the earliest method in  this era. The objective of Framingham heart study was to  identify the common factors or characteristics that  contribute to cardiovascular disease by following its  development in the large group of participants who had  not yet developed overt symptoms of cardiovascular  disease or suffer a heart attack. The researchers went  through medical history, extensive physical examination,  and laboratory tests.

Over the years, careful monitoring of Framingham  study population has led to the identification of major  cardiovascular disease risk factors, as well as valuable  information on the effects of these factors such as blood  pressure, blood triglyceride and cholesterol levels, age,  and gender [7].

The use of scoring systems to stratify cardiac risk is  currently hampered by methodological and mathematical  flaws. Newer approaches make use of fuzzy logic and  artificial neural networks, linked to artificial intelligence.

Applying neuro-fuzzy method, the present study seems to  initiate a new approach toward cardiac risk stratification.

So far, a lot of numeric analysis approaches of neuro-  fuzzy systems have been presented. Most of these  techniques divide the input data space, not considering  the output data space, so the obtained rules should not be  always reasonable. IRIDIA method is a simple and  effective neuro-fuzzy network that divides input-output  data space and extracts fuzzy if-then rules automatically.

This method searches for the right number of rules of the  architecture by adopting a procedure of cross-validation  on the available data set [8], [9].

To aim at excellent fuzzy modeling, it is necessary to  select adequate input elements. Unnecessary inputs  interfere with proper learning, inference, and creation of  efficient rules [10]. Sensitivity analysis of cardiac risk  factors was derived by using the obtained fuzzy rules in  order to show which factor has great effect on cardiac  risk. When the factors are uncertain, and/or there are  alternative sets of factors to choose from, the model  output will also be uncertain. Quantitative sensitivity  analysis tries not only to identify but also to quantify the  relative significance of the factors [11]. Selection of  efficient input elements can contribute to the performance  improvement, reduction of calculation cost and analysis  of the obtained rules that is one of the important merits of  fuzzy system.

ISSN 0276?6574 665 Computers in Cardiology 2008;35:665?668.

2. Database  The present article develops a simplified cardiac risk  factor model, building on the sex, age, cholesterol (LDL),  and blood pressure. Family history for heart disease,  physical activity, obesity, cigarette smoking, diabetes and  ? are not included because these factors work to a large  extent through a major risk factors, and their unique  contribution to cardiac risk factor assessment can be  difficult to quantify [12]-[14].

Statistic data of 165 patients in hospitals of Tehran  (54 patients) and Shiraz (111 patients)1 were gathered.

The data included the following variables: sex, age, LDL,  blood pressure, and Myocard-brain Creatinine  Phosphokinase (cpk-mb) enzyme. The intensity of  infarction was determined according to the amount of the  enzyme (in three different levels: no infarction, mild  infarction, and severe infarction).

3. Idea and method  Sex, age, LDL, and blood pressure were considered as  the input and infarction intensity was considered as the  output.

Fig. 1.  Assessment system    To draw the input-output mapping of each group,  neuro-fuzzy networks were used. Having obtained a  neuro-fuzzy model, we estimated the significance of  input variables in making output with the use of Linkens  method (Fig. 1.).

3.1. Cardiac risk stratification  At first step, in this study all the input variables  including age, LDL blood pressure were normalized in  the range of [0,1]. Output values of no infarction, mild  infarction, and severe infarction based on enzyme  concentration are identified with numerical values of 0,  0.5 and 1 respectively. Then the data related to men,  women, men-Shiraz, women-Shiraz, men-Tehran, and   1 . Tehran and Shiraz are two big cities in Iran which are far away  from each other.

women-Tehran were partitioned into train and test sets  randomly (both sets included subjects with no infarction,  subjects with mild infarction as well as subjects with  severe infarction). %70 of whole data was used for  training (rule generation) and the rest %30 was used for  testing. IRIDA method was applied to data sets of men,  women, men-Shiraz, women-Shiraz, men-Tehran, and  women-Tehran.

IRIDIA Method. The precise model of Takagi-  Sugeno selected to be used as the fuzzy model. The  program provided a set of structural alternatives in the  definition of the fuzzy model: the shape of membership  function of the antecedents (Gaussian/triangular), the  parametric form of the consequent (constant/linear), the  combination method of the rules (weighted/comb) and  bias term which can be either used or not in the linear  step of the nonlinear parametric optimization (bias/no-  bias). Further, it is possible to choose between two  different clustering policies, K-means/Hyperplane fuzzy  clustering [15], to provide the identification algorithm  with good initial values of the center and base of the  membership functions. Then we obtained 32 models for  each data set:  (Gaussian/Triangular,Constant/Linear,Weighted/Comb  , Bias/No-bias,K-means/Hyperplane ).

IRIDIA method searches for the right number of  rules of the architecture by adopting a procedure of cross-  validation on the available data set. It starts with a  minimal number of rules and at each step increases the  number of rules by restarting the global procedure until a  maximum number of rules is reached (the user is free to  set properly what is the desired range of number of rules  to range over). Then each structure is characterized by its  error in generalization, estimated by a procedure of cross-  validation and the optimal number of rules is searched by  comparing the cross-validation error obtained at different  levels of number of rules. At the end of the global  training phase, the cross-validation error is plotted against  the number of rules used and the user is asked to choose  the number of rules at which the fuzzy system looks to  perform better (Fig. 2.).

In order to have a definite range for the number of  rules, points with coordinates of (blood pressure, LDL,  age), were exhibited in a 3-dimentional space. Therefore  regarding the distribution of data a range of 3-10 was  chosen. For each of 32 fuzzy structures cross-validation  error versus number of rules was plotted and number of  those rules was chosen that produces the least cross-  validation error.

Selecting the fuzzy model, the number of rules was  determined. The model was trained by the train set data  Sex  Age  LDL  Blood pressure  Neuro-fuzzy  classifier Infarction  intensity  Evaluation of risk  factors selection         The trend was repeated for the 32 fuzzy structures.

Fig. 2.  Cross-validation error versus number of rules diagram    In these phase, we used the trained fuzzy model to  predict data output of train and test sets data. Considering  the number of errors, we chose the most appropriate  model.

Applying IRIDIA method led us to consider a  distinction between males and females in cardiac risk  stratification. Males and females were studied separately  because they differ according to the age at which there is  risk of infarction, but in the case of blood pressure and  LDL, the differences are not considerable.

The results of the study directed us to regard subjects  of different cities separately. Since life quality and  conditions such as air pollution, life style and ? differ in  these two cities, so risk ranges of different age, LDL, and  blood pressure levels are not the same in different cities  and various adaptive strategies can be tuned up in terms  of a specific population to stratify the risk of cardiac  disease.

Table 1  Fuzzy models of IRIDIA method    Results of different groups of our research are  summarized in Table 1.  Total error is the proportion of  error numbers to the total number of data.

Tehran women data, in our database, was not enough to  be applied to IRIDIA method.

3.2.  Evaluation of risk factor significance In this research, we used Linkens [16], [17] method to  compute input significance. Since this method has to  know the set of proper rules in advance, we first chose  the neuro-fuzzy model and then computed the input  significance.

Suppose that the dimension of the data, is N 1 , the  number of rules, is N 2 , and the dimension of the output  data, is N 3 . The input data is expressed as follows:  U= (u 1 , u 2 , ?, u 1N ).

The subscripts i, j, and k refer to the input, the rule, and  the output respectively. u ij  is the membership value and  w ij is the center value of the membership function. The  logical form of the fuzzy inference if-then rules is given  such as : if u 1  is jw1 , and ?, u i is ijw , ? , u 1N is jNw 1  is then y k is jkw .Where ijw  means the value near w ij .

The lth input significance value is calculated.

z l  ik =  ? ?    N  j ij  N  j ikij  u  wu (1)  Next, the integrated input significance value from the  ith input to the kth output is calculated using L sets of  z l  ik .       R ik = l  max ( z lik ) - l  min ( z lik )                       (2)  R k = i  max (R ik )                                    (3)  Finally, the syntactic input significance value is  calculated by accumulating F ik .

F i =? 3Nk ikF                                                   (4) 4.     Results  With regards to table 2, it can be concluded that  cardiac risk factor significance differs in terms of gender  and regional conditions.

The significance of input variables (blood pressure,  LDL, and age) was approximately the same. So our input  set has been appropriate and there is no need to decrease  the number of variables or change them. Age, blood  pressure and LDL, input variables, were sorted out  according their significance respectively. With the benefit  Total  error  Number  of rules Fuzzy model Group  %10.31 5  Gaussian, Constant,  Comb, Bias, K-mean    Men  %14.71 5  Gaussian, Constant,  Comb, Bias, HFC    Women  %4.76 5  Gaussian, Constant,  Weighted, No-bias,  K-mean  Men-  Shiraz    %2.08       Gaussian, Constant,  Weighted, No-bias, HFC    Women-  Shiraz  %14.71 4    Gaussian, Constant,  Comb, Bias, K-mean    Men-  Tehran         of this study, the significance degree of a risk factor can  be defined according to a specific population and specific  region.

Table 2  Significance of input variables    For further research, additional risk factors, not  available in patients' records at the present, can be  included to provide the medical community with a  comprehensive program which shows the risk factors  significance in a hierarchical order.

5. Conclusion  In this paper we explained cardiac risk factor  stratification based on a neuro-fuzzy classifier, IRIDIA  method. Our Parameters consisted of sex, age, LDL, and  blood pressure. Sensitivity analysis was used to  determine: the resemblance of this model with the  process under study, the quality of model definition,  factors that mostly contribute to the output variability and  interaction between factors.

The capabilities of our method can be summarized as  below:  - More Risk factor, smoking background, life  condition, obesity, diabetes, and ? can be applied in  the proposed method.

- Extension of available data in database simply can be  integrated in our model. Also, Extension of database  with more data can yield more reliable results.

- Using this method, risk factor assessment can be  specialized based on different regions and life  conditions.

- Defining the most effective factor, in each special  population, prevention strategies can be adopted.

- Risk factor can be compared in different populations  and differences can be derived.

