Probe Car based Traffic Information System Experiment in Shenyang

Abstract-The paper introduces the experiment of probe car based traffic information system experiment in Shenyang of China. It is done for evaluation of probe car system for big city, and aimed to traffic information service for mobile phone users in China. About 10000 taxies running on roads send GPS data in real time to the data base of the traffic information center. In the traffic information center, the probe information system matches the location of taxies on the digital map, calculates the average running speed and travel time on road links, and distributes the traffic information to users frequently through web and WAP portals. Test cars run on roads to evaluate the accuracy of traffic information from probe car system in 2008.

The result proves the feasibility of real-time traffic information service by using probe car system based on huge amount of GPS data.

Keywords: probe car, traffic information, travel time

I. INTRODUCTION  With the prevalence of GPS units, navigation products become more and more popular in global market. By concerning the price and convenience issues, PND (Portable Navigation Device) or GPS enabled mobile phone is the first choice for most users. According to China navigation market survey in 2007 [1], GPS enabled mobile phone market is increasing even faster than PND market as shown in figure 1.

In China, after the research on real-time traffic information service for navigation system based on about 2000 taxies in 2006 [2], and the statistical data based traffic information prediction service for navigation system in 2007 [3], Hitachi started research on traffic information service for portable devices including PND and mobile phones.

In order to evaluate the feasibility of real-time traffic information service on large amount of probe GPS data, and the accuracy of traffic information for web and WAP users by cooperating with local map provider and telecommunication carrier in China, Hitachi carried a field test in Shenyang in 2008.

Shenyang is the capital of Liaoning province in China, whose population is about 7 million. There are about 20,000 taxies running on roads. In this field test, we used the GPS data ofabout 10,000 taxies as probe car data.

In the present paper, the system architecture is introduced in section II, the evaluation and result is described in section III, and section IV is the conclusion.



II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE  In the project, the traffic information central system includes the taxi dispatching system collecting GPS data, the traffic information processing system processing probe car data in telecommunication carrier, and the traffic information distribution system with web and WAP portal in map provider.

The structure of the traffic information system is illustrated in figure 2. About 10000 taxies uplink GPS data to the data base frequently through GPRS network. The taxi dispatching system transmits the data to the traffic information processing system. The probe car information processing system calculates travel time on road links, generates congestion level, and provides traffic information in tables to traffic information distribution system. Through web and WAP, user can receive real-time traffic information.

Traffic Information Processing System  Information Distribution System  Taxi Dispatching System  Figure 2 Architecture of traffic information system  Year  Unit: 10,000   2oo01d------------..~  1 0   2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011  Figure 1 China navigation market survey  150nlt---------------~     Start field test  Choose test time and route  Figure 3 Evaluation process  The error rate of link travel time weighted by link length is calculated by the formula:  Error rate .weighted='" E.rro:Rate XLi /L Li Where Li IS the lengt~fhnk 1.

The error rate weighted by link length can reflect the  travel time error better than error rate without weights.

Due to the large volume of test data, we only disclose one  part of result in table 1.

From the table, we can see the average error rate of link  travel time is less than 20%.

By comparing with the error rate of other cities like  Beijing (around 15%), Tokyo (around 10%), such result is basically acceptable for business. It proves that the probe car system can run well in Shenyang city.

Record total driving distance when test is finished  Extract calculated travel time from probe car system outputs  Check congestion level and coverage on web/WAP  Compare real and calculated travel time  Publish test course and time to probe car system provider  When car arrives one intersection, do: 1. Record current time 2. If the traffic light is red,  record waiting time 3. If the traffic light is green,  only do 1  When car departures, do: 1. Record date, weather 2. Add gas fully 3. Record driving distance in  trip meter, and departure time  Repeat when car arrives an  intersection  A. Taxi dispatching system The taxi dispatching system includes about 20000 taxies  in Shenyang, which are equipped with GPS units and wireless communication units (GPRS), frequently sending the GPS data, taxi number and other data to the data base of taxi dispatching system. The time interval of each taxi GPS location recording is 30 seconds to 1 minute, which is depending on the settings of system.

In the field test, we used about 10,000 taxi data as probe data for calculation of traffic information on line.

B. Traffic information processing system The traffic information processing system receives the  probe car data from taxi dispatching system in real time, and stores it in Data Base (DB).

The probe car information process server picks the data from DB, matches the raw GPS data onto the suitable road links in digital map, estimates the trace of probe car on map, calculates the average travel time on each road link, judges the congestion level based on the average speed on road link, and outputs the traffic information to traffic information distribution system.

C. Traffic iriformation distribution system The traffic information distribution system is actually a  GIS engine platform of map provider, which can read traffic information from traffic information processing system, and display it on web and WAP portals.

In the portals, user can find the real-time congestion status in real time, and read current average travel time on main roads.



III. EVALUATION AND RESULT  After setting up the central system in telecommunication carrier, we started the field test to evaluate the accuracy of the output ofprobe car system, i.e., travel time on roads. The filed test was scheduled in one week.

The test car was driven on main roads in Shenyang from morning rush hour to evening rush hour. The test routes and time were selected randomly each day by customer. After recording the real travel time, the calculated travel time from probe car system is extracted from output data and delivered to an independent third party to evaluate.

At the same time, the traffic information of whole city was shown in the web and WAP portals to customers. The congestion level and travel time were displayed and refreshed frequently.

The evaluation process is illustrated in figure 3.

Based on the plan above, we carried out the test for 5 days  in one week, and calculated error of travel time on test routes after collecting all test data.

The error rate of link travel time is calculated by the formula below:  Errorrate=ITc - Tt IITt Where Tc is calculated travel time, and Tt is true travel  time recorded.

Table I Travel time error rate  No. Road Name True Cal. Error Link Error *  Travel Travel Rate Length Link  Time Time (m) Length  (min.) (min.)  1 NanWuMaLu o(start 0 0 0 0 *NaJingBeiJie point)  2 NanWuMaLu 1.28 1.47 0.14 442.5 63.21  *TaiYuanNanJie  3 NanWuMaLu 2.57 1.53 0.40 434.9 175.09  *ShengLiNanJie  4 JianSheZhongLu 4.60 4.70 0.02 1855.1 40.33  *XingHuaBeiJie  5 JianSheZhongLu 3.22 2.98 0.07 1403 101.77  *BaoGongBeiJie  6 BaoGongBeiJie 2.83 2.50 0.12 1470.9 173.05  *BeiErZhongLu  7 BaoGongBeiJie 1.20 0.85 0.29 859.8 250.78  *BeiYiZhongLu  Total length of test road links (m) 6466.2  Average travel time error rate 0.17  Average travel time error rate with link length weight 0.12  Besides the link travel time accuracy, we also analyzed the coverage of traffic information on road links, in the central area in Shenyang city where the field test was carried out.

Table 2 Coverage rate in central area  No. Road link type Road link Road link Coverage rate  number length (km) by length  1 Highway 28 24.28 1.940/0  2 Main road 3138 531.91 88.260/0  3 Other road 473 56.36 58.130/0  4 All roads 3639 612.55 82.07%  By comparing with the coverage rate of real-time traffic information service in other cities like Beijing (around 75%), it is acceptable for business too.

Furthermore, if we introduce the traffic prediction technology into the traffic information center, the accuracy and coverage of traffic information can be improved at least 10% more based on our experience in Beijing before.

After the evaluation on traffic information accuracy, we also tested the application on traffic information distribution on web and WAP portals. The main purpose is to test the interfaces and GUI of the systems, which is also critical for real business in future.

As shown in figure 4 and figure 5, the traffic level (there are 3 levels: free, slow, jam), and travel time on main roads (provided in tables) can be viewed in real time via Internet by PC and mobile phone users.

lti_ =:: ~~~::~ ,.111.. all. JtlII1I't:Ii ," 3.1II"_.~. OOT'tid __? .... ItS $lI:;;l:llII._ UXllS _ 091  ' .. - -,,-.~ _ itW 9"" *-_ 1'!'3 2C'i

I.~_ 1titII II Xliii ~_ +.. I'" I B3 l2:tllll +1M lift ":tllll fiB ??*_ .,' .. ::tllll ..... :so ...I.lili.. ~t:;to__ ...fiJlll_~ I'ti. ~ ...

1 _ItI~ ,,. ," I X.. lIJ:U ZIl f!lIM U<Pa :11:::.- %In. =<111 It-.. '".. __ '0-" lI..a Z3 Mtlf ..

_..'-- - _-  Figure 4 Web portal  Figure 5 WAP portal

IV. CONCLUSION  In the research on probe car system in Shenyang, we realize a traffic information system based on probe cars, which collects traffic data from about 10000 taxies, processes the traffic information in center, and distributes it to users through website and mobile phones. The evaluation of the system was carried out in 2008, and it was approved feasible for real time traffic information service. In the further research, we will continue the research on the scalability of large-scale probe car system by using distributed system and introduce traffic prediction technologies into the center.

