Optimal Pumping Schedule and Salinity Control in a Coastal Aquifer:

Abstract Proper management of coastal wells is important in  order to satisfy demand, minimize costs, control salinity increase, and ultimately to define water resource strategies which are both economically and environmentally sustainable.

The optimal pumping schedule for a coastal well has been defined by a decision model that minimizes desalination and pumping costs, while taking into account the aquifer salinity levels near the well. The state equations are embedded as constraints in the optimization problem. Pumping is related to salinity via empirical response curves, through data collected in experimental campaigns. The decision model is defined as a multi-stage optimal control problem, which can be solved by applying dynamic programming. The architecture of a Decision Support System (DSS) for real time implementation in order to minimize costs and salinity increase is reported. A case study is presented with application to a well positioned at Kuki?o (Hawai?i Island, Hawai?i, USA).

1. Introduction   Efficient management of coastal water resources is important to satisfy demand, to maintain supplies, and to sustain associated terrestrial and marine ecosystems [1], [2]. In coastal zones, where the intensive extraction of groundwater may upset the balance between freshwater and saltwater potentials, water resource managers need to satisfy demand while limiting seawater intrusion and saltwater upconing.

Seawater intrusion and the related phenomena of saltwater upconing occur when a well, or a set of wells, is pumped so that saline water is drawn into the well's capture zone, thus degrading water quality and useable value. Together with recharge, these water quality problems are often the limiting factors to pumping yield in coastal aquifers. The options if a well becomes saline are: (a) to decrease or stop the rate of pumping to allow water quality recovery, for a period which can be on the order of decades to centuries in low permeability aquifers; (b) to desalt via a treatment process such as reverse osmosis; or (c) to abandon the well. Economic and socio-political costs need to be included in any practical model of groundwater management. The challenge is given by the necessity of incorporating both the hydrology and the economics into a realistic, practical and tractable optimization framework. Many excellent models and methodologies for coastal aquifer management exist in the literature.

In [3], the optimal annual operation of a coastal aquifer is determined with a multiple objective linear programming approach based on a multi-cell model of the aquifer, where the decision variables are pumping and/or recharge quantities in each cell.

In [4] the non-linear finite-difference form of the steady-state density-dependent miscible flow and salt transport model for seawater intrusion is used, embedding it within the constraints of the management model. The use of embedding techniques for saltwater intrusion management models has several limitations for large-scale management models. An alternative approach to the incorporation of the simulation model in the management model is the linked simulation- optimization approach [5], using an Artificial Neural Network Approximation linked to a Genetic      Algorithm-based optimization model. However, the performance of this approach is highly dependent on the performance of the saltwater intrusion simulation model, as repetitive simulations are required to achieve an optimal management strategy. The computational time can be reduced through parallel computing, or by some approximation of the simulation model.

As regards upconing phenomena in coastal aquifers, an increase in pumped water salinity is related to the movement of the transition zone of the saltwater interface towards the pumping well. An excellent survey is given by [6]. Of special note and relevance to the present paper is [7], in which a very interesting model of upconing and rebound is described. This work well presents the mechanisms of flow and salt transport for upconing phenomena, the decay/rebound after shut-off of the salinized well, and the effects of parameters on flow and transport processes. A physically-based model is used to derive different curves for upconing effects in case of pumping and well shut-off. Attention is paid to finding pumping policies that may increase the efficiency of freshwater pumping from the aquifer.

In this paper, the curves for well pumping and shut- off/rebound are derived from experimental campaigns.

The curves are used to define a state equation for the concentration behavior as a function of a binary control variable that makes the system switch between the two modes of salinity increase/decrease. The aim of this paper is to present a dynamic decision model able to define the optimal pumping trajectories for a coastal, brackish water well that minimizes desalination and pumping costs while dynamically keeping track of salinity levels in the well. The possibility of turning on/off the pump has led to the definition of a binary control variable that indicates when the well is turned off or on.

Due to the suitable data obtained during the experimental campaign at Kuki?o, Hawai?i [8], unlike most published models on coastal well optimization, pumping is related to salinity via empirical response curves. The pumping curve, which is site-specific and flowrate-specific, is determined by the fitting of data collected for the case study and is used to describe the salinity increase when the binary control variable is set equal to 1. When the binary variable switches to 0 (i.e., there is no pumping in a specific time interval) the rebound curve (obtained in the same way as the pumping curve during the field experiment) is used to describe the salinity decrease. Then, a discrete-time state equation for salinity concentration in the pumped water can be written, taking into account the effect of a binary switching control variable, on the basis of the curves that describe pumping and rebound behavior for the aquifer. An additional state equation has to be  defined in order to represent the dynamics of the cumulative pumped water up to the considered time instant. The performance index to be minimized consists in a weighted sum of economic costs, salt concentration at the end of the time horizon, and water demand dissatisfaction.

The optimization problem is non-linear with continuous state variables and binary control variables that allow the switching between two different behaviors of the environmental system.

In this paper, a control-oriented approach is adopted for the case of coastal aquifers affected by saltwater intrusion and upconing phenomena, and feedback strategies are sought. To this end, the application of dynamic programming allows for definition of a procedure to facilitate on-line determination of the optimal control action as a function of the current state.

For the considered case study, the computational requirements of such a procedure are shown to be compatible with a real-time application.

2. The system model   The considered system consists of a single coastal pumping well whose hourly pumping schedule shall be defined, taking into account that a daily water demand should be fulfilled and salinity of the well minimized.

Time is discretized, being the length of the unit time interval equal to one hour. An optimization horizon of N=24 hours is considered because of the daily water demand that has to be satisfied. A binary control variable, ku , is defined equal to 1 in case the pump is on during the k-th hour interval (k=0,?,N-1), and 0 otherwise. Two state equations must be written: the cumulative pumped water state equation and the concentration state equation.

2.1 Cumulative pumped water state equation   A state equation is needed to define the cumulative  amount of water pumped over the daily time horizon.

This is critical to the cost function, which weights the deviation of the overall pumped water from the daily water demand.

The equation is complicated by the fact that the brackish water has to be desalted prior to use.  Due to inefficiencies in the treatment (reverse osmosis) process, the higher the pumped water salinity is the greater the losses of water volume due to the treatment process. This "by-pass inefficiency" effects an increase in the amount of total water pumped with respect to the actual water demand.  That is, the pumped water useful to satisfy the daily water demand decreases as the salinity increases. This may be modelled by assuming      that the overall (useful) pumped water, at each hour k, is reduced (with respect to the actually pumped water)  by a factor C  C E k~ , where E is a dimensionless  parameter, kC  is the state variable (concentration at  time k), and C~  is a fixed reference concentration1. The reference concentration is site specific and it is typically set at the maximum salinity that would be expected to encounter at the site. The values of such parameters are such that, for any possible value of Ck,  the factor C C  E k~  is less than or equal to 1. Thus, the  following equation can be used in order to represent the dynamics of Pk+1    n C  C EQuPP kkkk ?+=+ ~11        k=0,?,N-1          (1)   where kP  is the cumulative pumped water at time k  [m3], Q is the well pumping rate [m3s-1], n is the number of seconds in a hour, and P0=0.

2.2 Concentration state equation   To introduce the second state equation, it is necessary to characterize the system behaviour. This characterization is not based, in the present paper, on a physically-based model, but on two experimentally obtained functions (hereinafter referred to as pumping and rebound curves). These functions result from the interpolation of the data gathered during observation campaigns at the considered site. The curves obtained represent the behaviour of the salt concentration at the considered site, when the well is subject to a constant control, i.e., pumping ( 1=ku ) or rebound ( 0=ku ), k = 0, 1, 2?. From these empirical functions, both the increment, )(1 kCf , and the decrement, )(2 kCf , of the salt concentration can be obtained during the k-th time interval (e.g. one hour in the case study) when the pump is on or off, respectively. Note that this increment (or decrement) is in any case a function of the current concentration Ck. Hence, the second state equation may be written as   ( )kkkkkk uCfuCfCC ??+=+ 1)()( 211   1 Permeate/System recovery rate is affected by many factors such  as membrane performance, temperature, and feed pressure. These factors affect energy consumption and hence system economics. The formulation presented here simplifies what is a complicated optimization problem in itself.  For more background on these processes see, for instance, www.membranes.com.

k=0,?,N-1                                  (2)   Based on the empirical curves generated at Kuki?o  and curves noted in work such as [7], a function to represent the increase in salt concentration over continuous time ? , i.e. the pumping curve, is defined as,  ? ?  ? +  +== p  p  b  a sgC 0)(                                          (3)  where 0s , pb , pa  are parameters that result from an experimental data fitting, and s0 is the salinity at the beginning of the data campaign. From this curve, one can obtain the inverse function  kp  ppk k Cas  bsbC Cg  ?+ ?  == ?  01 )(? . On this basis, the  concentration increment )(1 kCf  during a unit time interval in the pumping mode, can be written as  k kp  kp  kk  k  C Cgb  Cga s  CggCgg  Cf  ? ++  + +  =?+  =  ?  ?  ??  1)(  )1)((  ))(()1)((  )(      (4)  and, using the expression of )(1 kCg ? , as  k k  k k CCba  Cde Cf ?  + +  =  1 )(                                     (5)  where: 01 saaba ppp ++= ; 11 ?=b ; 01 saabd ppp ??= ;  001 2 pp assae ++= .

Similar considerations can be made as regards the term )(2 kCf . In fact, the rebound curve can be represented as  ? ?  + +==  R  RR b  ba shC 0')(                                          (6)  where 0's , Rb , Ra  are parameters that result from experimental data fitting.

From this curve, one can obtain the inverse function  )(1 kCh ?=? , namely R  k  RR k bsC  ba Ch ?  ? =?   '  )( .

Thus, )(2 kCf  can be written as  ) 1)(  '(  )1)(())(()(    ++ +?  =+?=  ?  ??  kR  R k  kkk  Chb  ab sC  ChhChhCf (7)  and, using the expression of )(1 kCh ? , as      k  k kk Cba  Cde CCf   2 )( +  + ?=          k=0,?,N-1       (8)  where  02 'saba RR ?= ; 12 =b ; 02 'sabd RR += ;  02 'se ?= .

In this way, having expressed )(1 kCf  and )(2 kCf  as in equation (5) and (8), respectively, the state equation (2) is completely specified.

3. The optimization problem   The performance index to be minimized is the weighted sum of three contributions: pumping and desalination costs, final salt concentration, and (quadratic) deviation of the overall actual available water with respect to the total water demand.

The first contribution is relevant to the energy cost to pump water from depth and the additional energy cost to desalinate. Energy cost for pumping depends on the specific energy schedule, pumping rate, and depth to the water table. Desalination energy cost depends primarily on the pressure needed to drive the reverse osmosis process, which, in turn, depends on the salinity of pumped water. Moreover, due to the treatment plant inefficiency, a larger gross volume of salty water (as opposed to freshwater) needs to be pumped to meet the water demand. Energy is needed in the treatment plant process (Reverse Osmosis (RO)) to provide additional pressure to force salty water through the RO membrane. This additional desalination pressure may be equated to a depth of water.

Thus, on the whole, the first contribution can be expressed as  ( ) k N  k k uC  ?  = +   ??                                                    (9)   where:  ? ? [$/(hr ppT)] and ? [$/hr] are parameters depending on unit costs for energy, pumping rate, and technical characteristics of the desalination plant (for further details on the structure of these parameters, see [8]);  ? kC  is the salt concentration at the beginning of the k-th hour;  ? ku  is the binary control variable indicating whether the pump is on ( 1=ku ) or off ( 0=ku ) within the time interval (k, k+1).

The second contribution is simply proportional to the pollutant concentration at the end of the time horizon N, CN.

Finally, the last term is proportional to the quadratic difference between the (useful) pumped water at the  end of the time horizon, PN  [m3], and the water demand over the overall time horizon, QTOT [m3], that is, ( )2TOTN QP ? .

Thus, the overall objective function (to be minimized) is  ( ) ( )2  TOTNNk  N  k k QPCuCJ ?+++=  ?  = ????       (10)  where ?  and ?  are specific dimensionless weighting coefficients. The minimization in (10) has to be carried out with respect to the binary control variables,  1,..., ?No uu , and to the continuous state variables, Ck, Pk, k=1,?,N, starting from the initial conditions 0C and 00 =P , and taking into account the dynamic constraints (1) and (2), and the expressions (5) and (8).

One can consider the minimization of (10), subject to constraints (1), (2), (5), (8) as a non-linear mathematical programming problem, with continuous and binary decision variables. Alternatively, if one assumes to make use of on-line measurements of the state variables, it is possible to consider such a problem as an optimal control problem, and to approach it by dynamic programming, in order to find optimal closed- loop control strategies.

4. A general optimal switching control problem   The objective of the problem is to perform the following minimization  )(),(),...,,(min  100,..., 10  N  N  t fttNuu  xhuxhuuxJ N  ?  = ? +=  ?   (11) under the constraints   ),(1 ttt uxfx =+       t=0, 1, ?, N-1                    (12)  { }1,0?tu    t=0, 1, ?, N-1                                    (13) 00 Xx =  (fixed)                                                  (14)   where ),( tt uxh , )( Nf xh , and ),( tt uxf  are given  functions (that, in this specific case, correspond to equation (10)). The state vector is nt Rx ? , for any  0?t , where n is a given integer.

Solution of the problem The problem of determining the optimal control  actions 0u ,?, 1?Nu  can be viewed as the problem of      finding the optimum path from the initial state 0x , to a final state Nx , in a directed graph, characterized by the fact that every node (apart from the terminal ones) has exactly two outgoing links.

The optimum sequence of decisions can be found either by solving a (binary) optimization problem by a general mathematical programming problem solver, or by applying the dynamic programming algorithm. The second approach is advantageous, since:  a) no continuous decision variable is dealt with, b) the special structure of the problem is exploited.

The application of dynamic programming allows finding optimal control actions at each node, and thus the overall optimum path.

However, in presence of un-modelled system dynamics and/or stochastic disturbances affecting the system behaviour, the optimization objective should be that of determining (optimal) closed-loop control strategies instead of (optimal) control actions.

5. The architecture of a DSS for coastal wells optimal pumping schedule   The models described in the previous sections are integrated into a DSS that can be used to schedule the optimal pumping pattern for coastal wells and to control salinity increase. A graphical interface (developed in MS Visual Basic 6.0) can be used to modify the parameters and the settings of the optimization problem (time horizon, initial states, weights, parameters for the equations, etc.), to run the optimization procedure, and to display the results.

Specifically, the DSS is characterized by three main modules: a database, in which are stored all parameters for the pumping and rebound curves, unit costs, pumping rate, optimization horizon; an optimization module that includes the objective function and the optimization procedure; a simulation module, in which the system state equations are expressed as a function of the control variables. The DSS can be flexible to the different exigencies of the users. In particular, it can be used for real time implementation. In fact, the overall optimization problem has a running time that is much less than the time interval (running time: few minutes, time interval: one hour). Then, each step has an optimization procedure based on dynamic programming that takes to the final stage and that is expressed as a function of the current state variables (concentration, pumped water).

Thus, the DSS can be used to: ? daily schedule the pumping pattern on the basis of  the initial state conditions;  ? compare the predicted (by the system models) and the observed state variables;  ? hourly schedule the pumping pattern on the basis of the specific stage and of the initial values of the state variables (predicted and/or observed);  ? perform a simulation scenario, running the optimization for the desired number of days.

6. Application to a case study   The considered case study is relevant to the area of Kuki?o, North Kona, Hawai?i. The empirical pumping and rebound curves used to build the concentration state equation have been calculated for the study site on the basis of real data collection.

Shallow basal wells are a large component of potable water supply along the Kona coastline, but, due to the area's unique and highly hydraulically conductive hydrogeology, the basal lens is thin with a relatively thick transition zone. Basal heads range from 0.1 to 2.5 m, with some coastal wells being brackish (>200 ppm) even under virgin condition, even though they may be located kilometres inland [9].

Such conditions exist at the three irrigation wells pumped for the study. Initial heads at these three wells average 0.43 m and initial chlorides average 525 ppm.

All three wells are located at about the 183 m elevation contour and are drilled through young, basaltic rock to approximately 6.1 m below sea level.  The 125 HP U.S. Motors pumps are set at sea-level and generate 2.955 m3/day (540 gpm).

The developers conducted controlled pumping and rebound tests on these wells during January and February 2002. The site's unique hydrogeology provided the opportunity to obtain curves of salinity stress and rebound in a short amount of time.

For the specific field site (and a pumping rate of 122.4 m3h-1) it was found that salinity rises fairly quickly for the first 24 hours of pumping, but plateaus at about 3.2 ppT after only about 72 hours. For the longest test the pump was on continuously for 7 days and then the pump was turned off and the basal lens allowed to rebound for 7 days. Successful rebound back to initial conditions was achieved in only a week's time. Such quick rebound is surely a result of the region's very high hydraulic conductivity and regional recharge conditions. The fact that the Kuki?o well salinity asymptotically approaches a "stable" salinity level is supported by Zhou and Bear [7], who note, on the basis of their numerical model, "local upconing occurs only for low iso-salinity surfaces, while those of high salt concentration remain stable after a short time". Differently from the Kuki?o in situ experiments, Zhou and Bear observe very long times (~ decades) for      salinity decay back to initial conditions in their upconing model. However, Bear et al.(2001) find in their model of saltwater intrusion that the decay process may be reversible when the model includes regional flow to the sea, as obviously exists at the field site of Kuki?o.

The experimental methods used at Kuki?o may not be appropriate in low permeability porous media if the well being tested is needed to meet potable demand.

The quality of one's well could be seriously impaired for a long-period of time. This optimal management methodology is most applicable to high-conductivity aquifers, or to management situations with long-term data and/or reliable models of salinization and rebound.

The pumping and rebound curves have been obtained via a fitting with hyperbolic-type curves.

Figure 1 shows collected data for field pumping rate (Q = 0.034 m3s-1) together with the empirical curves that have been used in this work. Multi-parameter exponential/logarithmic curves have also been found to fit as well. However, the shape of the fitted model is not a matter for the model methodology presented, as it can be easily changed in the proposed approach.

Figure 1: Experimental data and fitted pumping and rebound curves for Kuki?o pump tests, Jan. 2002 (field pumping rate,  Q = 0.034 m3s-1).

As such, pumping and rebound are fit with the two- parameter hyperbolic curves, reported in equations (3) and (6), respectively.

The parameter values reported in Table 1 are found for a pumping rate of Q = 0.034 m3s-1.

Table 1: Parameters? values for the pumping and  rebound curves.

Q=0.034  Pumping Curve  Q=0 Rebound Curve  00 'ss =  2.1 2.1  Pa  1.1 -  Ra  - 1.1  Pb  2.5 -  Rb  - 8   It is assumed that the pumping well rebounds along  a single trajectory regardless of the well salinity when the pump is switched off. This is justified on the basis of field results. The well has been turned off at various levels of salinization to test rebound curve sensitivity to initial point of rebound, and in all cases it rebounded along almost identical trajectories. This assumption may be incorrect if critical upconing conditions are encountered and/or at high pumping rates, and this is a subject in need of further experimentation.

Obviously, the approach based on the use of the empirical response curves should be adopted only in study sites where these equations are available or can be obtained. For the case presented in this article, robust, real datasets are used to find a response curve.

Most places do not have such nice curves that represent reality, so, in these cases, it is necessary to use approximate models. In some cases it would be possible to find model-generated response curves for use in the optimization model framework presented here. Zhou et al. [7] is an example of a sophisticated flow and transport model that generates excellent response curves.

As regards the objective function (10), it is important to note that the parameters ?  and ?  should be calculated on the basis of the pumping rates, the unit costs, and other parameters that depend on the study site. Specifically,  EelCKQh=?  EKQC??= 64.08.7? where elh  is pump lift or depth to water table [m],  Q  is water that can be pumped by the well [m3/s],  EC  represents energy unit costs for the energy schedule in $/KWH, and K is a conversion factor equal to 14 KWH/(hr m4/s). Energy price depends on ones daily use schedule; for Kona, Hawai?i (in 2002) this is $0.13 for 10 hours or less, $0.19 for 13 - 20 hours, and $0.21 for 21-24 hours of use.

It is important to note that energy is needed in the RO process to provide additional pressure to force salty water through the RO membrane. This additional desalinisation pressure may be easily equated to a depth of water  t RO CP ??= 64.08.7  where ROP  is in meters and salinity tC  is salinity  at time t in ppT. In addition, a RO treatment plant has an associated inefficiency that necessitates additional      pumping to make up for by-pass water lost in the RO process.

The optimization problem has been solved for an optimization horizon of 24 hours and a time interval of one hour, using the initial conditions 1.20 =C  and  00 =P  for concentration and pumped water, respectively.  The values of the weighting factors ? and ?  are chosen to be equal to 106 and 105, respectively. Finally, as regards the parameters in equation (1), the following values have been set:  =n 3600, =C~  15, and =E 0.35.

The model has been applied to three levels of daily  water demand, based on consumption at the study site: ? Scenario 1 (high demand): TOTQ = 1600  m3/d, =EC  0.19 ? Scenario 2 (medium demand): TOTQ =700  m3/d, =EC  0.13 ? Scenario 3 (low demand): TOTQ  = 200 m  3/d, =EC  0.13.

The optimal results (obtained via the application of the computational structure described in the previous section) for pumping pattern, salinity concentration and pumped water are reported in Figures 2, 3, and 4, respectively. The main difference among the three Scenarios is that for the ?medium demand? (Scenario 2), the pumping schedule is divided during the day and not all water is pumped in the first hours. This is an important result because it states that the pumping strategies, in order to minimize costs and control salinity in coastal pumping wells, are not easily determined during the considered optimization horizon.

Pumping pattern    1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23  hour s  u_1600   Figure 2a: The optimal value of the control variables  (pumping pattern) in the case of nominal pumping rate and Scenario 1, 1600=TOTQ .

Pumping pattern    1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23  hour s  u_700   Figure 2b: The optimal value of the control variables  (pumping pattern) in the case of nominal pumping rate and Scenario 2, 700=TOTQ .

Pumping  p at t ern    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24  hour s  u_200  Figure 2c: The optimal value of the control variables (pumping pattern) in the case of nominal pumping rate and  Scenario 3, 200=TOTQ .

Salinit y concent rat ion   1.5   0 5 10 15 20 25  hour s  C_1600  C_700  C_200   Figure 3: The optimal value of the salt concentration  (pumping pattern) in the case of nominal pumping rate and the different Scenarios (Scenario 1: 1600=TOTQ ;  Scenario 2: 700=TOTQ ; Scenario 3: 200=TOTQ ).

Pump ed wat er    0 5 10 15 20 25  hour s  P_1600  P_700  P_200   Figure 4: The optimal value of the pumped water in the case  of nominal pumping rate and the different Scenarios (Scenario 1: 1600=TOTQ ; Scenario 2: 700=TOTQ ;  Scenario 3: 200=TOTQ ).

In particular, to obtain the presented results, the procedure has been applied for each k-th step, using, as initial values of the state variables (for each step), the predictions obtained by applying the optimal control action at the previous step, k-1, and the state equations (1)-(2). The computational time decreases as k grows.

For the first step (i.e., k = 1, and initial conditions,  1.20 =C  and  00 =P ), the computational time is 3?45??, while for the second and the third is less than two minutes and one minute, respectively. After that, the computation effort decreases from less than 30 seconds, for the fourth step, to less than one second for the last step.

In any case, the computational time is negligible as regards the time interval (one hour). Thus, the procedure can be used for on-line implementation.

7. Conclusion and future developments   Environmental systems planning and management is a complex task because of the different aspects to be taken into account and because of the necessity of integrating physical/chemical models into decision models. Finding the appropriate problem formalization to support these actions, solving the optimization problem efficiently,and providing for the possibility to update the information and the model itself, are key- points for complex systems managers. In coastal aquifers where seawater intrusion occurs, the challenge is given by the necessity of incorporating both the hydrology and the economics into a realistic, practical and tractable optimization framework. This entails simplifying complicated partial differential equations and embedding the relevant economics, while maintaining the model's reliability and physical- economic validity.

The different models (chemical, physical, economic, etc.) can be integrated in a DSS. DSSs are considered  effective tools for the environmental planning and management of natural resources (Matthies et al. [10]).

This approach should help to define economically and environmentally sustainable strategies for the use of water resources. While other system physical/chemical models may represent the interaction between control variables (i.e., extracted water, in this case) and the hydraulic head and/or the concentration levels, optimization models like the one presented here are able to define optimal strategies on the basis of the different objectives to be achieved (minimization of economic costs due to pumping and desalinization, groundwater salinity concentration, water demand dissatisfaction) in order to minimize costs and to preserve the resource.

The aim of this paper is to present a dynamic decision model to define the optimal pumping trajectories for a coastal, brackish water well that minimizes desalination and pumping costs while dynamically keeping track of salinity levels in the well.

The possibility of turning on/off a pump has led to the definition of a binary control variable that indicates when the well is turned off or on. Pumping is related to salinity empirically, with actual pumping and rebound curves derived from on-site pump tests at Kuki'o, Hawai'i. When the binary variable switches to 0 (i.e., there is no pumping in a specific time interval) the rebound curve (obtained in the same way as the pumping curve) is used to describe the salinity decrease. A discrete-time state equation for salinity concentration in the pumped water can be written, taking into account the effect of a binary switching control variable, on the basis of the curves that describe pumping and rebound behavior for the aquifer. An additional state equation has to be written in order to represent the dynamics of the cumulative pumped water up to the considered time instant. The performance index to be minimized consists in a weighted sum of different objectives: economic costs, salt concentration at the end of the time horizon, and daily water demand dissatisfaction.

Unlike most published models on coastal well optimization, pumping is related to salinity via empirical response curves based on real datasets.

However, when these curves can not be found from real data, the approach is to find model-generated response curves in the optimization model. Zhou et al.

[7] is an example of a complex numerical model that generates response curves.

The approach used in this paper to determine a closed-loop control scheme makes use, at each step, of a procedure based on dynamic programming to find the optimal control action. The computational requirements of such a procedure are exponentially dependent on the length of the control horizon (i.e., on      the number of steps). The advantage of applying dynamic programming instead of standard mathematical programming tools is twofold. First, the special structure of the optimization problem is effectively exploited. Second, no continuous-valued variable has to be taken into account. The computational requirements of the proposed approach have been experimentally evaluated in connection with a real case study, and have been proven to be compatible with a real-time implementation of the procedure.

Future developments may regard the comparison of results with the use of empirical curves based on complex upconing models (such as the one formulated by Zhou et al. [7]) and the expansion of these models to more wells that influence each other. As regards the proposed methodology, future development may include a generalization of the formalization of the optimal control strategy to more binary variables for each stage, more state equations about the setting time needed by the pump when it is turned on-off, and integer variables instead of binary variables. Then, future developments of the presented DSS regard the definition of an ?Identification module? in which the information as regards predicted concentration, pumping pattern, observed data can be used to identify models for the system state equations and to update the parameters. Finally, further aspects that can be added include a sensitivity analysis performed by varying the weight?s coefficients in the objective function, and the use of other multi-objective approaches.

8. Acknowledgments  The authors would like to thank Steve Bowles and Waimea Water Services Inc. that facilitated the in situ pumping tests, and Holly Michael of MIT for the help with the field work.

9. References  [1] Postel S. Pillar of Sand: Can the irrigation miracle last?

W.W. Norton and Co.: New York, 1999.

[2] Bear J, Cheng AH-D, Sorek S, Ouazar D, Herrera I.

Seawater Intrusion in Coastal Aquifers- Concepts, Methods and Practices. Springer; 1999, p.640.

[3] Shamir U, Bear J. Optimal Annual Operation of a Coastal Aquifer. Water Resources Research 1984; 20(4): 435-444.

[4] Das A, Datta B. Development of management models for sustainable use of coastal aquifers. Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering 1999; 125(3): 112-121.

[5] Bhattacharjya R, Datta B. Optimal management of coastal aquifers using linked simulation optimization approach.

Water resources management 2005; 19: 295-320.

[6] Bear J, Zhou Q, Bensabat J. Three dimensional simulation of seawater intrusion in heterogeneous aquifers: application to the coastal aquifer of Israel, in:Proceedings of Coastal Aquifers-Monitoring, Modeling, and Management, Essaouira, Morocco, April 23?25, 2001.

[7] Zhou Q, Bear J, Bensabat J. Saltwater upconing and decay beneath a well pumping above an interface zone.

Transport in Porous Media 2005; 61: 337 ? 363.

[8] Duarte TK, Robba M, Harvey CF. Hydrologic-Economic Optimization of a Brackish Coastal Pumping Well.

Proceedings of  iEMSs2004 Congress, Osnabr?ck, Germany, June 14-17, 2004.

[9] Bauer G. A study of the ground-water conditions in North and South Kona and South Kohala Districts, Island of Hawai?i, 1991-2002. State of Hawai?i, Department of Land and Natural Resources 2003; PR-2003-01.

[10] Matthies, M., Giupponi, C., Ostendorf, B.

Environmental decision support systems; current issues, methods and tools. Environmental modelling and software 2007; 22:  123-127.

