Diversity as a Knowledge Resource in Top Management Teams ?

Abstract The current paper reveals and explains  inconsistencies in cognitive diversity research  regarding diversity effects on top management team  information processing as a presumption for team  performance. On the one hand diversity constitutes  a resource by enlarging the knowledge-pool of the  team and therefore potentially contributes to team  and organisational performance. On the other hand  diversity can act as a barrier and hinder access to  the knowledge. The paper refers to limitations of  empirical research designs and discusses different  simulation approaches as alternative research  methods. Following the first steps of a roadmap for  using simulation given by Davis et al. (2007) a  framework, comprising relevant moderator and  mediator variables of the team diversity ?  information processing relationship, is identified.

Finally agent based simulation is acknowledged as  method to clarify the team diversity ? team  performance relationship in future research and  further steps of the roadmap are outlined.

1. Introduction  Striving for market success, organizations try to  establish heterogeneous top management teams  (TMTs) more than ever, enhancing diversity in  terms of age, educational background,  socioeconomic background and functional  experience [20, 32, 46]. According to the upper  echelon perspective TMT characteristics like  values, experiences and personalities influence  TMT interpretations of the strategic situations they  face which in turn affect social and psychological  processes of the team [19]. These again take  influence on team information processing which  can be defined as the way teams reflect, perceive,  interpret, store, retrieve, transmit and use  information [2]. This again is crucial for TMT  performance and therefore for the performance of  the organization, e.g. for strategy innovations [19].

Hence TMTs can be regarded as the aggregate  informational and decisional entity through which  competitive moves are made, TMT characteristics  are a matter of particular interest in diversity  research [20]. The great promise of diversity is an  increased knowledge pool, leading e.g. to an  extensive range of perspectives and thus potentially  enhancing team performace [25, 36]. But still there  are several risks associated with diversity, e.g.

conflict. Delivering ambiguous results, numerous  empirical studies focus on the link between TMT  diversity and information processing [25, 27, 31,  32] considering information processing as a  presumption for team performance or strategic firm  performance. Therefore diversity potentially  constitutes a resource, providing an enlarged  knowledge pool to a team. But still there are no  definite implications for how to benefit from this  knowledge resource, respectively how to manage a  diverse team successfully.

The current paper suggests to clarify the  contradictory diversity debate by applying a  simulation model. Following the first steps of a  roadmap for using simulation given by Davis et al.

(2007) a framework comprising relevant moderator  and mediator variables is identified and different  simulation approaches are discussed. The current  paper is organized as follows:  In section 2 basic concepts of diversity, in  particular cognitive diversity that accounts for  differences in information processing, and diversity  effects are introduced. The occurrence of  contradictory findings in empirical diversity  research calls for a closer look at potential reasons  for the inconsistencies in section 3. Consequently a  simulation approach is considered as alternative  research method in section 4.1. Following the first  steps of the simulation roadmap by Davis et al.

(2007) a comprehensive literature review on  empirical research in cognitive TMT diversity is  provided in section 4.2. Comprising the relevant  moderator and mediator variables, a framework for  modeling the complex relationship between  diversity and information processing is developed.

Reviewing state of the art technical literature on  simulation methods in section 4.3 reveals agent  based simulation as the appropriate approach for  modelling team diversity and information  processing, for which two examplary computational  representations from the literature are described. In  Section 5 we summarize and discuss our findings  from the first steps towards simulation-based  research in the diversity debate and outline the next  steps.

2. Theoretical Concepts and  Background  2.1 Top Management Team Cognitive  Diversity  In former research various definitions and  categories of diversity have been utilised. For  instance Simons, Pelled, and Smith (1999)  distinguish different kinds of diversity depending  on their job-relatedness [38]. They examine three  types of job related diversity (functional  background, educational level, tenure) and one less  job related variable (age). The authors refer to all  four variables as ?demographics? while other  researchers [e.g. 20] define demographic diversity  in terms of age, gender, cultural background, and so  forth. As deep level differences (e.g. attitudes, or  cognitions) are much more potent in group  interactions than surface-level demographic  differences [21] the current paper focuses on  cognitive diversity.

Most aspects that account for cognitive diversity  are so called deep level differences, like cognitions,  beliefs, and attitudes, opposed to surface  demographic differences [21], and cannot be  directly measured. Therefore proxies like  functional, or educational background, firm tenure,  industry experience, and educational level are  widely used in empirical research [4, 20, 36].

Functional background diversity represents the  range of specialists, e.g. members from marketing,  finance, human resources, as well as members from  research and development in a TMT. Functionally  diverse management teams possess depth in their  respective individual areas but not breadth across a  range of other areas [4]. Van der Vegt and  Bunderson (2005) for example refer to expertise  diversity speaking of the range of domains in a  team [44].

Firm tenure is defined as the time a person is  employed at a certain company. It takes influence  on aspects like tolerance, perspectives and attitudes  [4].

The concept of experience diversity  characterises differences in job or industry  experience, which is supposed to take influence on  knowledge and knowledge processing capabilities,  e.g. availability of schemata facilitating decision  making [39].

Educational diversity reflects the balance and  breadth in years of school education [5].

Educational levels relate to knowledge structures  and information processing. Education enables  individuals to understand what they know, predict  outcomes, manage time or resources, monitor  results and provides problem solving abilities [39].

Thus education takes influence on cognitive  structures and mental maps.

2.2 Effects of Diversity on Information  Processing  Individual cognitive differences lead to  differences in human information processing.

Individual information processing reflects how a  person perceives, memorizes and uses information  [30]. Team-level information processing  characterises how teams perceive, interpret, store,  retrieve, transmit and use information, and how  they come to a decision [2, 19].

Former research revealed ambiguous results  concerning the effects of TMT cognitive diversity  on information processing and related team  performance variables. For instance Bunderson and  Sutcliffe (2002) identified ten different studies  revealing different relationships between TMT  functional diversity and performance variables each  [7]. Findings in diversity research imply that  diversity offers great opportunities and at the same  time an enormous challenge [32].

Several benefits have been attributed to  cognitive diversity, e.g. increased breadth of  perspectives, enlarged knowledge pool, cognitive  resources and improved overall problem solving  capacity of groups [22] or valuable dissimilar  underlying assumptions [16]. According to Milliken  and Martins (1996) diversity generates creativity  and innovation by accessing diverse mental models  of TMT members [32]. Bringing together  representatives from all relevant areas might lead to  gathering the full range of perspectives and issues  that are crucial to a collective venture [44]. Further  more, diversity may lead to a better acquisition and  assimilation of new external knowledge [24] and  thereby can contribute to the organisation?s  adaptivity [1, 3], which affects the overall corporate  performance in a beneficial way [20].

At the same time, as often confirmed in the past,  a number of risks seem to be associated with highly  diverse teams, e.g. conflict [11]. For instance Miller  et al. (1998) conclude that TMT diversity inhibits  extensive long-range planning and comprehensive  examinations of current opportunities and threats  [31].

Referring to social categorization theory and  social identification theory [41, 43] conflicts among  heterogeneous individuals emerge because of  labelling processes, self-identification with certain  groups while valorising the own group and  devaluating the other group. These processes can  seriously constrict cohesion, obstruct  communication and hinder collaborative problem  solving [41].

Pelled et al. (1999) showed that different types  of diversity may lead to different categories of  conflict: Race and tenure diversity predominantly  cause emotional conflicts, which are potentially  detrimental to team processes, because they      originate communication barriers [34]. Functional  background diversity leads to task conflict, which is  partially beneficial to team performance, as it  enhances task related debate among team members  and therefore facilitates knowledge sharing. Still  even beneficial conflict can cause unwanted costs,  e.g. due to difficulties in information sharing [5].

Therefore on the one hand a highly homogenous  team might not realize innovative solutions,  because its ability to scan the business landscape  for creative ideas is limited in comparison to more  heterogeneous teams. On the other hand a highly  diverse team might suffer from poor  communication and the obstruction of knowledge  sharing which again lowers innovativeness [4].

The diversity-benefits and diversity-conflicts  relationships described above demonstrate the  enormity of interacting and intertwined variables in  diversity research. Hence the relationship between  TMT cognitive diversity and information  processing is not clear up till now [5, 36].

Accordingly diversity can enhance or hinder a  team?s ability to use the knowledge provided by  heterogeneity itself [13]. Therefore it appears  desirable to take influence on the makeup or the  interaction processes of a team to achieve a balance  between risk and reward [16] and to maximize the  information processing capability of the team. The  positive effects of TMT diversity might only  surface under certain conditions that enhance the  benefits and diminishes the costs [5]. This requires  knowing the relevant moderator and mediator  variables of cognitive diversity and information  processing in TMTs. Even though contemporary  models of diversity seem able to explain the  positive and the negative effects of diversity, they  are not able to determine when each occurs [46] let  alone how to manage a diverse team.

In sum, TMT diversity can constitute a valuable  knowledge resource for an organization [4, 9].  But  there is empirical support for TMT diversity to be  both a facilitator and a barrier to knowledge sharing  and team performance. Reasons for these  inconsistent results are discussed in the following  section.

3. Reasons for Inconsistent Results  3.1 Inconsistencies in Diversity Research  Aside from incorrect theories, falsely  hypothesised relationships or illegitimate  operationalisations [9, 20, 36] the inconsistent  categorisation and nomenclature of diversity-types  additionally to the use of varying proxies as  described above impede comparability of research  results [36].

Further more several authors [9, 20] query the  adequacy of the proxies: As explained in Section  2.2, often demographic differences have been  measured in order to approximate underlying  variables like cognitions. Certainly demographic  variables are easy to access and rather reliable.

However, the validity of using demographic data  for approximating underlying characteristics must  be called into question [32, 36]. Instead deep level  characteristics like individual differences regarding  personal identities, personality, skills, and  cognitions of team members should be assessed  [25]. Yet obtaining rich cognitive data on variables  like goals or beliefs requires extensive interviews or  questionnaires [31]. Measuring the issue itself in a  direct manner would require experimentation or at  least observation, which is very difficult to realize  in organisational research let alone upper echelon  research [19].

3.2 Complexity and Dynamic Interactions  Unmeasured moderator, mediator, intervening,  independent or dependent variables possibly  contribute most predominantly to the observed  inconsistency of empirical studies as described  above [9, 20, 36]. In former cognitive diversity  research mediating or moderating variables have  not been considered in full range [25].

Further there is evidence for the necessity to  treat diversity as a multifaceted construct (see  section 2), whose facets interact with team  processes and doing so take influence on team  performance in the course of time [21, 36]. So aside  from the complexity of the subject matter the  underlying processes of information processing in  diverse teams are highly dynamic. Longitudinal  research, very complex research designs and large  samples would be necessary to understand the  effects of time on the relationship between diversity  and knowledge use [13, 36].

However, the ambiguous results described in  section 2 cast into doubt if empirical research  designs can satisfy the criteria of representing all  relevant variables and taking account of the  dynamics evolving between the variables.

Therefore simulation methods are considered as  an alternative research approach in the next section.

4. Resolving the Shortcomings of  Diversity Research with Simulation  4.1 Simulation as an Appropriate Method  Colbert (2004) suggests accepting the dynamic  and emergent properties as key features of complex  systems like ecosystems, organisations or HR  systems. Instead of testing discrete phenomena the  interacting processes of the elements of a social  system should be seen as a coherent whole with  managerial leverage points [10].

Superior insight into complex relationships  between ranges of variables can be provided by  simulation methods [29]. Law and Kelton (1991)  define simulation as a method for using computer  software to model the operation of ?real-world?  processes, systems, or events. Simulation can reveal  interactions between various underlying  organizational and strategic processes, particularly  as they evolve over time. Thus allowing  computational experimentation, simulation  approaches can contribute to theory development,  specifying and extending extant theories [14].

Simulation is very valuable for explaining  longitudinal, processual and dynamic phenomena  being time and data demanding. Even nonlinear  phenomena like feedback loops, tipping points or  thresholds can be analyzed this way [14]. Further  more there is no need for proxies in simulation.

Depending on the respective simulation approach,  observations about social actors can be immediately  translated into a model [28].

According to Davis et al. (2007) using  simulation for theory building in strategy and  organizational research is particularly promising  when the research question shows one of three  specific characteristics: First, it addresses a  fundamental phenomenon with limited theoretical  backing or multiple theoretical roots. Second,  longitudinal interactions that would be difficult to  study empirically play a major role. Thirdly, the  research question focuses on an essential tension or  trade-off [14].

With respect to all of these three characteristics,  the TMT diversity debate qualifies for a simulation  study. First, in section 2.2 we have elaborated on  the fragmented and contradictory results of  empirical TMT diversity research, lacking an  answer to the fundamental question of how to  benefit from diversity as a knowledge resource.

Furthermore, as shown in Section 3.2 there is some  support in the literature for the dynamic nature of  the problem, with information processes in diverse  teams as well as diversity itself changing over time  in the course of team interactions. Thirdly, the  contrarian effects of TMT diversity that can be  either beneficial or obstructive characterize the  trade-off problem in diversity management.

With the TMT diversity debate being a  promising subject, next steps towards a simulation  study on this topic are described in the following.

4.2 Identifying Relevant Variables for a  Comprehensive Framework  In order to design a realistic simulation model  and to derive reliable insights the underlying  theoretical concepts must be acknowledged [14].

Davis et al. (2007, p. 482) refer to this second step  of their simulation roadmap as the identification of  major variables and interacting processes, or  ?simple theory?, with a focus on intertwined  processes, non-linearities and longitudinal effects  associated with the research question.

Recognizing the neglection of relevant variables  as the central methodological shortcoming of  empirical research, the full range of moderator and  mediator variables of TMT cognitive diversity  effects has to be identified. Therefore an extensive  literature review on the relationship between  cognitive diversity and information processing was  conducted. Primarily papers concerning TMTs were  incorporated. Supplementations from non-TMT  cognitive diversity research were made only if they  add crucial insights to the diversity - information  processing relationship. Information processing  itself was defined in a broader sense due to its  entangled relationship to several performance  variables, e.g. team performance or strategic  decision making (see section 2.3). Additionally the  social network perspective provides crucial insights  into diversity effects [e.g. 8, 17, 35]. Thus variables  identified in social network research were  incorporated into the framework described below.

The results of the literature review are shown in  Table 1. The variables in the third and fourth  column refer to the framework shown in Figure 1,  comprising all relevant identified moderator and  mediator variables of the relationship between TMT  cognitive diversity and information processing. In  order to avoid misunderstandings due to  inconsistent nomenclature, single variables were  summarized if their content allowed for it. For  example the moderator variable ?environmental  turbulences? in line two of Table 1 is relabelled  ?task complexity?. The variables in Fig. 1 are  grouped according to their specific context (social  categorization, team climate, ability and team  processes as well as environmental characteristics)  and are arranged in columns from left to right.

In the upper part of the framework (Fig. 1)  relevant mediator variables are displayed. One of  the moderator variables ?Affective and Evaluative  Reaction? is additionally affected by Stereotypes  and Bias [46] which again is influenced by  Cognitive Diversity itself. At the bottom of the  framework three variables mediate the relationship  between cognitive diversity and information  processing. Again one of them, ?tie strength?, is  affected by the number of exchange partners. The  framework combines the whole range of variables  identified by the referenced empirical studies. Still  more interactions between the incorporated  variables are thinkable, although not being detected  yet. Due to space limitations, just one moderator  variable (task complexity) and one mediator  variable (tie strength) will be specified exemplarily.

The relationship between TMT cognitive  diversity and firm performance is moderated by  task complexity [9].

Table 1. Literature Review: Moderator- and Mediator Variables of the TMT Cognitive Diversity  - Information Processing Relationship  Author Proxies for cognitive  diversity  identified moderator variables identified  mediator variables  output variables  Auh, and Menguc (2005a)  functional background gained through career  experience and education  interfunctional coordination  -  innovativeness  Auh, and Menguc  (2005b)  functional background  gained through career  experience and education  interfunctional coordination,  environmental turbulence (Fig. 1:  task complexity) -  strategic orientation  Burt (2004) group-affiliation - structural holes  (Fig. 1: tie strength)  good ideas, creativity  Carpenter (2002) educational background,  work experience, tenure  task complexity -  firm performance  (Return on Assets)  Cronin, and Weingart (2007)  educational background -  representational gaps  information processing, conflict  Cross, Liedtka, and Weiss (2005)  functional background, educational background,  business experience  task environments (Fig. 1: task complexity),  network structures  (Fig. 1: intragroup interdependence) -  innovativeness  Dahlin, Weingart,  and Hinds (2005)  educational background task characteristics (Fig. 1: task  complexity), social categorization (Fig. 1: Stereotypes and bias)  -  information use  Granovetter (1973)  affiliation to a network -  tie strength  diffusion of influence and information  Kauer, zu  Waldec, and  Sch?ffer (2007)  experience, personality network abilities (Fig. 1: integration  abilities), achievement motivation  (here: task motivation) leadership, action orientation  -  strategic decision  making  Van Knippenberg,  De Dreu, and Homan (2004)  functional and educational  background  task motivation, task ability,  affective and evaluative reactions influenced by stereotypes and bias  -  creativity and  innovation, decision quality  Miller, Burke, and  Glick (1998)  4 questionnaire items: 2 on  preferred goales for the  firm, 2 on beliefs  -  decision  comprehensiveness  strategic decision  process  Olson, Bao, and  Parayitam (1998)  (dis)agreement of  executives on key firm  ideals  trust  -  commitment and  decision quality  Pelled, Eisenhardt, and  Xin (1999)  functional background, tenure, age, race  task routineness (Fig. 1: task complexity)  -  task performance, conflict  Perry-Smith, and Shalley (2003)  affiliation to a network -  tie strength influenced by the  number of ties  creativity  Simons, Pelled,  and Smith (1999)  company tenure, functional  background, educational level  debate decision  comprehensiveness  financial performance  (profitability and sales growth)  Van der Vegt, and  Bunderson (2005)  expertise collective team identification -  team learning, team  performance  Van der Vegt, and  Janssen (2001)  questionnaire: to what  extent members differ in  their way of thinking, knowledge and skills  intragroup interdependence  -  individual in-role job  performance and  innovative behaviour in the workplace  West (2002) e.g. professional  background, knowledge,  skills, abilities  integration abilities, intragroup  safety -  creativity and  innovation  implementation      Mediator Variables  Moderator Variables  Cognitive  Diversity Information  Processing  Tie Strength  Number of Exchange Partners  Decision Comprehensiveness and Extensiveness  Representational Gaps  Affective and Evaluative  Reaction  Stereotypes  and Bias  Collective  Team  Identification  Task  Motivation  Intragroup  Safety  Trust  Task Ability  Debate  Integration  Ability  Inter-  functional Coordination  Task  Complexity  Individual  Task and Positive  Goal Inter-  dependence  Leadership  Team  Performance /  Strategic PerformanceMediator Variables  Moderator Variables  Cognitive  Diversity Information  Processing  Tie Strength  Number of Exchange Partners  Decision Comprehensiveness and Extensiveness  Representational Gaps  Affective and Evaluative  Reaction  Stereotypes  and Bias  Collective  Team  Identification  Task  Motivation  Intragroup  Safety  Trust  Task Ability  Debate  Integration  Ability  Inter-  functional Coordination  Task  Complexity  Individual  Task and Positive  Goal Inter-  dependence  Leadership  Team  Performance /  Strategic PerformanceMediator Variables  Moderator Variables  Cognitive  Diversity Information  Processing  Tie Strength  Number of Exchange Partners  Decision Comprehensiveness and Extensiveness  Representational Gaps  Affective and Evaluative  Reaction  Stereotypes  and Bias  Collective  Team  Identification  Task  Motivation  Intragroup  Safety  Trust  Task Ability  Debate  Integration  Ability  Inter-  functional Coordination  Task  Complexity  Individual  Task and Positive  Goal Inter-  dependence  Leadership  Team  Performance /  Strategic Performance  Figure 1. Identified Moderator and Mediator Variables of TMT Cognitive Diversity Effects  Hence in highly complex settings, here defined as  high level of internationalisation, cognitive diversity  had a negative effect on performance while at low  levels of complexity the benefits of cognitive diversity  became evident. The author reasons that the benefits of  diversity are threatened by time pressures and  uncertainty potentially due to a loss of team coherence  and behavioural integration in the face of highly  complex environments. Auh and Menguc (2005b)  ascertain the effect of environmental turbulence on  strategic orientation and attain results supporting  Carpenter (2002). Contradictory Pitcher and Smith  (2001) derive from their findings that heterogeneity is  advantageous especially in turbulent competitive  environments. Further more there is evidence that the  nature of the task itself [13] respectively task  requirements [46] takes influence on the utility of  diversity.

Tie strength mediates the cognitive diversity ?  information processing relationship. Strong ties  typically link similar people in dense social circles  with frequent interactions, high emotional closeness  and reciprocity [17, 18]. Individuals from different  social circles are often connected by what is known as  ?weak ties?. Weak ties involve low communication  frequency, low emotionally closeness and one way  exchanges [35]. Weak ties often emerge between  people with dissimilar perspectives, diverse outlooks,  varying interests and different approaches to problems  [18].

In this regard Burt (2004) describes structural holes  emerging amongst heterogenic individuals and  contributing to innovative outcomes.  If weak ties  connect different social circles without any other direct  relationships between the members of the groups,  access to a wide array of information is provided  [17,  18] and a variety of processes being helpful for  creativity are facilitated [35].

Additionally two repercussive variables, composing  feedback loops as shown in Fig 1, where identified by  literature research. First Akaishi and Arita (2002)  found out that accurate communication (in the current  paper understood as effective information processing)  itself reversely takes influence on cognitive diversity.

Among the considered literature, this is the first and  only study, applying a simulation approach (see section  4.3) [1]. Second Kilduff et al. (2000) ascertained an  interaction between team performance and cognitive  diversity itself [27].

4.3 Choosing a Simulation Approach  After having identified the major variables and  interacting processes in the context of our research  question, the next step of the simulation roadmap is to  choose an appropriate simulation approach [14]. This  simulation method should be able to model the  interactions of diverse team members and their  information processing performance over time within  the identified framework in Figure 1. Furthermore, it  should be able to capture the nonlinear, recursive or  feedback nature of the system, with team members  adapting to team interactions and thus team diversity  and influencing factors changing under ongoing  information processing activities.

There are three main simulation schools that are  used to model information processing problems in      organizations, discrete event simulation, System  Dynamics, and Agent-Based Simulation [15].

In discrete event simulations all system changes are  triggered by outside events with the system itself  remaining unchanged. Given these limitations, it is  obvious that this simulation approach has two major  shortfalls with regard to our research problem. First,  individual or team information processing covers a  broader range of activities than just reacting to inputs  from the outside, e.g. actively producing or searching  for information, as stated in Section 2.2. Secondly,  discrete event simulation cannot deal appropriately  with the feedback nature of the system, where not only  system behaviour, but also system structure  characteristics can change adaptively, e.g. tie strength  or diversity. Therefore we consider discrete event  simulation inappropriate for our specific modelling  needs.

System Dynamics takes an aggregate view on a  system, not focusing on external events nor on the  behaviour of a single system element, but rather on the  overall system?s structure, which accounts for the  system behaviour over time. A System Dynamics  model typically consists of different interacting  feedback loops. On a more detailed level, these loops  include a number of system state variables, called  stocks, along with flow variables that can change the  state of the stocks [40].

However, feedback loops are the system structure?s  basic building blocks driving the system behaviour in  System Dynamics simulations. The identification and  simulation of feedback loops in the system under  investigation can even be called a core paradigm of  that modelling approach [37]. This underlying  feedback loop structure accounts for the overall  system?s behaviour. Qualitative changes in system  behaviour known as tipping point result from changing  loop dominance in the existing system structure, which  remains unchanged during simulation in this modelling  approach [37].

With regard to our research problem, a System  Dynamics model obviously would be able to capture  the aggregate feedback structure underlying the  information processing behaviour of a diverse TMT on  a macro level. On a micro level, System Dynamics has  also proven helpful gaining insights in the dynamics of  an individual person?s behaviour, e.g by Homer (1985)  modelling the interplay between an individual?s goals,  perceptions and actions in the occurrence of burn-out  [23]. However, while System Dynamics could be used  to model the fixed underlying structures of the macro  as well as the micro level of our framework, this  modelling approach is not suited for capturing a  structural change on either level, let alone those  stuctural adaptations resulting from an interplay of the  two levels.

Hence, if we assume that in the problem under  investigation the system structure itself can change,  and moreover, if our research problem is of a  multilevel type, it is Agent Based Simulation that  seems most appropriate to model such a system. Agent  Based Simulation is a bottom-up simulation approach  [28]. It aims at modelling the individual behaviour and  interactions of a system?s micro-level entities, called  agents, with the overall multiagent system?s properties  resulting emergently from these interactions and in turn  setting conditions for the individuals? behaviour.

Dependent on the specific simulation method used, e.g.

cellular automata, Boolean networks, artificial neural  nets or genetic algorithms, these emergent properties  can either relate to order formation or even include  innovation [42].

As Wooldridge (2004) states multiagent systems  are unique in being computational information  processing entities [48]. Agents are designed to act  upon individual goals being assigned to them. In this  means their behaviour is self-induced [10, 18, 43].

After a task has been delegated to an agent it figures  out for itself what has to be done without being told  explicitly every single step. Agents optimize their  behaviour and evaluate goals accordant to programmed  incentives [48]. Most important concerning the current  issue agents possess schemes determining the  behaviour towards and the information exchange with  other agents [15, 28]. Therefore multiagent systems  enable to simulate the emergence of cooperation in  social groups, the communication of beliefs and  aspirations, the negotiation with or without resorting to  conflict, and the coordination of activities [37, 48].

Furthermore agents are able to interact not only among  themselves, but also with their environment. In other  words they sense their environment and react  adaptively to it [48].

Altogether agents? behaviour is situation dependent  and cannot be pre-estimated. In this means agents are  capable of self-contained planning and organising their  behaviour in order to achieve their implanted  objectives. Hence it is possible to simulate planning,  knowledge, opinions, motivations and emotions [48].

Recaptulatory, with regard to our research problem  Agent-Based Simulation seems to be particularly well-  suited to model TMT diversity and information  processing. The respective TMT characteristics and  other relevant variables shown in Fig. 1 could be  modelled in a multiagent system, allowing for  experimentation and clarification of the contradictory  empirical findings. However, up to now there are few  papers that make use of Agent-Based Simulation with  regard to cognitive diversity.

One example is given by Boisot and Child (1999),  who apply Boolean networks (NK-models) to strategy  processes. These can be considered team information  processing activities that depend on differences in the  team members? or agents? individual information  processing as well as on the speed of information  diffusion through the network of agents [6]. The  authors relate the cognitive complexity of strategies to  the relational complexity of the strategy processes.

Relational complexity increases with the number of  agents that are linked in the system. Cognitive  complexity is high when the codification of  information is low and the degree of information  abstractness is low, too. Under these conditions,  information needs to be interpreted by every single  agent to which it is passed. This bears the risk of  misinterpretation and may lead to great diversity in  information processing. In analogy to Kauffman?s  (1993) general insights on Boolean Networks [26], the  authors find that there are only a few combinations of  cognitive complexity and relational complexity that  lead to effective strategy processes [6]. Although based  on very simple computational representations of  information processing and focusing on strategy rather  than on strategy maker characteristics, this model  provides first hints towards computational  representation of diversity .

Another example is given by Akaishi and Arita  (2002), based on an ant food foraging model [1]. The  authors design agents being diverse in means of the  divergence of their so called resource maps. Those  maps function as belief systems and comprise  information on food resources which the agents have to  obtain. The diversity of those belief systems positively  affects the diversity of the agents? behaviour.

To summarize, while agent-based modelling has  been shown to be the most appropriate modelling  approach for our research problem, and there is an  extensive literature on agent-based simulation models  in general, the diversity debate has not been addressed  intensively by this literature yet.

Hence, there is little to draw on and the next  challenge will be to stepwise design a computational  representation that fits the system outlined in Fig. 1.

5. Discussion and Conclusion  Depending on numerous moderator and mediator  variables, diversity can constitute a resource, providing  an enlarged knowledge pool to a team. Empirical  research did neither clarify the relationship between  cognitive diversity and information processing nor  deliver definite implications for how to benefit from  this knowledge resource, respectively how to manage a  diverse team successfully.

The current paper suggests resolving the diversity  debate by applying a simulation model. Following the  first steps of a roadmap for using simulation given by  Davis et al. (2007) a framework comprising relevant  moderator and mediator variables is identified and  different simulation approaches are discussed.

Integrating relevant moderator and mediator variables  of the relationship between cognitive diversity and  information processing in TMTs, the framework in Fig.

1 reveals a very complex and highly dynamic matter of  interest. The highly complex and dynamic interactions  of diversity and its effects additional to the need for  modelling individual behaviour and interactions of the  system?s micro-level entities provide evidence for  agent based simulation as a promising methodological  approach.

Agent based simulation allows for integration of  the identified relevant variables by programming the  schemes of agents. Hence multiple autonomous entities  interact with each other and strive to carry out a task  being assigned to them. Due to the agents? ability to  interact with each other and to react to environmental  factors in a self-induced manner, the resulting  behaviour cannot be pre-estimated. This enables to  observe developments on a micro level, e.g. knowledge  sharing, the emergence of cooperation and conflict or  the coordination of activities, along with the emergent  macro-level properties resulting in team performance.

Even in a multiagent system it obviously is not  possible to consider every single variable, possibly  taking influence on diversity effects. For instance our  framework does not include organisational structures.

In this sense simulation simplifies the reality, yet  allows for more complex considerations than any  empirical research method. As described above  classical empirical research tools are unlikely to  capture the complexity and the dynamic of the  relationships shown above (see Fig. 1).

Next steps according to the simulation roadmap  given by Davis et al. (2007) will be to operationalise  the identified theoretical constructs for the  computational representation and apply the appropriate  software. The computational representation shall  integrate the propositions of former research, mirror  the underlying theoretical logic and allow for  theoretically valuable experimentation [14]. If thus the  propositions of former research can be replicated, the  computational representation is verified and the  accuracy and robustness of the computational  representation additional to the internal validity of the  ?simple theory? is confirmed. If the verification fails,  modification of the underlying construct has to be  undertaken until integration is achieved [14]. At that      time experimentation in terms of exploration,  elaboration, and extension (e.g. varying constructs,  altering assumptions or adding new features) must be  conducted in order to build novel theory. Most  probably this process will contribute to clarify the  considered relationships and shed light on momentary  inconsistent findings in TMT cognitive diversity  research. Finally the results of the simulation should be  compared with empirical data in order to ensure  external validation [14].

The present paper focuses on the first step of a  research project being supported by the Peter Curtius-  Foundation. In the long we are aiming to derive  implications for managing cognitive diverse TMTs  using the approach described in this paper. Especially  the relationship between cognitive diversity and  strategy innovation is of utmost significance to our  project.

Additionally this research project might contribute  to establish agent based simulation as option in  management and organizational research, especially in  case of highly complex and dynamic issues like the  diversity debate.

6. References  [1] Akaishi, J., and Arita, T.. Misperception, Communication  and Diversity, in R.K. Standish, H.A. Abbass, M.A. Bedau  (Eds.), Artificial Life VIII: 350-357, MIT Press, Sydney,  2002.

[2] A.E. Akg?n, G.S. Lynn, and C. Yilmaz, ?Learning  Process in New Product Development Teams and Effect on  Product Success: A Socio-Cognitive Perspektive?, Industrial  Marketing Management, 35 (2), 2006, pp. 210-224.

[3] P.M. Allen, ?What is Complexity Science? Knowledge of  the limits to Knowledge?. Emergence, 3 (1), 2001, pp. 24-42.

[4] S. Auh, and B. Menguc, ?Top Management Team  Diversity and Innovativeness: The Moderating Role of  Interfunctional Coordination?, Industrial Marketing  Management, 34 (3), 2005a, pp. 249-261.

[5] S. Auh, and B. Menguc, ??The influence of top  management team functional diversity on strategic  orientations: The moderating role of environmental  turbulence and inter-functional coordination?, Journal of  Research in Marketing, 22 (3), 2005b, pp. 333-350.

[6] M. Boisot, and M. Child, ?Organizations As Adaptive  Systems in Complex Environments: The Case of China?,  Organization Science (10) 3, 1999, pp. 237-252.

[7] J. Bunderson, and K. Sutcliffe, ?Comparing Alternative  Conceptualisations of functional diversity in management  teams?, Academy of Management Journal, 45 (5), 2002, pp.

875-893.

[8] R.S. Burt, ?Structural Holes and Good Ideas?, American  Journal of Sociology, 110 (2), 2004, pp. 349-399.

[9] M.A. Carpenter, ?Implications of Strategy and Social  Context for the Relationship Between Top Management  Heterogenity and Firm Performance?, Strategic Management  Journal. 23 (3), 2002, pp. 275-284.

[10] B.A. Colbert, ?The Complex Resource-Based View:  Implications for Theory and Practice in Strategic Human  Resource Management?, Academy of Management Review.

29 (3), 2004, pp. 341-358.

[11] M.A. Cronin, and L.R. Weingart, ?Representational  Gaps, Information Processing, and Conflict in Functionally  Diverse Teams?, Academy of Management Review. 32 (3),  2007, pp. 761-773.

[12] R. Cross, J. Liedtka, and L. Weiss, ?A Practical Guide to  Social Networks?, Harvard Business Review. 49 (3), 2005,  pp. 124-132.

[13] K.B. Dahlin, L.R. Weingart, and P.J. Hinds, ?Team  Diversity and Information Use?, Academy of Management  Journal 48 (6), 2005, pp. 1107-1123.

[14] J.P. Davis, K.M. Eisenhardt, and C.B. Bingham,  ?Developing Theory Through Simulation?, Academy of  Management Review, 32 (2), 2005, pp. 480-499.

[15] Dooley, K., Simulation Research Methods, in J. Baum,  Companion to Organizations: 829-848, Blackwell, London,  2002.

[16] L. Fleming, ?Perfecting Cross-Pollination?, Harvard  Business Review, September, 2004, pp. 22-24.

[17] M.S. Granovetter, ?The strength of weak ties?, The  American Journal of Sociology, 78 (6), 1973, pp. 1360-1380.

[18] Granovetter, M.S. The strength of weak ties: A network  theory revisited. In: P.V. Marsden , and N. Lin (Eds.), Social  structure and network analysis: 105-130, CA: Sage, Beverly  Hills, 1982.

[19] D.C. Hambrick, ?Upper Echolon Theory: An Update?  Academy of Management Review, 32 (2), 2007, pp. 334-343.

[20] D.C. Hambrick, T.S. Cho, and M.J. Chen, ?The  Influence of Top Management Team Heterogenity on Firm's  Competetive Moves?, Administrative Science Quarterly, 41,  1996, pp. 659-684.

[21] D.A. Harrison, K.H. Price, and M.P. Bell, ?Beyond  relational demography: Time and the effects of surface- and  deep-level diversity on work group cohesion?, Academy of  Management Jornal, 41, 1998, pp. 96-107.

[22] L.R. Hoffman, and N.R.F. Maier, ?Quality and  acceptance of problem solutions by members of      homogeneous and heterogeneous groups?, Journal of  Abnormal and Social Psychology, 62, 1961, pp. 401-407.

[23] J.B. Homer, ?Worker Burnout. A Dynamic Model with  Implications for Prevention and Control?, System Dynamics  Review, 1 (1), 1961, pp. 42-62.

[24] J.J.P. Jansen, F.A.J. Van den Bosch, and H.W.

Volberda, ?Managing Potential and Realized Absorptive  Capacity: How do Organizational Antecedents Matter??,  Academy of Management Journal, 48 (6), 2005, pp. 999-  1015.

[25] T. Kauer, T.C. zu Waldeck, and U. Sch?ffer, ?Effects of  top management team characteristics on strategic decision  making: Shifting attention to team member personalities and  mediating processes?,  Management Decision, 45 (6), 2007,  pp. 942-967.

[26] Kauffman, S.A., The Origins of Order: Self-  Organization and Selection in Evolution, Oxford University  Press, New York, 1993  [27] M. Kilduff, R. Angelmar, and A. Mehra, ?Top  Management Team Diversity and Firm Performance:  Examining the Role of Cognitions?, Organization Science,  11 (1), 2000, pp. 21-34.

[28] J. Kl?ver, C. Stoica, and J. Schmidt, ?Formal Models,  Social Theory and Computer Simulations: Some Methodical  Reflections?, Journal of Artificial Societies and Social  Simulation 6 (2), 2003.

[29] A.M. Law, and Kelton, D.W., Simulation modeling and  analysis (2nd ed.), McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991.

[30] R.G. Lord, and K.J. Maher, ?Alternative Information-  Processing Models and Their Implications for Theory,  Research, and Practice?, Academy of Management Review,  15 (1), 1990, pp. 9-28.

[31] C.C. Miller, L.M. Burke, and W.H. Glick, ?Cognitive  Diversity Among Upper-Echelon Executives - Implications  for Strategic Decision Processes?, Strategic Management  Journal, 19, 1998, pp. 39-58.

[32] F.J. Milliken, and L.L. Martins, ?Searching for common  threads: Understanding the multiple effects of diversity in  organizational groups?, Academy of Management Review,  21 (2), 1996, pp. 402-433.

[33] B.J. Olson, Y. Bao, and S. Parayitam, ?Strategic  decision making with Chinese firms: The effects of  cognititve diversity and trust on decision outcomes?, Journal  of World Business, 42 (1), 2006, pp. 35-46.

[34] L.H. Pelled, K.M. Eisenhardt, and K.R. Xin, ?Exploring  the Black Box - An Analysis of Work Group Diversity,  Conflict, and Performance?, Administrative Since Quarterly,  2, 1999, 1-28.

[35] J.E. Perry-Smith, and C.E. Shalley, ?The Social Side of  Creativity: A Static and Dynamic Social Network  Perspective?, Academy of Management Review, 28 (1),  2003, pp. 89-106.

[36] P. Pitcher, and A.D. Smith, ?Top Management Team  Heterogeneity: Personality, Power and Proxies?,  Organization Science, 12 (1), 2001, pp. 1-18.

[37] Schieritz, N., Milling, P., Modeling the Forest or  Modeling the Trees - A Comparison of System Dynamics  and Agent-Based Simulation. In: Robert L. Eberlein et al.

the System Dynamics Society, New York, 2003.

[38] T. Simons, L.H. Pelled, and K.A. Smith, ?Making Use  of Difference: Diversity, Debate, and Decision  Comprehensiveness in Top Management Teams?, Academy  of Management Journal, 42 (6), 1999, pp. 562-673.

[39] K.G. Smith, J.C. Collins, and D.C. Clark, ?Existing  Knowledge, Knowledge Creation Capability, and the Rate of  New Product Introduction in High-technology Firms?,  Academy of Management Journal, 48 (2), 2005, pp. 346-357.

[40] Sterman, J., Business Dynamics: Systems thinking and  Modeling for a complex world, McGraw-Hill, Boston, 2000.

[41] Tajfel, H., Human groups and social categories: Studies  in social psychology, Cambridge: University Press,  Cambridge, 1982.

[42] M. Tilebein, ?A complex adaptive systems approach to  efficiency and innovation?, Kybernetes 35 (7/8), 2006, pp.

1087-1099.

[43] Turner, J., Rediscovering the social group: A social  categorization theory, Blackwell, Oxford, 1987.

[44] G.S. Van der Vegt, and J.S. Bunderson, ?Learning and  Performance in Multidisciplinary Teams: The Importance of  Collective Team Identification?, Academy of Management  Journal, 48 (3), 2005, pp. 532-547.

[45] G.S. Van der Vegt, and O. Janssen, ?The Joint Effect of  Psychological Diversity and Interdependence on Individual  Performance?, Academy of Management Proceedings, 2001.

[46] D. van Knippenberg, C.K.W. De Dreu, and A.C.

Homan, ?Work Group Diversity and Group Performance: An  Integrative Model and Research Agenda?, Journal of Applied  Psychology, 48 (6), 2004, pp. 1008-1022.

[47] M.A. West, ?Sparkeling Fountains or stagnant ponds:  An integrative model of creativity and innovation  implementation in work groups?, Applied Psychology: An  International Review, 51 (3), 2002, pp. 355-424.

[48] Wooldridge, M., An introduction to multiagent systems,  John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 2002.

