Knowledge Base Concepts in the KEA System Combined with Social  Networking Techniques

Abstract We present a knowledge management system for  mathematics suggesting a combination of an information retrieval system with social networking techniques to overcome information flood in mathematical and natural scientific texts, and problems of merging databases within the system to structure our data efficiently. With regard to the increasing demand of knowledge management systems in all fields, especially mathematical knowledge management systems remain a major challenge.

Particularly systems that automatically extract information using natural language processing methods require a very different semantic analysis of texts than other field specific languages. In this regard, a numerous number of information fragments has to be extracted based on the specifics of the underlying text structures. New concepts are needed to control this information flood. One possible approach is the use of social network techniques.

1. Introduction   The mathematical and natural scientific knowledge contained in digital lectures and articles, used in numerous eLearning platforms like Moodle [1] and in other learning relevant applications, or just in texts in the World Wide Web, is increasing the demand for sophisticated knowledge retrieval and knowledge management systems. These numerous digital natural language texts are easy to find with search engines such as Google, but they emerge in diverse complexity factors. On top of everything, it is not easy to identify which prerequisites are necessary ? for experts and nonprofessionals alike - in order to read these texts efficiently.

To overcome the resulting information flood, we suggest using a knowledge management system. Such  a system has three main purposes: creation, transfer, and execution of knowledge. The following question has to be answered: ?What is knowledge in this context, and how does it differ from the concepts of information and raw data?

Natural scientific language and especially the mathematical language are the formalization of thoughts embedded in logical conclusions. A simple analysis of raw material such as written text is not enough to develop a real comprehension of the content of these texts. Only reader her-/himself can induce comprehension by actively dealing with the context.

Following Leidner?s idea [2], we characterize such knowledge as personalized knowledge or personalized information respectively, which is related to facts, concepts, ideas, etc. of a single person. For successful knowledge management, distinguishing between the different kinds of personified knowledge is important; cognitive psychology (cf. Anderson [3]) classifies knowledge in declarative and procedural while philosophy (cf. Polanyi [4]) groups explicit and implicit knowledge. In written texts or spoken language we find explicit (declarative) knowledge whereas implicit (procedural) knowledge is the ability to use verbalized knowledge to logically conclude and reason, e.g. in mathematical proofs. In [5, 6, 7] Nonaka et al. use these two kinds of knowledge to create a theoretical foundations of knowledge management systems. Four distinct processes are the base of this approach: socialization, combination, internalization, and externalization.

The KEA-System [8] is based on this approach. It supports the idea of dynamic developing the user?s knowledge through these four basic processes that are of importance for the comprehension of mathematical texts. Besides the theoretical foundation, the system is build up on the operative, strategic, and normative building blocks of Probst at al. [8, 9]: knowledge identification, knowledge acquisition, and knowledge development, knowledge distribution and usage, and      knowledge perpetuation. The KEA system is designed to process data from mathematical and natural scientific texts to construct a system for users who have to deal with personalized information in mathematics and natural sciences such as students, teaching- or academic staff, engineers, etc. via an internet platform (knowledge identification).

We integrate explicit knowledge in the KEA system in terms of knowledge acquisition. The system tries to formalize explicit knowledge in an automatic way so that no human user is required to collect the data for integrating them into knowledge bases.

Different approaches to this challenge exist; one basic approach, which we follow, is the automatic generation of semantic annotations, based on ontologies describing the fields and structures of natural language texts themselves. The KEA system is based on natural language processing techniques, taking advantage of characteristic linguistic structures defined by the language use in natural scientific and mathematical texts (see Figure 1 for an overview of the system). It creates knowledge bases based on these special language constructs, extracted from text fragments in textbooks or webpages. The system organizes and manages numerous single knowledge bases of different authors, texts and fields, and therefore, it develops new knowledge based on automatic extraction. In addition, there is little influence which knowledge has to be integrated. The analysis of relevant knowledge content is relocated to the information retrieval of the KEA system.

Figure 1. Overview of the KEA system  At the backend, KEA has a web-based information retrieval system for different applications areas such as encyclopedias, library systems, and e-learning systems.

In this part of the system, system operators may determine knowledge usage and distribution. The system is designed such that it facilitates serving different kinds of applications for different kinds of users. All usable applications have in common that extracted information (explicit knowledge) is adapted to the needs of different backend users. The critical point of such a system is the sheer amount of data and merging processes of different knowledge bases.

In recent years, a new interesting field gained in importance in conjunction with the Web 2.0: social bookmarking. By using social bookmarking methods, users can organize and manage tags in webpages in a very easy way. These tags can be shared with other users. The advantage of this concept is obvious: human readers who know content and relevance of internet resources classify and rank them in such an efficient way that no current automated system could do. By using social bookmarking techniques, the KEA system integrates the idea of Nonaka et al. [5, 6, 7]. In this stage, implicit knowledge is rudimentarily integrated into the systems knowledge bases in the sense of the four basic processes: externalization, internalization, socialization, and combination. The users? interaction with the system induces the generation of personalized knowledge bases representing users? standard of knowledge, and the improvement of the existing automated generated knowledge bases. However, the disadvantages are lacking standardization and the unstructuredness of tags apart from manipulative ranking methods. However, social bookmarking is widely used and has proven to be a very successful concept, offering efficient ways of bypassing the problem of manual metadata input for search engines by the authors.

We present a solution using social networking techniques with the KEA system to overcome the information flood and the problem of merging databases to structure our data efficiently. One approach uses the contained axiomatic structure of mathematical texts to establish different levels in knowledge bases for arranging text fragments from a coarse up to fine-grained structure level. For example, the designator of a mathematical definition lives in a higher structure level in a database than the sentences defining this definition. Another approach is the appropriation of the user data to track the navigational structure and use of tags. Based on user data user profiles are constructed improving the knowledge base structure. In order to adapt to the user standard of knowledge and her/his navigational preferences the knowledge base is virtualized. In the context of social      bookmarking, users aid to integrate a missing ranking mechanism into the KEA system, which it cannot automatically extract of text fragments. This tagging technique not only deals with text fragments; beyond that equation fragments can also be tagged. By social networking techniques, we integrated human behavior and knowledge into the system to provide concepts for structuring our knowledge bases and merging mechanisms in an efficient way.

After the literature review in the following section we will briefly outline of the complexity of KEA system in section 3. We explain the structure of the knowledge bases and the possible merging concepts in section 4. To overcome the challenges of structuring data within the knowledge bases we represent possible solutions in section 5.

2. Literature review   To date we have not learned of a knowledge management system similar to KEA regarded as a turnkey solution. This fact is probably induced because the KEA system is not a classical knowledge management system but rather a system for processing natural scientific and mathematical natural language information. Primarily it serves rather for processing of data (explicit knowledge in texts) as for the spreading of knowledge in the sense of implicit knowledge (drawing conclusions in mathematics and natural sciences). Implicit knowledge in mathematics and natural sciences can be only imparted through intensive studies of the subject by the user her-/himself [10, 3].

Therefore, the KEA System can only guide users to using the appropriate explicit knowledge. Therefore, we use social network techniques to overcome these challenges. However, from the theoretical standpoint of view, the KEA system is based on the fundamental ideas of Nonaka [5, 6, 7] and Probst [8, 9].

Furthermore, KEA consists of different components, which can be compared to other projects: basic results on mathematical ontologies were accomplished by Gruber and Olsen [11]. MBASE [12] is an example of a manually written mathematical ontology. Investigation on English mathematical texts was accomplished by Baur [13]. An example of a manually assembled mathematical encyclopedia is MathWord [14].

GermaNet [15] and WordNet [16, 17] are intelligent thesauri providing a number of suitable synonyms and definitions for given queried expressions similar to the semantic analysis of MARACHNA core project. Helbig [18] investigated concepts for automated semantic analysis of the German language.

Mizar [19, 20] is used for describing mathematical proofs through a formal human and machine-readable language as input for an automated reasoning system.

DIALOG [21] processes natural language for mathematical validation in an automated reasoning system. HELM [22] uses metadata provided by authors for semantic annotation of mathematical texts used in digital libraries. MoWGLi [23] in combination with HELM is an information retrieval interface based on pattern matching within mathematical equations and logical expressions.

3. The KEA ? System   The KEA system is a semi-automated knowledge management system based on natural language processing techniques taking advantage of characteristic linguistic structures defined by the used languages in natural sciences and mathematics. One of its core components is the mArachna system, the NLP subsystem, consisting of several separate components: a pre-processed analysis for different text formats, the syntactical and semantic analysis.

The mArachna system implemented the TRALE system [24, 25] based on head-driven phrase structure grammars. Symbols and mathematical equations have to be processed separately in the mArachna System [26, 27] because of its special structures. The whole analysis based on a linguistic approach [10] taking the special structure of mathematical languages into account to describe content in an axiomatic way. Thus, entities are principal carries of information in such texts. New syntactic and semantic rules are integrated through XML documents implemented by a Java Script Interpreter [28]. This guarantees an easy access for all users to write new rules for the mArachna system, and improve our system by external users.

As a result of the semantic analysis the system creates complex triples structures (information fragments) annotated with addition information about the text corpus.

Another core component is the knowledge base system. All information fragments are integrated into the knowledge bases integrated by dint of the Java- based Jena Semantic Web Framework [29]. As a result the knowledge bases are easy manageable OWL documents [30-32]. Jena provides retrieval mechanisms such as SPARQL [33] and an interference engine to extract information from such OWL documents.

The third component is the information retrieval provided through a web interface. We have two interface types: administrator interface and user interface. The administrator interface is a fixed      construction to provide direct access to all relevant internal structures to control the whole system such as graphical and textual in and outputs of different stages of the analysis, graphical representations of parts of the knowledge bases, etc. Moreover, we try to implement the administrator interface into Eclipse [34] as an extension. The user interface follows the ideas of the desktop in a browser corresponding with the concept of Web 2.0 applications. So, the user has the possibility to display only preferred working tools (desktop agents) such as special searching and graphical agents. In addition, for each different user application (encyclopedia, libraries, e-learning tools, etc.) new and reusable desktop agents (different searching agents, graphical representations, history log files, tagging tools, and notepads) can be easily provided. The graphical realization based on the graphic tool package Graphviz [35]. In this way Web 2.0 and semantic web technologies [36, 37] are combined.

4. KEA?s knowledge bases system   Each triple (cf. sec. 2) consists of nodes representing an expression, phrase or term, and the relation between nodes describes their associations.

Each relation exemplifies different types of linguistic phrases or key words. To support complex dependencies triples themselves are often used as nodes of other triples (clustering). The resulting structures are very complex: for each element, it has to be decided whether it represents OWL classes or individuals of classes. Above all, we found ways of using OWL DL instead of OWL FULL which was a crucial factor in the beginning.

Figure 2. Structure of a knowledge base   This process creates elaborated and intricate knowledge bases with convoluted and very fine-  grained structures. To guarantee consistency of the knowledge bases we pursue two strategies: At first, each text generates a single independent knowledge base. Second, we use a semi-automated approach for new information fragments to encounter contradictions during the integration process.

4.1. Knowledge base concept   Every single knowledge base is a complex and huge semantic network. Due to the fine-grained structure of texts in mathematics filler words are used as seldom as redundant information fragments. The language is precise. Each single sentence supports important information about the content. Thus an information flood is accumulated which has to be managed.

A knowledge base is a multidimensional object consisting of several levels based on linguistic structures where each level forms an ontology of the text. At the lowest level we find single words and symbols used within a text in a specific way. In the next level there is a collection of collocations or information fragments within the sentences which are used correlative. A single word or phrase is connected specifically with other phrases or words. In the next level we build up entities. Entities are objects such as definitions, theorems or prepositions. Each of these entities has a specific internal structure which is stored in this level. At the bottom most level we map the axiomatic structure of the text itself.

The technical implementation is based on the RDF- based Web Ontology Language (OWL) [30-32] backed by the JENA Framework [29]. Thus, we integrate semantic web standards, and build up semantic Metadata automatically. Additionally mind maps of text ontologies could be provided using common software tools, e.g. Prot?g? [16].

The fragmentation into linguistic structure levels is the key component to support the merging processes, to include social network techniques, and to implement the information retrieval mechanisms.

4.2. Merging concepts   Due to the strategy that each text generates a new knowledge base, the system has to manage a lot of these databases. For retrieval mechanisms it is complicated to get access to the information, especially if same information fragments are spread above different knowledge bases.

The solution to this problem is unifying knowledge bases of identical content. For example: knowledge bases of the same mathematical field from different      authors have to be unified. In addition, tools and strategies for portioning unified knowledge bases into smaller ones have to be developed. Such smaller knowledge bases can be adapted to the preferences and requirements of specialized target groups (e.g. students of engineering, physics or mathematics) to harmonize teaching material within courses.

Trying to do this we encounter some problems: even in mathematics and natural sciences, different authors use different terms and axiomatic structures to describe similar content. The differences are so subtle that even a human reader needs profound knowledge to be able to manage them. Therefore, another strategy is to use a semi-automated approach in the KEA ?system but this has not proved satisfactory. Intervention by a human administrator through by means of an administrative web-based interface is not our primary intention. However, first tests show that this intervention is not the rule.

5. Social networking in KEA   Social networking is an outstanding method for integrating human knowledge into knowledge bases and the usage of tagging mechanisms is already widely accepted amongst users. However, the disadvantages are lacking standardization and unstructuredness of tags apart from manipulative ranking methods.

Nevertheless, our database structures can benefit of the support of social networking.

Figure 3. Internal structures of the knowledge base   5.1. Database Concept   Generally, there are two types of databases. First, there exits knowledge bases which are containing  semantic information fragments (the semantic network) of the analyzed texts.

In this regard, knowledge bases are split into two components: One component (textual component) manages pure text portions. The other component manages equations and symbols only.

Although from the outside it seems that there is a single knowledge base for all text-relevant issues, on the inside the system has to treat these two components as separated parts because of their different syntactical structures (cf. Figures 2 and 3).

Figure 4. KEA database system   The second database manages user profiles containing collected data about the users? interaction with the system and information about the user itself.

KEA tracks user navigation through the system, and builds up user profiles using volunteer questionnaires or self-assessment tests to estimate standard of knowledge of a single user. In this database, we also include social networking components to store all bookmarks (tags) of the users. As a result, we get information fragments about the behavior of the user within our system. Figure 4 illustrates the database arrangement.

5.2. Technical Concept   Standardized methods and techniques based upon open source projects are used to realize this project.

First, RDF1-based languages to support semantic web technologies and store metadata for further processing is used. Furthermore, the knowledge bases and the some parts of the user profiles databases are based on  1 resource description framework      the Web Ontology Language (OWL), an RDF-based language storing relationships between information fragments. Additionally, FOAF (Friend of a Friend) [39] is used to store information about the user and the tags adapted with slight modifications for our purposes, not restricted to personal data, but also containing everything of particular importance in the learning process like standard of knowledge, attended lectures and exercise courses. This standard is widely used in different kinds of social networks tools [40, 41] to easily exchange, merge and reuse data describing people and relations between them, and for the process of creating and sharing tags for different formats (pictures, weblogs, etc). FOAF is also an RDF-based language. Consequently, we have the same basis of languages in such a way, that we are able to process all components together, or to query them with one automated search engine, which is able to analyze semantic web resource descriptions. Hence, the databases can be easily managed based on RDF.

Figure 5. Technical concept of KEA   Input and output of the databases are controlled  using the Java-based Framework JENA. JENA has several advantages: it supports OWL documents, comes with a query language SPARQL and an interference engine to get additional information from our databases.

The knowledge bases can be analyzed graphically by the graphical tool kit Graphviz [35]. The graphical representation of the FOAF parts of the user profiles database are provided by the java-based tool TouchGraph [42]. For an illustration of the technical concept, see Figure 5.

5.3. Merging Concept with Social Networking   Merging databases appears to be the adequate means of overcoming the challenges information flood and semi-automated approach. In the following, the algorithm of merging those databases is described.

First virtual, i.e. databases not containing content but rather links to the content, databases belonging to each specific user are created (cf. Figure 7 for an illustration). Due to the high amount of users, many of these virtual databases have to be created. Of course, similar virtual databases can be merged by checking out similarities.

In the knowledge bases, we will find information fragments. The user profile database has several layers:   1. Tracking Layer: tracking ways through the  knowledge bases by the users him-/herself.

a. Used information fragments in the knowledge  base b. Stop time of the a single information  fragments c. Number of visits on a single information  fragment 2. Social Network Layer: Bookmarking  a. Tags of information fragments b. Time of tagging (history) c. Exchange information to different user groups  3. Questionnaire Layer a. Personal data b. Knowledge standard c. Fields of interest d. Self assessment       Figure 6. Merging process for text knowledge bases        The tracking layer is build up with OWL whereas the social network and questionnaire layer is build up in FOAF.

Analysis of the databases is accomplished in a different way and analyzing knowledge bases is more differentiated than for user profile databases. As each information fragment of a text is important, every information unit is incorporated in the knowledge base.

In a completely automated procedure, the distinction between necessary, less necessary, or even wrong entries is very extremely time-consuming or even impossible. In the semiautomatic approach, a human expert can make the appropriate error corrections, for which the system inquires as soon as an inconsistency is noticed. First observations show however that there are only very few ambiguities. In order to automate this semi-automated procedure, the entries must be weighted and/or evaluated. The same problem arises during the merging process: if two homogenous units of information, however with different peculiarities, are to be brought together with one another, it makes sense to use both respective entries, even though with different weights, corresponding to the page ranking methods: the more often an information fragment is used the higher its ranking gets.

Figure 7. Virtual databases   When the knowledge bases are united, the linguistic layers are dissolved. At first, the axiomatic structure is merged, followed by the internal structure up to the word level. In this process, the collocation- layer plays a decisive role as the concept formation taking place in this layer can be mapped the most simply. The same process is carried out with formulae and the symbol knowledge base (cf. Figure 6). If  ambiguities or inconsistencies arise in the individual levels, both variants are integrated and ranked. The more texts respectively knowledge bases are merged the better the obtained rankings are. During the linguistic analysis information supplementary to the actual semantic net in the knowledge bases, for example target group (mathematicians, chemists, etc.) is stored, that can now be applied.

On the other side, we have the user-profile databases (UPDB), which have been produced by the human users and their navigation through the knowledge base. Therefore, these structures can be filed to the UPDB, based on the user?s standard of knowledge. Comparison with the existing knowledge bases then generates the virtual database.

These virtual databases reflecting the human interaction with the system help structuring the databases and only information relevant for the specific user is selected for his/her navigation through the database. By examining the length of stay and frequency of the visits a decision about the importance of an information fragment can be concluded, which determines the ranking of these fragments. Based on this ranking the fine-structured portion of the database is dissolved and only the most significant components are mapped to the virtual database, yielding a custom- tailored database for each user.

For a general presentation of information social bookmarking, neglecting the individual?s previous knowledge, by many persons is appropriate.

6. Conclusion and future work   KEA is a semi-automatic web-based knowledge management system constructing and organizing knowledge bases for mathematical language to store, maintain, and retrieve information combining different technologies and shall be extended to manage natural scientific texts also. Metadata is generated in form of RDF/OWL triples and FOAF documents, which can be used in Semantic Web environments. Social tagging technologies improve our knowledge results based on tracking methods of users? knowledge, building tags, and questionnaires. Desktop agents are provided to maintain and support the individual learning process, motivation and the interest of user. Using such an environment, the users? and administrators? individual preferences are preserved. During further development, a collaborative environment shall be evaluated to augment the user-friendliness of the system, to improve, and to test the system itself.

Caused by the way how we learn to understand mathematics and natural sciences the KEA system is not a classical knowledge management system. In the      first stage, it is primarily a system to process data in form of explicit knowledge (natural language texts).

Generally, the system itself cannot impart implicit knowledge because the computer cannot draw conclusions. Thus, this task is left to the user, and can only be achieved by intensive studies of the subject2.

Therefore, the KEA system can only assist users to use the adequate explicit knowledge. For this purpose, we use social network. From the theoretical point of view, the KEA system is based on the fundamental ideas of Nonaka [5, 6, 7] and Probst [8, 9].

Currently, KEA is a testbed analyzing mathematical texts written in German and partly in English, processing selected entities and texts blocks and successfully integrating the extracted information into knowledge bases. We provide parts of the user interfaces for administrators and the user interface for a mathematical encyclopedia. We try to analyze complete textbooks for different fields of mathematics, starting with geometry because of the strong axiomatic structure of this particular field.

For evaluation purposes, KEA will be integrated in a cooperative knowledge space system used for mathematical learning environments. Such systems contain numerous entries of mathematical and natural sciences language constructs. This approach confronts KEA with a wide range of examples of correct and incorrect usage of mathematical language constructs.

In addition, our workgroup can create representative bookmarks for the system and further examine users? knowledge skills through tracking methods and questionnaires.

This is only the first step in documenting the users? skills and allows for guiding the user to improve or complete his/her knowledge, e.g. by taking additional courses, hints for additional literature and check for correlations between the usage of language and actual skills.

Finally, we are very interested to see which types of desktop agents will be developed by the users within the framework of KEA, and how social networks techniques improve the system.

