The Impact of Social Support of Guild Members and Psychological Factors

Abstract  The objective of this study is to identify the relationships  in which social support influences flow and game loyalty  through character control, character identity, guild identity  and self-esteem. For the study, focus group interviews were  carried out with MMORPG gamers and, as a result,  important factors such as social support and self-esteem  were found. Based on prior research and the focus group  interviews with MMORPG gamers, the independent  variables of social support and character control were  identified. Character identity, guild identity and self-esteem  are proposed as mediating variables with flow and loyalty  as the dependent variables. The research model and  hypotheses were developed and then verified   empirically.

The data was collected from 244 WOW gamers to verify the  research model and SEM analysis was then used to test  goodness-of-fit of the model. The results were as follows:  First, social support had a statistically significant impact  on character control, character identity, guild identity and  self-esteem. Second, character control had significant  effects on character identity, guild identity and self-esteem.

Third, character identity had a clear effect on self-esteem.

Fourth, guild identity affected self-esteem, flow and loyalty.

Fifth, self-esteem had a positive influence on flow.

1. Introduction  Due to the dramatic growth in the number of users of  online games, the revenue of the Internet game industry has  dramatically increased. As a consequence, different genres  of games have been developed, many of which are designed  to interact with individual gamers. With the rapid  development of the game industry, there is a growing  recognition that online games are an accepted leisure  activity. People tend to establish interpersonal relationships  and/or a virtual community by playing online games [31].

Massively Multiplayer Online Role Playing Game  (MMORPG) is a representative game which incorporates  both of these features. Nowadays, online gamers have a lot  of social interaction and active communication in the  virtual community, when they play online games. It is  possible for many people to simultaneously participate in a  game; so, communication is necessary for cooperation and  negotiation during games. The gamers can greatly influence  each other [39]. There is some research on the factors that  influence the sharing of information and cooperation  amongst gamers through guilds [6][50][58]; such research  is nevertheless exploratory. The present research focuses on  identifying the factors that arise through interactions  between gamers in a guild where people develop  interpersonal relationships through frequent interactions.

2. Theoretical Background  2.1. MMORPG and Guild  MMORPG is an online, role-playing game wherein many  gamers create their own characters and interact with each  other in a virtual community [58]. According to  MMOGCHART (2006), top three games that currently lead  in the game market are World of Warcraft, Lineage, and  RuneScape [62]. MMORPG is the best concern among  developers. Obviously, each game has its unique  characteristics, however, the genre of games definitely has  in common, MMORPG. The most striking feature of  MMORPG, when compared to offline games, is the guild  system [50]. The members who belong to the guild share  information about games and regularly play games within a  virtual community [6][60]. Many MMORPGs offer  guild-chatting or guild-messenger services to encourage  guild members to actively communicate with each other  [56]. Using adaptive structuration theory, Lee and Kwon  [59] analyzed the influence of appropriation on  performance in a MMORPG game.

The guild refers to a virtual community whose sole  purpose is to enable gamers to interact with each other all  the time [6][58]. Lee et al. [46] set high value on the  interaction between users and invoke the concept of a sense  of community. However, they did not clarify the meaning of  ?guild.? Jo et al. [50] defined the term in terms of a  community of players of a particular game and suggested  an integrated model by mapping out two strategies, namely,   1978-0-7695-3450-3 2009 U.S. Government Work Not Protected by U.S. Copyright    a control-enhancing strategy and an interaction-enhancing  strategy. A guild is sometimes also called a ?clan.? Many  MMORPGs provide game players with both chatting and  instant-guild-messenger services for better communication  amongst the guild members [56]. Through an ethnographic  approach involving WoW gamers, Williams et al. [14]  developed a typology of players and guilds to examine the  social dynamics of guilds targeting Wow gamers. Social  interaction tends to increase due to the enjoyable  environment of the guild and gamers build a social network  over time. Williams et al. [14] found that playing WoW is  as social as any team sport. After reviewing the literature it  was found that there is some research on guilds, and that  some scholars are focusing their attention on guilds. Since  the guild is a major factor of game loyalty, in which  interactions between gamers are developed, it is considered  important in an investigation of the psychological factors of  gamers and their relationships.

2.2. Social support  Social support has been examined in the field of  psychology. It is usually studied as an intervening factor of  the relationship between stress and adaptation. Cohen and  Hoberman [47] defined social support as the best positive  resource that an individual can achieve from the personal  relationships they have. Richter [23] defined two types of  social support: informational support (through the sharing  of information) and physical support (where there is  personal relational support). House [26] considered social  support as personal behavior that involves emotional  interest, instrumental support, information on one?s  surroundings, and positive evaluations about oneself.

According to Cohen and Hoberman [47], social support  falls into four divisions according to function: emotional  support; informational support; instrumental support; and  appraisal support. Emotional support makes people feel  comfortable through the expression of sympathy and the  demonstration of respect or affection. Informational support  refers to the provision of information or advice that is  helpful for problem-solving. Instrumental support refers to  the provision of an instrument or property that is useful for  handling problems. Appraisal support is something that  helps people to evaluate themselves by letting them see  themselves through others? eyes. The virtual community  also offers consistent social relationships. Through these  relationships, people exchange the same type of social  support online as they do offline [43].

Through focus-group interviews, it was found that social  support within guilds is also divided into emotional,  informational, instrumental, and appraisal categories, as  suggested by Cohen and Hoberman [47]. In other words,  we found that the members of a guild are accustomed to an  environment where they share information, give items for  free, and evaluate themselves through others. Gamers at the  higher levels usually help their comrades at the lower levels  and teach them the skills that are needed to play the games.

2.3. Identity theory  Much of the research on identity, from a  social-psychological viewpoint, is conducted within  organizations and based on social-identity theory [17][21].

Dutton et al. [21] divided the concept of ego into two parts:  personal identity and social identity. The identity that is  related with an individual or group plays a significant role  in influencing the concept of ego, i.e., the sense of one?s  social identity, and subsequently leads to self-definition.

The process of building up self-definition is called identity.

It is obvious that personal identity is complementary to  group identity. Prior research classifies identity into three  kinds: organizational identity [3][17]; identity with the  online environment [18][33][38][54]; and identity with the  virtual community [52].

According to community theory, the community identity  refers to a wide range of psychological mechanisms that  recognize the community [10]. The community identity has  many psychological mechanisms that guide members?  behavior in interactions within the community. By eliciting  commitment and responsibility and emotionally connecting  members, identity plays an important role in the conduct of  members of a community [41].

The degree of online-community identity depends on  how strong an individual?s self identity is and/or how firm  the social identity is toward the community [4][48]. As  previously mentioned, identity is classified into two parts:  personal identity and social identity [38][57]. Personal  identity is defined as the degree of similarity between the  image of the product/service and the image the individual  has of themselves [57], whereas social identity implies  individual knowledge about a specific social group that is  important and valuable for the individual?s membership [9].

The field of organizational behavior has suggested the  concept of cognitive factors of social identity as an example  of self-categorization that is established by members on  their own [34]. Bergami and Bagozzi [34] noted three  different aspects of the concept of social identity, pointing  out that social identity in terms of a valued group involves  cognitive, affective, and evaluative components, and  motivates behavior that is consistent with identity  maintenance.

As social identity theory explains, the degree of  community identity reflects the individual?s psychological  attachment for the community [20][30]. It can be said that  community identity persuades people to change their way  of behavior and makes them aware of the necessity of  community. In other words, the greater is the awareness or  sense of community, the more that people identify with the  community. In this study, using identity theory, we recast  personal identity as character identity, and social identity as  guild identity, so that we can employ them as research  variables for the environment of MMORPG.

2.4. Self-esteem  Self-esteem is defined as the degree to which someone  regards himself/herself as a valuable person [35]. That is,      we can say that self-esteem affects the ego. Individuals,  who have high self-esteem, can protect themselves from  mental illness, recover quickly from stress, and are strongly  motivated to solve problems. Individuals with high  self-esteem tend to experience greater satisfaction with life  [15]. As the motivation theory of Maslow [5] proposes,  there are two forms of esteem needs, a lower form and a  higher form. People with low self-esteem need respect from  others. They may seek fame, glory, dignity, attention, and  reputation, which again depend on others. These types of  people think of themselves as important beings when they  receive high evaluations from others. The higher form  involves the need for self-respect, including such feelings  as confidence, competence, achievement, independence,  and freedom. People with the higher form of self-esteem  feel that they are skilled, confident, and competent when  they achieve what they desire. If they do not achieve what  they originally seek, they suffer from depression and  experience helplessness, inferiority, and spiritlessness.

Maslow [5] noted that self-respect is much more important  than the respect of others, because, unlike the respect of  others, self-esteem is a lot harder to lose. Likewise,  members of the guild will continue to take part in the guild  by evaluating their own value through communication with  each other.

From focus-group interviews, this study found that  self-esteem is established through information sharing and  social support with guild members. That is, when gamers  win games by their own clever tactics, they think of  themselves as important beings, who receive favorable  comments and respect.

3. Focus group interviews (FGI)  Based on the experience of playing WoW games, the  authors proposed a research model and conducted  focus-group interviews (FGI). FGI involve formulating a  hypothesis and then collecting some relevant data. Williams  and Skoric [13] insisted that researchers of games should be  able to actually play the game they are studying before they  carry out a survey. If they do not, they will not know what  questions they should ask, they will not be able to decipher  the local language, they will not understand the mechanics  of the game and they will not have a sense of the social  context of play.

FGI were conducted face-to-face with students of C  University in Korea. We formulated structured interview  schedules, which included questions that were based on our  research variables and personal experience. Then, the key  point of the questions and the order of questions were  explained to respondents.

The questions for the interviews encompassed: (a) the  demographic characteristics of the focus group; (b) the  number of years for which respondents had played online  games; (c) the motive for starting a game; (d) the number of  game-characters assumed by each gamer; (e) the type of  game played; and (f) other issues such as the reasons for  involvement in the play, the willingness to reuse the game  in case new versions were released, etc. In general, it took  two hours to interview each of three groups. A  tape-recorder was used to record the content of the  interviews. Table 1 lists the demographic characteristics of  each group. All respondents were heavy users [61], who  spent more than three hours each day playing games, had  more than two years? experience in playing games,  possessed more than two game-characters, and reached the  highest level, i.e., 70. Therefore, the focus groups definitely  represented general users of games, since the members had  rich experience and profound knowledge of games.

<Table 1> Characteristics of the focus groups  Group 1 Group 2 Group 3  Number of respondents 4 5 5  Age 28 25~26 24~26  Title of the game WoW WoW WoW  Years for which they have  played the game 2, 3 2 2  The number of  game-characters they possess  2 2~5 3~5  The highest level 70 60~70 60~70  Average duration for which a game is played  5~8 hr 3~5 hr 3~5 hr  Character race Horde Alliance Horde  Playable server Normal Combat Normal  3.1. The results of the first FGI  A primary set of FGI was conducted with three groups  on the premise that there would be some differences by  character race (Horde vs. Alliance) or by playable server  (Normal vs. Combat). The three groups were of the same  level of ability and there were no obvious differences.

Responses did not vary across races and servers. The  second interview was constructed targeting just one group  which consists of four- five respondents chosen at first  interview. With respect to the manner of playing, it was  found that guild members shared information, felt a sense  of belonging, and played computer games for quite a long  time through the guild; however, they did not undergo these  experiences when playing alone. Gamers who belonged to a  specific guild helped other players without claiming  compensation, shared information about the game, gave  items for free, and forgave others who made mistakes. They  were mutually aware of their existence and experienced a  sense of belonging through interactions with, and  evaluations from, other players. It was clear that social  support was shown within the guild and that it played an  important role as a major research variable. Using the  results of the first FGI, a second set of in-depth FGI was  carried out where the psychology of the individual within  the guild and the social community of the guild were the  focus.

3.2. The results of the second FGI  A second set of FGI was undertaken that focused on the  guild and offline meetings. Gamers recognize the necessity  of joining a community, not only in real life, but also in the      online world of the guild. They admit that the guild is  important and is needed so they can easily and conveniently  enjoy playing online computer games. The active behavior  and positive attitudes of existing guild members can  motivate new members of the guild to adapt themselves to  the guild environment. They then adopt the same behaviors  and attitudes of established guild members. In this manner,  the new members of the guild strengthen the bonds between  gamers, feel a sense of belonging, and develop social  identity. It was discovered that the interaction among guild  members and the social support encouraged new gamers to  quickly develop a sense of social identity and increase their  self-esteem. The guild seemed to play the role of socializing  gamers. Sometimes, even in the real world, the guild  members helped one another; so, the features of the guild  also spilled over into the offline environment. We intend to  use self-esteem, which was found through the second set of  FGI, as an important research variable.

4. The Research Model and Hypotheses  4.1. The research model  Considerable research is being carried out on MMORPG  from various angles; however, studies that deal with the  concept of guilds are very rare [6][14][50]. Based on both  FGI and prior theory, seven variables are drawn that focus  on the guild. Among them, social support and self-esteem,  which were discovered in the FGI, are considered to be  important variables at the level of the guild. Therefore, we  intend to reveal the impact of social support on flow and  loyalty, as mediated by character control, character identity,  guild identity, and self-esteem.

We developed the following research model and  hypotheses based on prior research [9][11][12][16][17][22]  [24][29][35][50][51][56] and the results of focus group  interviews (Figure 1).

[Figure 1] The Research Model  4.2. The Hypotheses  4.2.1. The relationships between social support,  character control, character identity, guild identity, and  self-esteem  Social support [47] can be construed as offering  information about how to setup game-characters, how to  achieve quests, etc., to members of the guild. Character  control is conceptually related to manipulating  game-character directly[25], character identity is defined as  a feeling of identity with the character and guild identity is  defined as a feeling or a sense of belonging to a guild.

Self-esteem is related to the degree to which gamers think  of themselves as important beings in a guild. The greater is  the social support the guild members are given, the greater  are the character identity and character control that they  have. Based on the results of FGI, four hypotheses were  formulated that deal with the relationships between social  support, character control, character identity, guild identity,  and self-esteem.

H1. Social support will be positively associated with  character control.

H2. Social support will be positively associated with  character identity.

H3. Social support will be positively associated with guild  identity.

H4. Social support will be positively associated with  self-esteem.

4.2.2. The relationships between character control  character identity, guild identity, and self-esteem  The concept of control is the psychological desire of a  human being that affects their ego and self-esteem  [1][40][42][45]. It is directly related to the manipulation of  a target [24][25]. The gamers in MMORPG make an effort  to skillfully manipulate their characters. The higher is the  level of the character, the more is the character control they  have. It encourages gamers to identify themselves with their  characters and the guild and can increase their self-esteem.

Based on the results of FGI, Hypotheses 5, 6, and 7 can be  formulated as follows.

H5 Character control will be positively associated with  character identity.

H6 Character control will be positively associated with  guild identity.

H7 Character control will be positively associated with  self-esteem.

4.2.3. The relationships between character identity,  self-esteem, flow, and game loyalty  Personal identity is evident when a client is aware of the  similarity between him/her and the online community [2].

Where the self-image matches the online community image  and users have the chance to express or improve their  image though the online community, they will highly rate  the community. They will provide information about the  community and frequently interact with gamers from the  community [4][55]. In other words, gamers become  immersed in the online community. Based on the results of  FGI, Hypotheses 8, 9, and 10 are:      H8. Character identity will be positively associated with  self-esteem.

H9. Character identity will be positively associated with  flow.

H10. Character identity will be positively associated with  game loyalty.

4.2.4. The relationship between guild identity,  self-esteem, flow, and game loyalty  Williams [14] suggested that gamers have social  interaction when they enjoy participating in the guild; from  this interaction, social networks are created. Gamers who  have strong guild identity try to increase their self-esteem  through social interaction within the guild. Based on the  results of FGI, Hypotheses 11, 12, and 13 are:  H11. Guild identity will be positively associated with  self-esteem.

H12. Guild identity will be positively associated with flow.

H13. Guild identity will be positively associated with game  loyalty.

4.2.5. The relationships between self-esteem, flow, and  game loyalty  Like sports and dancing [19][32], games are also  considered to be related to self-esteem and may be one of  the factors that affect pleasure. Self-esteem that is built  through social interaction with guild members will increase  flow and game loyalty. Based on this, Hypotheses 14 and  15 are:  H14. Self-esteem will be positively associated with flow.

H15. Self-esteem will be positively associated with game  loyalty.

4.2.6. The relationship between flow and game loyalty  Based on research that established the relationship  between flow and game loyalty [8][12], Hypothesis 16 is  formulated.

H16. Flow will be positively associated with game loyalty.

5. Research Methodology  5.1. Variables and their definitions  Based on the prior study and FGI, a measuring device was  developed to determine the constructs of the research model.

Some constructs have been adjusted to fit the purpose of the  study (Table 2).

<Table 2> Variables and their definitions Variables Definitions Ref.

Social Support  Positive resource that gamers get from personal relationships.

[56]  Character  Control  The ability that includes awareness of control  of their game-characters and the actual competence for skillfully controlling them.

[24]  [50]  Character  Identity A feeling of identity with the character.

[24]  [28] [50]  Guild  Identity A feeling or a sense of belonging to a guild  [5]  [9]  Self-  Esteem  The degree to which gamers think of  themselves as important beings in a guild.

[27]  Flow  A state where there is a feeling of pleasure  and excitement when gamers are completely involved in playing a game.

[11]  [12] [51]  Game  Loyalty  The intention of consistently playing the game  even if new RPG games are released by other companies  [8]  [35] [50]  5.2. Data collection  To collect data, an online survey was designed with a  questionnaire to be completed by WoW gamers, who  belong to a guild. The survey was registered on the best  three domestic game-sites: ?WoW playforum;? ?WoW  gamemeca;? and ?Wow invent.? The items to be measured  that were included in the questionnaire were based on prior  research and data from FGI. To verify the content of the  questionnaire, we carried out a pilot test with the same  participants to correct ambiguous questions and ensure  there were no misunderstandings. A total of 244 responses  were analyzed from the 250 questionnaires that were  completed.

6. Results  6.1. Descriptive statistics  After the survey was carried out, the demographics of the  respondents were checked. Of all the respondents, 87.7  percent (n=214) was male and 12.3 percent (n=30) was  female. Most of the male respondents were university  students (36.9%), who were aged between 25 and 29 years.

Gamers with more than three years? experience had, on  average, more than five game-characters (48.8%). Some  gamers owned the highest level (a level of 70) of characters  and played computer games for four-five hours (30%) on  average per day. In relation to the time they spent on online  games, most of the respondents were heavy gamers.

However, although it was obvious that they were heavy  gamers, they seemed unwilling to admit the fact and said  that they were only light gamers.

6.2. Reliability  Cronbach's  was used to assess whether the variables  were reliable or not. For each item, Cronbach's  (0.883~0.924) was higher than the acceptable criterion of  0.8, which indicated that all items were highly reliable  (Table 3).

<Table 3> Reliability  Variables Cronbach?s No. of  Items Note  Social  Support 0.924 3 4,5 removed  Character  Control 0.883 5  Character Identity  0.835 4 4 removed  Guild  Identity 0.834 5  Self-Esteem 0.864 4 4 removed  Flow 0.936 5  Loyalty 0.901 5  6.3. Validity  Validity is the degree to which an item actually measures  what it is intended to measure. A confirmatory factor  analysis was used to analyze validity. The results after the  exclusion of some items (cont1, sup1, sup2, sup5, cide1,  cide5, gide3, gide4, gide5, flow4, flow5, loy1, and loy5)  that would hinder unidimensionality are shown in Table 4.

The goodness-of fit indices for each measurement model  were: =133.40 (with 98 degrees of freedom); GFI=0.94;  RMR=0.06; RMSEA=0.03; AGFI=0.91; CFI=0.99; and  NFI=0.97. All were higher than the standards generally  suggested. Construct reliability exceeded 0.7, which is a  suggested standard value, and AVE exceeded 0.5, which is a  suggested standard value [22]. In conclusion, each item of  this study is valid for the associated research  variables(Table 4).

<Table 4> Confirmatory Factor Analysis  variables items  Standar-  dized  solution  Measure-  ment  error  t-value Construct  reliability AVE  Character  Control  cont2  cont3  0.98  0.88  0.05  0.22  17.55  15.45 0.928 0.918  Social  Support  sup3  sup4  0.89  0.79  0.20  0.38  16.31  13.89 0.830 0.776  Character  Identity  cide2  cide3  0.90  0.96  0.19  0.07  15.17  16.41 0.930 0.920  Guild  Identity  gide1  gide2  0.86  0.90  0.27  0.18  15.16  16.26 0.873 0.842  Self-  Esteem  est3  est4  est5  0.70  0.82  0.80  0.51  0.33  0.37  11.66  14.50  13.94  0.816 0.528  Flow  flow1  flow2  flow3  0.95  0.97  0.97  0.11  0.05  0.06  19.74  20.84  20.59  0.974 0.972  Loyalty  loy2  loy3  loy4  0.82  0.90  0.82  0.33  0.19  0.33  14.92  17.17  14.81  0.884 0.845  To confirm the discriminant validity of the variables, it  was verified whether the AVEs exceeded the squares of the  correlation coefficients among constructs [7]. There was  discriminant validity because all AVEs satisfied this  requirement (Table 5).

<Table 5> correlations and discriminant validity  Variables AVE 1 2 3 4 5 6 Character  Control 0.918  Social  Support 0.776 0.30  Character  Identity 0.920 0.27 0.22  Guild  Identity 0.842 0.40 0.65 0.19  Self-Esteem 0.528 0.45 0.42 0.28 0.42  Flow 0.972 0.31 0.39 0.15 0.59 0.61  Loyalty 0.845 0.24 0.29 0.24 0.42 0.41 0.36  6.4. Verifications of the structural model and the  hypotheses  In Figure 2 below, among 16 paths suggested in the  research model, 13 paths were verified as statistically  significant. The effects of social support on character  control (H1), character identity (H2), guild identity (H3)  and self-esteem (H4) were all proved to be statistically  significant. The effects of character control on character  identity (H5), guild identity (H6) and self-esteem (H7) were  all proved to be statistically significant. The effects of  character identity on self-esteem (H8) and loyalty (H10),  the effects of guild identity on self-esteem (H11) and game  loyalty (H13), and the effect of self-esteem on flow (H14)  were all proved to be statistically significant.

<Figure 2> The results of SEM analysis  As a result of verifying the research model, GFI and  RMSEA were lower than their criteria while RMR, AGFI,  PNFI, NFI, NNFI, CFI were all higher than their criteria  (Table 6).

<Table 6> Goodness-of-fit indexes of the research model  Fit index Absolute fit index  x2 (p,df) GFI RMR RMSEA  Criteria - 0.9 0.1 0.05  Result 248.64  (0.00,154) 0.89 0.1 0.06  Parsimonious fit index Incremental fit index  x2 /df AGFI PNFI NFI NNFI CFI  3.0 0.8 0.6~0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9  1.61 0.84 0.73 0.95 0.96 0.97  7. Conclusion  This study focuses on the relationships in which social  support influences flow or game loyalty through character  control, character identity, guild identity, and self-esteem,  which are present within a guild in the MMORPG game  environment. The facts discovered are as follows. First, the      effects of social support on character control, character  identity, guild identity and self-esteem are proven to be  statistically significant. It was found that character control  improves character identity, guild identity and self-esteem.

Among the seven variables, social support, which is derived  from FGI, plays an important role in this study. With the  active support of other guild members, gamers can improve  their ability to develop good characters and to control them.

Second, character identity has a positive effect on  self-esteem and game loyalty, while guild identity has a  significant effect on self-esteem, flow and loyalty.

Self-esteem affects the flow. It was found that the higher  are the character and guild identities, the greater is the  self-esteem that is established. Contrary to the findings of  prior research [32][38], it was found that the relationship  between character identity and flow is not significant.

Rather, it was found that character identity directly affects  game loyalty. Even though character identity had no direct  effect on increasing flow, it secondarily affected flow  through self-esteem. The significant relationship between  self-esteem and flow indicates that gamers achieve flow,  i.e., a feeling of pleasure and excitement, through social  support.

Several important implications of this study should be  noted. First, both qualitative and quantitative methods were  used to conduct this study. Through FGI, it was observed  that both social support and self-esteem are important  variables. Second, research relating to guilds has rarely  been carried out. This research has focused on the guild  [37], which is expected to play an important role in the  online community. Third, according to the result, six  hypotheses (H1, H5, H6, H7, H8, and H11) which were  setup based on FGI, were statistically significant; so, we  can suggest the corresponding relationships among the  variables as a guideline for follow-up research. Fourth,  social support, self-esteem and identity are important  variables that affect flow and game loyalty in the  MMORPG game. Fifth, game developers should provide  extra communication functions for the guild community so  that gamers can play online games in collaboration with  each other. It is suggested that positive self-esteem, which  is built up through social support, can help gamers to  achieve flow and reduces negative motivation. Sixth, on the  basis of FGI, we suggest that gamers have strong loyalty  towards WoW, as all respondents agreed that they would  consistently play WoW, even if new RPG games are  released by other companies.

