Consumer e-Satisfaction and Site Stickiness:  An Empirical Investigation in the Context of Online Hotel Reservations1

Abstract Research on website satisfaction (also known as e- satisfaction) has been approached from many different perspectives. However, many studies lack a solid, overarching theory base, and rely heavily on student data. As a consequence, there is a lack of clarity as to the antecedents and consequences of e-satisfaction.

Using a survey of 4,838 visitors to a large hotel chain?s website, we test a comprehensive model of e- satisfaction grounded in Bagozzi?s 1992 framework of the self-regulation of attitudes, intentions, and behavior. Results indicate that appraisals of website quality and usefulness, as well as product value appraisals, lead to overall satisfaction with a site, which in turn leads to site stickiness. These website and product appraisals, as well as an appraisal of trust in the vendor, also have a direct impact on site stickiness unmediated by satisfaction.

1. Introduction1  Customer satisfaction in the online environment, also called e-satisfaction [see 1, 2] , is an important business concern, due to low reported conversion rates (i.e., the percentage of website visitors that actually purchase from a website). Although there is a plethora of studies on e-satisfaction, many research models are based on empirics, rather than a solid theory base. In addition, extant research is not consistent in its definition and operationalization of e-satisfaction, or the relationships between e-satisfaction and its antecedents and consequences.

1 Authors are listed alphabetically.

Part of the reason for the confusion in understanding e-satisfaction and its nomological net is the fact that there are many different perspectives from which one can study satisfaction. A consumer may be (dis)satisfied with characteristics of a website itself, the vendor, product(s), or service(s) associated with that website, the electronic channel as a whole, a single transaction conducted through the site, or the aggregation of all past transactions that have taken place. While it is the characteristics of the site itself that are perhaps of most concern to IS researchers, we cannot ignore these other elements altogether, inasmuch as consumers? attitudes and behaviors in regard to the site may be influenced by them, and proper site design may be able to alleviate the associated concerns.

Given the shortcomings and confusion in the extant literature on e-satisfaction, it is critical to reexamine the theoretical foundations of satisfaction studies in the marketing literature, as well as related concepts in the IS literature, to arrive at a theoretically grounded model of the relationships between e- satisfaction and its key antecedents as well as consequences. We present and test a model of e- satisfaction that is based on Bagozzi?s framework of the self-regulation of attitudes, intentions, and behavior [3], which has previously been validated in several studies on satisfaction outside the e-commerce and IS realms [e.g., 4, 5]. Our specific focus in using this framework is to determine what factors impact e- satisfaction, and how e-satisfaction can in turn impact consumer loyalty and intentions to return to the site (i.e., site stickiness).

Our paper proceeds as follows. First we review the literature and present a conceptual model of e- satisfaction, its antecedents, and its consequences. Next        we present and theoretically justify our research model.

We then describe our research methodology and results and end with a discussion of implications for practice and future research.

2. Theory and conceptual model  While many different theoretical frameworks have been used for studying various aspects of e-satisfaction (e.g., the technology acceptance model [6], transaction cost economics [7, 8], models of the decision making process [8, 9], expectation-disconfirmation theory [10], motivators versus hygiene factors and asymmetry [11, 12]), there is still confusion and inconsistency as to how the various pieces fit together.

We propose Bagozzi?s framework of the self- regulation of attitudes, intentions, and behavior [3] as an appropriate overarching theoretical framework for understanding what leads to e-satisfaction, as well as how e-satisfaction leads to site stickiness. The crux of this framework is its argument that popular behavioral models (e.g., TRA, TPB, and the theory of trying) fail to answer the question of ?when (and under what conditions) do attitudes actuate intentions?? It is possible for an individual to have a favorable attitude toward a given behavior (such as using a particular website), but still not form intentions to return (thus preventing ?site stickiness?). One can also negatively evaluate a website usage experience, yet still plan to return. In order to form intentions to return to a site, the consumer must first have the desire to do so. Thus attitudes may trigger a desire, which will lead to intentions to perform a given behavior. Bagozzi proposed that individuals will appraise a situation as to how it applies to their well-being, particularly as to whether it will allow them to achieve important goals.

Based on this appraisal, individuals will experience an emotional reaction, which in turn will lead to responses to cope with these emotions.

The basis for this appraisal  emotional response  coping process is an outcome-desire unit, defined as a ?particular class of appraisals with personal significance for the individual? [3, p.187]. Outcomes are events, such as use of a website, that occur in the past or that can occur in the future. Desire involves wanting to approach or avoid a given situation. If an encounter in the past or present is unpleasant, or does not lead to goal achievement, negative emotions (e.g., dissatisfaction, distress, disappointment) will result.

The individual will then form intentions designed to cope with the result of this ?outcome-desire conflict,? in order to change or avoid the negative consequences in the future. However, if a given encounter is pleasant, leading to goal achievement, the individual will  experience satisfaction or other positive forms of affect, and form intentions designed to maintain or increase these positive experiences in the future [3].

When emotional reactions arise from use of a website, such intentions might be manifested through loyalty to the site and return intentions (what we collectively term ?site stickiness?). Figure 1 graphically depicts this process.

Figure 1. Conceptual model (adapted from Bagozzi, 1992)   3. Research model  In the IS literature, e-satisfaction is most often viewed from the perspective of one?s experiences with features of the website itself, particularly those related to information and system quality [e.g., 10, 13, 14, 15].

However, other studies have examined customer satisfaction with the e-vendor or provider [e.g., 16, 17], satisfaction with the overall ordering / fulfillment process [e.g., 18], and even satisfaction with the electronic channel in relation to conducting the same activities through a different channel [e.g., 9]. These latter perspectives all tap into the view that an e- commerce website is not just an information system but also an interface with a vendor [6]. Thus in predicting customer e-satisfaction and site stickiness, vendor-related factors such as trust and product-related factors such as price and value, may become more salient.

Thus, our study includes not only the system- related factors of information quality, system quality, and perceived usefulness (PU), but also the vendor- related factor of trust and the product-related factor of value. The relationships across these constructs and e- satisfaction and site stickiness are informed by the organizing conceptual framework provided by Bagozzi. Figure 2 presents our research model, and maps it to Bagozzi?s model.

Figure 2. Research model  3.1. Antecedents of e-satisfaction  3.1.1. Information and system quality. Quality in the marketing literature has been defined as ?the consumer?s judgment about a product?s overall excellence or superiority? [19, p.3], and as ?fitness for use, given the needs of the consumer? [20, p.311]. A review of the literature on IS and e-satisfaction reveals some confusion concerning the exact nature of the relationship between quality and satisfaction.  There are three primary conceptualizations of this relationship. First, quality and/or its most commonly recognized dimensions (information, system, and service quality) have been conceptualized as antecedents to satisfaction in both popular IS success models [e.g., 21, 22, 23] and e-commerce studies [2, 8, 15, 24]. Second, aspects of quality have been operationalized as dimensions of satisfaction itself [e.g., 13, 14]. Finally, satisfaction is occasionally decomposed to address satisfaction with information quality, satisfaction with system quality, and/or satisfaction with service quality [e.g., 10, 25]. These various dimensions of satisfaction may or may not then be used as antecedents of an overall satisfaction measure.

Despite this widespread confusion elsewhere in the literature, Oliver [26] argues that quality and satisfaction can be clearly differentiated based on the following characteristics:  ? Quality perceptions do not require direct exposure by the consumer; satisfaction perceptions do.

? Satisfaction perceptions are more comprehensive, in that they may take into account attributes of a product or service besides those related to quality.

? Quality is based on ideals or notions of excellence,  whereas satisfaction is based on one?s predictions, norms, or needs.

? Quality is primarily cognitive, whereas satisfaction is both cognitive and affective.

? Quality has a long-term focus, whereas satisfaction is primarily short-term in nature.

We follow both Oliver and the IS success models cited above in viewing quality and satisfaction as distinct in definition, focus, and measurement. We further focus our attention on information and system quality. Web information quality has been defined as ?the customers? perception of the quality of information presented on a Web site,? whereas web system quality is defined as ?the customers? perception of a Web site?s performance in information retrieval and delivery? [10, p.299]. Separating information and system quality features in this manner makes even more sense in an e-commerce environment, due to the feasibility of separating product information content from the content delivery mechanism [10].

Perceptions of information and system quality are critical in e-commerce, because consumers are not able to physically examine the items that they are considering for purchase. Thus the content provided on the website, and the site?s design elements, become the primary sources by which consumers can judge attractiveness of the product, as well as vendor attributes [24]. The depth, breadth, and presentation of information are all important in helping consumers to fully evaluate a product [27, 28],  and this increased ability to make such evaluations will lead to increased satisfaction with the website as a tool for making purchase decisions. Ease of use and navigability of the website (i.e., system quality) allow for a smoother problem-free interaction with the website leading to higher levels of satisfaction [29]. Thus we posit the following: H1:  Perceived information quality will have a positive impact on e-satisfaction.

H2:  Perceived system quality will have a positive impact on e- satisfaction.

3.1.2. Perceived usefulness. Seddon?s model of IS success [see 22, 23] includes perceived usefulness (PU) as an important antecedent to user satisfaction.

The inclusion of PU as a direct antecedent to satisfaction in an e-commerce context is also supported by the marketing literature on quality. Oliver explicitly identifies usefulness as one form of quality, defining it as ?the ability of the product or service to ?serve? the consumer?s needs? [26, p.167].

In line with Bagozzi, Oliver [26, p.188] states that ?quality exists prior to and subsequent to consumption as an enduring signal of product or service excellence,? whereas satisfaction is a response to this consumption.

Thus perceptions of website usefulness are viewed as an antecedent to e-satisfaction in that a website that is perceived as more useful in fulfilling the needs of the consumer will lead to higher satisfaction. We therefore posit the following: H3:  Perceived usefulness of a website will have a positive impact on e-satisfaction.

3.1.3. Value. Since websites are often used for the purpose of purchasing a specific product, product- related factors become salient in determining a consumer?s satisfaction with a website. The primary product attribute studied in the IS literature on e- commerce is price savings, or perceived product value [e.g., 8, 28]. Value is tied to the concept of quality, i.e., value is ?quality received at a particular price or outlay? [26, p.167]. According to Chiou, perceived value is ?a consumer?s overall assessment of the utility of a product or service based on perceptions of what is received and what is given. It is a tradeoff between received benefit and cost? [16, p.687].

Given the link between quality and satisfaction already enumerated in the previous section, we can further posit a relationship between perceived value and satisfaction. This relationship has also been supported empirically [see 11, 16]. Furthermore, marketing studies [e.g., 30] have found empirical evidence that satisfaction mediates the relationship between value and loyalty, the latter of which is a component of stickiness. Thus we posit the following: H4:  Perceived value will have a positive impact on e-satisfaction.

3.1.4. Trust. A website is not only a form of information technology, but also an interface with an e- vendor [6]. Thus vendor-related factors may play an important role in addition to system-related factors in consumer decisions to return to a website, as well as to make future purchases from it. One of the key vendor- related factors that has been studied in the IS literature to date is trust [e.g., 6, 31, 32]. Trust implies a belief that the e-vendor will fulfill its commitments in a dependable, competent manner [33], and thus represents part of the individual?s appraisal process in Bagozzi?s [3] framework.

The relationship between trust and satisfaction has been conceptualized in a number of different and sometimes contradictory ways [see 1, 34]. However, studies based on social exchange theory indicate that a consumer?s trust evaluation prior to an exchange episode (such as making a purchase on a website) will directly influence their postpurchase satisfaction [7].

Taking this framework a step further, Chiou [16, p.688]  argues that ?accumulated trust perceptions will affect accumulated overall satisfaction.?  Trust enables  the consumer to engage in various transactions without worrying about vendor opportunism and thus leads to higher satisfaction. A number of other studies provide empirical support of the relationship between trust and satisfaction [e.g., 29, 35, 36]. Thus we posit: H5:  Trust will have a positive impact on e- satisfaction.

3.2. Antecedents of site stickiness  At least three different conceptualizations or aspects of site stickiness are found in the literature.

First, ?sticky? sites lead visitors to linger on the site, by encouraging exploratory behavior and a ?positive subjective experience? [37, p.406] [see also 38, 39].

Second, they motivate users to revisit the site in the future [37, 39] by creating e-loyalty towards the site.

Finally, these intentions to return may result in increased purchases down the road [40]. We focus on the second conceptualization of stickiness here, i.e., measuring consumers? intentions to return to the site in the future and e-loyalty. In the sections below, we discuss the antecedents of site stickiness in our model.

3.2.1. E-Satisfaction. There is disagreement in the literature regarding the nature of the relationship between satisfaction and site stickiness. The most common view is that higher levels of satisfaction lead to greater loyalty, which in turn leads to more frequent site visits, increased purchasing, and greater spending [34]. On the other hand, when customers are not satisfied, they will be more likely to explore other alternatives [1]. In the context of Bagozzi?s framework, satisfaction with a website will lead to the formation of intentions to maintain or increase this satisfaction in the future, through returned visits. There is much empirical support for positive relationships between satisfaction and e-loyalty, repurchase intentions, and continuance intention in the e-commerce context [see 1, 30, 34, 41, 42]. Thus we posit: H6:  E-satisfaction will have a positive impact on site stickiness.

The positive relationship between satisfaction and aspects of site stickiness such as loyalty and repurchase intentions has long been taken for granted in the marketing literature. However, Oliver [43] has argued for the view that ?satisfaction is not enough;? in other words, while loyal customers tend to be satisfied, satisfied customers are not necessarily loyal. Chiou [16] has also pointed out that satisfaction and loyalty can operate independently from each other, in that ?temporary reversals in satisfaction may not influence long-term loyalty intention? (p.686). In other words, over time, the two constructs may become so completely disconnected that dissatisfaction no longer        impacts loyalty [see 43]. In fact, satisfaction can be viewed as either a temporary state based on a single experience, or as a repeatedly experienced state.

Loyalty, on the other hand, is a more enduring, attained state that the consumer is likely to defend [43].

These arguments suggest that e-satisfaction may not fully mediate the relationship between site stickiness and the other independent variables in our model. In fact, though satisfaction may be necessary for the formation of loyalty, it becomes less important as other mechanisms develop [44]. Such mechanisms include perceptions of product superiority [44], which in the context of a website would include the perceived usefulness of the website as well as the quality of the site and of the information provided.

These results and arguments also suggest that research should shift its focus away from satisfaction as the ultimate dependent variable, and toward dependent variables such as loyalty and repurchase intent, that may contribute more to the company?s bottom line. Thus we now examine the direct impact of the other constructs in our model on stickiness, beyond their impact through e-satisfaction.

3.2.2. Information and system quality. We have already discussed how perceptions of information and system quality may impact a customer?s satisfaction with a website. However, we also expect quality to directly impact site stickiness, independently of satisfaction. Perceptions of information and system quality may involve deliberate cost-benefit analyses, implying that quality appraisals may lead to cognitive loyalty in the absence of high satisfaction with other aspects of the customer-website experience [43, 44].

Particularly in viewing site stickiness as an intention to revisit a website (and not necessarily to purchase from it), we can argue that if a site provides high quality, in- depth information and is easy to use and navigate, the consumer may return to it to get information even when not intending to make a purchase from the particular website. Once they have returned to the site, however, the chances of making a purchase may also likely increase. Therefore we posit: H7:  Perceived information quality will have a positive impact on site stickiness.

H8:  Perceived system quality will have a positive impact on site stickiness.

3.2.3. Perceived usefulness. While not explicitly incorporating satisfaction in their models, TAM-based studies of online purchasing behavior [6, 45] have consistently found PU to have a significant direct influence on purchasing intentions. We therefore expect PU to have a direct influence on site stickiness, over and above its influence through e-satisfaction. For  example, a consumer may not be satisfied with features of a website?s system quality (e.g., its layout and navigational features, or speed of loading pages), yet still find it useful to some degree for making reservations (e.g., comparing hotels and room options) and thus intend to continue using it. This is particularly true if there is no good alternative to using the site.

Further support for the argument that PU may influence intentions to revisit a website regardless of the level of user satisfaction is found in the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [46] where two paths are posited between PU and behavioral intention. The first is an indirect path through attitude, while the second is a direct path. Davis argued that in an organizational setting where users are focused on task performance, positive affect may not be activated and decisions concerning use of a particular system may be based primarily on a cognitive assessment of how the system helps to improve performance. In other words, an individual may continue to use a system because of its task-related advantages, regardless of how the user actually feels about the system itself. The same may be true in an e-commerce setting where the user is primarily focused on the task of obtaining information or making a purchase. Thus we posit: H9:  Perceived usefulness will have a positive impact on site stickiness.

3.2.4. Value. Many marketing studies support the view that delivering superior value will increase customer loyalty and purchase intentions [e.g., 30, 47, 48]. Thus perceived value may have a direct influence on site stickiness, aside from its effect through satisfaction. In fact, Oliver [43] has argued that, satisfaction aside, one?s loyalty may be weakened if a product is not uniquely desirable or superior in some way. This implies that perceptions of product value can positively influence site stickiness, even if the consumer is not satisfied with other aspects of the website or customer experience. Thus we posit: H10:  Perceived value will have a positive impact on site stickiness.

3.2.5. Trust. In a similar manner, trust in the e-vendor, which has been shown to be a significant antecedent of online purchasing behavior and site usage intentions [6, 34, 49], can influence site stickiness irrespective of satisfaction. If a consumer does not trust the e-vendor, then repeat visits will not be likely even if the consumer is satisfied with other aspects of the website.

Similarly, if the consumer trusts the vendor, they may return to the website even in the absence of satisfaction with other aspects of the relationship, such as website features. Therefore we posit:        H11:  Trust will have a positive impact on site stickiness.

4. Methodology and results  4.1. Research sample  The data for testing our research model were collected via a web-based survey administered to a random sample of visitors to the websites of InterContinental Hotels Group (IHG) in May 2003.

IHG is the largest hotel company in the world in terms of number of rooms, and has more than 4000 hotels in more than 100 countries. The company has seven hotel brands and the industry's first and largest customer loyalty program. Individuals can make online reservations and gather information via the company's website, the loyalty program website, or the websites of any of the brands. 4,838 website visitors from the United States completed the questionnaire.

44.5% of respondents were female and fewer than 1% of were under 18 years old with age distribution as follows: 4.2% between 18 and 24 years old; 21.4% between 25 and 34; 31.1% between 35 and 44; 29% between 45 and 54; and 13.9% over 55 years old.

4.2. Operationalization of constructs  Due to the organization?s desire not to alienate its customer base, it was important that the questionnaire be kept as short as possible. Where possible, we used multiple questions to assess constructs. However, some constructs (e.g., e-satisfaction and value) were measured using only one item each. We believe that the realism of the sample and context are worth the tradeoff in terms of number of items per scale. This is especially true given the relative absence of studies of actual consumers engaged in real e-commerce purchases.  IS research has been inconsistent in terms of how information and system quality should be measured and different dimensions of each have been used in different studies. In the current research, we assessed information quality via items tapping the relevance, breadth, and depth of information on the site [21, 50], and measured system quality via items tapping ease of navigation, speed of the site, and site layout [10, 21, 22].

PU was measured via items tapping two aspects of the construct that were deemed important in online purchasing: comparative convenience and effectiveness. Trust was assessed through perceptions of trust and privacy [31], while perceived value was measured via a single item asking respondents about the website saving them money on room rates. E-  satisfaction was assessed via a single item aimed at capturing visitors? overall satisfaction with the site.

Finally, site stickiness was assessed via three items indicating preference and loyalty to the site. A complete list of survey items used, as well as their means and standard deviations, are found in Table 1.

4.3. Measurement model  The psychometric properties of the scales were assessed via PLS. All scales exhibited good reliability with composite reliability scores above .91 for all constructs. In terms of discriminant validity: (a) all items had factor loadings of .84 or higher on their respective constructs exceeding the .70 recommended guideline and (b) the square root of each construct?s average variance extracted (AVE) was greater than the inter-construct correlations of the construct with other constructs (see Table 2) indicating that all constructs share more variance with their indicators than with other constructs. These suggest that the scales exhibit adequate psychometric properties.

Table 2. Inter-construct correlations   Sitestick Satisf PU Trust Value SQual IQual  Sitestick 0.884  Satisf 0.615 1.000  PU 0.821 0.621 0.915  Trust 0.817 0.554 0.775 0.917  Value 0.679 0.483 0.691 0.674 1.000  SQual 0.773 0.627 0.778 0.757 0.595 0.898  IQual 0.807 0.643 0.747 0.747 0.613 0.794 0.936  Shaded values in leading diagonal are square root of avg variance extracted   4.4. Structural model  The research model and hypotheses were tested via PLS.  As shown in Figure 2, 46% of the variance in e-satisfaction is explained by our five independent variables. Further, 79% of the variance in site stickiness is explained by these five variables along with e-satisfaction.

All paths in the structural model are significant at a level of .001 except for the path from trust to e- satisfaction, indicating support for all our hypotheses except H5. However, given the very large sample size, it is more appropriate to look at the effect size of each path coefficient, rather than its statistical significance alone, in determining the construct?s practical value in the model. We can see that information quality and system quality (with medium effect sizes) are the most important predictors of e-satisfaction, followed by        perceived usefulness of the site. The path coefficient for perceived value is relatively small, and the path for Trust, as mentioned above, is not significant.

While the hypothesized relationship between e- satisfaction and site stickiness is statistically significant, the effect size is quite small. This indicates that e-satisfaction is not an important direct predictor of site stickiness. As hypothesized, e-satisfaction does not fully mediate the relationships between the five independent variables and site stickiness. Trust, perceived usefulness, and information quality (with medium effect sizes) are the most important predictors of site stickiness while perceived value and system quality are of limited importance in predicting stickiness.

Figure 2. PLS results   5. Discussion and conclusion  Prior to discussing our findings, we discuss the limitations of the study. First, the need to keep the survey short required that we use scales with fewer items than desired. Nonetheless, we believe that the items used capture the essence of the constructs.

Second, since this is a cross-sectional study, we cannot test the time-ordering of the constructs in the model and causal inferences are based on the underlying theory. Third, common method bias may have influenced the results though the non-significant effect and some low path coefficients may alleviate this concern to some extent. Further, Harman?s one factor test does not indicate a single factor that accounts for the majority of the variance. Finally, since the survey was administered to actual website visitors and was voluntary we could not test for non-response bias.

Our findings support the view, grounded in Bagozzi?s framework, that an individual?s appraisals of website system quality, information quality, and usefulness, and to a lesser extent appraisals of the  product value associated with that website, will lead to an emotional reaction (overall satisfaction with the site) that will in turn result in the coping response of being loyal to the site and planning to return to it as a first option in the future. However, the link between this particular emotional reaction and coping response is unexpectedly weak. The findings are consistent with IS success models and prior marketing research in indicating that satisfaction alone is not adequate to predict consumer behavior. Rather, one might choose to continue using a site regardless of their level of satisfaction with it, because it serves a useful purpose to them. This begs the question of whether other emotional reactions to one?s appraisal of a website, besides satisfaction, should be taken into consideration in e-commerce research [see 4].

Furthermore, results underscore the importance of information quality and perceived usefulness to both e- satisfaction and site stickiness. Both these constructs are task focused and aim at aiding the consumer (either through information or other functionality) in making a reservation. On the other hand, system quality which focuses on website design and usability has a stronger relationship with e-satisfaction than site-stickiness, whereas trust and value have stronger relationships with site stickiness than with e-satisfaction. What these results seem to suggest is that (a) task-focused constructs (information quality and perceived usefulness) are important determinants of both e- satisfaction and site stickiness; (b) system-focused constructs (system quality) are important determinants of e-satisfaction; and (c) vendor- and product-focused constructs are important determinants of site stickiness irrespective of satisfaction.

The failure to find a significant relationship between Trust and e-satisfaction was somewhat surprising. However, the strength of the relationship between trust and site stickiness indicates that one?s trust in the e-vendor is enough to lead a consumer to plan to return to the site regardless of whether they are otherwise satisfied with it.

This study contributes to the IS literature in several ways. First, it provides a theoretical framework for understanding the antecedents of e-satisfaction and its relationship to site stickiness. Second, it expands the discussion of e-satisfaction to include not just perceptions of site characteristics, but also perceptions of vendor and product characteristics. Third, it tests this framework in a real world context, using a large sample of real consumers. Results suggest a tenuous relationship between e-satisfaction and site stickiness that needs to be explored in future research. Do the results imply absence of a relationship or do they suggest the presence of moderating effects not captured by the study? Results further suggest distinct groupings        of antecedents that differ across the two dependent variables that are worthy of further investigation.

5. References  [1] R. E. Anderson and S. S. Srinivasan, "E-Satisfaction and E-Loyalty: A Contingency Framework," Psychology & Marketing, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 123-138, 2003.

[2] D. M. Szymanski and R. T. Hise, "E-Satisfaction: An Initial Examination," Journal of Retailing, vol. 76, no. 3, pp.

309-322, 2000.

[3] R. P. Bagozzi, "The Self-Regulation of Attitudes, Intentions, and Behavior," Social Psychology Quarterly, vol.

55, no. 2, pp. 178-204, June 1992.

[4] J. B. Gotlieb, D. Grewal, and S. W. Brown, "Consumer Satisfaction and Perceived Quality: Complementary or Divergent Constructs?," Journal of Applied Psychology, vol.

79, no. 6, pp. 875-885, 1994.

[5] J. J. Cronin, M. K. Brady, and G. T. M. Hult, "Assessing the Effects of Quality, Value, and Customer Satisfaction on Consumer Behavioral Intentions in Service Environments," Journal of Retailing, vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 193-218, 2000.

[6] D. Gefen, E. Karahanna, and D. W. Straub, "Trust and TAM in Online Shopping: An Integrated Model," MIS Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 51-90, 2003.

[7] J. Singh and D. Sirdeshmukh, "Agency and Trust Mechanisms in Consumer Satisfaction and Loyalty Judgments," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 150-168, 2000.

[8] S. Devaraj, M. Fan, and R. Kohli, "Antecedents of B2C Channel Satisfaction and Preference: Validating e-Commerce Metrics," Information Systems Research, vol. 13, no. 3, pp.

316-333, 2002.

[9] R. Kohli, S. Devaraj, and M. A. Mahmood, "Understanding Determinants of Online Consumer Satisfaction: A Decision Process Perspective," Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 115- 135, 2004.

[10] V. McKinney, Y. Kanghyun, and F. Zahedi, "The Measurement of Web-Customer Satisfaction: An Expectation and Disconfirmation Approach," Information Systems Research, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 296-315, 2002.

[11] Q. Chen and W. D. Wells, ".Com Satisfaction and .Com Dissatisfaction: One or Two Constructs?," Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 34-39, 2001.

[12] C. M. K. Cheung and M. K. O. Lee, "The Asymmetric Effect of Website Performance on Satisfaction: An Empirical Study," in Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2005.

[13] S. F. Abdinnour-Helm, B. S. Chaparro, and S. M.

Farmer, "Using The End-User Computing Satisfaction (EUCS) Instrument To Measure Satisfaction With A Web Site," Decision Sciences, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 341-364, 2005.

[14] S. Muylle, R. Moenaert, and M. Despontin, "The Conceptualization and Empirical Validation of Web Site User Satisfaction," Information & Management, vol. 41, no.

5, pp. 543-560, 2004.

[15] J. W. Palmer, "Web Site Usability, Design, and Performance Metrics," Information Systems Research, vol.

13, no. 2, pp. 151-167, 2002.

[16] J.-S. Chiou, "The Antecedents of Consumers? Loyalty Toward Internet Service Providers," Information & Management, vol. 41, pp. 685-695, 2004.

[17] S. N. Ramaswami, T. Strader, and K. Brett, "Determinants of On-Line Channel Use for Purchasing Financial Products," International Journal of Electronic Commerce, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 95-118, 2000-2001.

[18] Y. Cao, T. S. Gruca, and B. R. Klemz, "Internet Pricing, Price Satisfaction, and Customer Satisfaction," International Journal of Electronic Commerce, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 31-50, 2003-2004.

[19] V. A. Zeithaml, "Consumer Perceptions of Price, Quality, and Value: A Means-End Model and Synthesis of Evidence," Journal of Marketing, vol. 52, pp. 2-22, July 1988.

[20] J.-B. E. M. Steenkamp, "Conceptual Model of the Quality Perception Process," Journal of Business Research, vol. 21, pp. 309-333, December 1990.

[21] W. H. DeLone and E. R. McLean, "The DeLone and McLean Model of Information Systems Success," Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 9-30, 2003.

[22] A. Rai, S. S. Lang, and R. B. Welker, "Assessing the Validity of IS Success Models: An Empirical Test and Theoretical Analysis," Information Systems Research, vol.

13, no. 1, pp. 50-69, 2002.

[23] P. B. Seddon, "A Respecification and Extension of the DeLone and McLean Model of IS Success," Information Systems Research, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 240-253, 1997.

[24] M. Wolfinbarger and M. C. Gilly, "eTailQ: Dimensionalizing, Measuring and Predicting eTail Quality," Journal of Retailing, vol. 79, no. 3, pp. 183-198, 2003.

[25] B. H. Wixom and P. A. Todd, "A Theoretical Integration of User Satisfaction and Technology Acceptance," Information Systems Research, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 85-102, 2005.

[26] R. L. Oliver, Satisfaction: A Behavioral Perspective on the Consumer. New York: McGraw Hill, 1997.

[27] Z. Jiang and I. Benbasat, "Virtual Product Experience: Effects of Visual & Functional Control of Products on Perceived Diagnosticity in Electronic Shopping," Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 111- 147, 2004/2005.

[28] P. A. Pavlou and M. Fygenson, "Understanding and Predicting Electronic Commerce Adoption: An Extension of the Theory of Planned Behavior," MIS Quarterly, vol. 30, no.

1, pp. 115-143, March 2006.

[29] S.-J. Yoon, "The Antecedents and Consequences of Trust in Online Purchase Decisions," Journal of Interactive Marketing, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 47-63, 2002.

[30] Z. Yang and R. T. Peterson, "Customer Perceived Value, Satisfaction, and Loyalty: The Role of Switching Costs," Psychology and Marketing, vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 799- 822, 2004.

[31] S. L. Jarvenpaa and N. Tractinsky, "Consumer Trust in an Internet Store: A Cross-Cultural Validation," Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1-35, 1999.

[32] D. H. McKnight, V. Choudhury, and C. Kacmar, "Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e- Commerce: An Integrative Typology," Information Systems Research, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 334-359, 2002.

[33] N. Kumar, L. K. Scheer, and K.-B. E. M. Steenkamp, "The Effects of Supplier Fairness on Vulnerable Resellers," Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 17, pp. 54-65, February 1995.

[34] C. Flavian, M. Guinaliu, and R. Gurrea, "The Role Played by Perceived Usability, Satisfaction and Consumer Trust on Website Loyalty," Information & Management, vol.

43, pp. 1-14, 2006.

[35] L. C. Harris and M. M. H. Goode, "The Four Levels of Loyalty and the Pivotal Role of Trust: A Study of Online Service Dynamics," Journal of Retailing, vol. 80, pp. 139- 158, 2004.

[36] S. Kim and L. Stoehl, "Apparel Retailers: Website Quality Dimensions and Satisfaction," Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 109-117, 2004.

[37] D. Luna, L. A. Peracchio, and M. D. deJuan, "Cross- Cultural and Cognitive Aspects of Web Site Navigation," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 397-410, 2002.

[38] R. E. Bucklin and C. Sismeiro, "A Model of Web Site Browsing Behavior Estimated on Clickstream Data," Journal  of Marketing Research, vol. 40, pp. 249-267, August 2003.

[39] H. S. Bansal, G. H. G. McDougall, S. S. Dikolli, and K.

L. Sedatole, "Relating e-satisfaction to behavioral outcomes: an empirical study," Journal of Services Marketing, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 290-302, 2004.

[40] M. Khalifa, M. Limayem, and V. Liu, "Online Consumer Stickiness: A longitudinal study," Journal of Global Information Management, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1-14, 2002.

[41] G. Balabanis, N. Reynolds, and A. Simintiras, "Bases of e-Store Loyalty: Perceived Switching Barriers and Satisfaction," Journal of Business Research, vol. 59, pp. 214- 224, 2006.

[42] A. Bhattacherjee, "An empirical analysis of the antecedents of electronic commerce service continuance," Decision Support Systems, vol. 32, pp. 201-214, 2001.

[43] R. L. Oliver, "Whence Consumer Loyalty?," Journal of Marketing, vol. 63: Fundamental Issues and Directions for Marketing, pp. 33-44, 1999.

[44] W. H. DeLone and E. R. McLean, "Information Systems Success: The Quest for the Dependent Variable," Information Systems Research, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 60-95, 1992.

[45] D. Gefen and D. W. Straub, "The Relative Importance of Perceived Ease-of-Use in IS Adoption: A Study of e- Commerce Adoption," Journal of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 1, no. 8, pp. 1-30, 2000.

[46] F. Davis, "Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User Acceptance of Information Technology," MIS Quarterly, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 319-340, 1989.

[47] T.-Z. Chang and A. R. Wildt, "Price, Product Information, and Purchase Intention: An Empirical Study," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 16-27, 1994.

[48] D. Sirdeshmukh, J. Singh, and B. Sabol, "Consumer Trust, Value, and Loyalty in Relational Exchanges," Journal of Marketing, vol. 66, pp. 15-37, January 2002.

[49] D. J. Kim, "Self-Perception-Based Versus Transference- Based Trust Determinants in Computer-Mediated Transactions: A Cross-Cultural Comparison Study," Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 13- 45, 2008.

[50] R. Agarwal and V. Venkatesh, "Assessing a Firm?s Web Presence: A Heuristic Evaluation Procedure for the Measurement of Usability," Information Systems Research, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 168-186, 2002.

Table 1. Scale items and descriptive statistics  Construct Item Name Item Wording Mean Std. Dev.

