DISCRIMINATION OF GEOLOGICAL END MEMBERS USING HYPERION IMAGERY: PRELIMINARY RESULTS, BIG BEND NATIONAL PARK, TEXAS

ABSTRACT  Hyperion hyperspectral data are being tested as a means for generating databases of surface cover at Big Bend National Park, Texas.  Preliminary unmixing results indicate a capacity for discrimination of general geological classes, but separation of several sedimentary end members has proven difficult due to shared weathering characteristics.  Of special interest in this study is the utility of hyperspectral data in the mapping of fractional lithological compositions of widespread alluvial deposits.

Index Terms? geology, desert regions, spectroscopy  1. INTRODUCTION  The potential value of hyperspectral datasets in the identification and mapping of narrowly-defined classes of surface cover has been demonstrated in numerous past studies [e.g., 1-3].  In the present study, Hyperion data and relevant hyperspectral techniques are being evaluated with regard to their utility in mapping the surface distribution of geological and vegetation classes over a section of Big Bend National Park, Texas.  Of interest is the capacity of hyperspectral data to be utilized in the mapping of surface- cover classes that cannot be clearly distinguished through pixel-based classification of Landsat or ASTER datasets.

Successful discrimination of geological end members could allow for the improved mapping of bedrock exposures, as well as the determination of the fractional compositions of large alluvial deposits that extend across much of the park.

More generally, the applicability of hyperspectral data in the mapping of geological and botanical end members of interest could help expand the capacity of the park to produce spatial inventories of exposed surface materials, and to monitor future changes in the abundances and spatial extents of these materials.

2. STUDY AREA  Big Bend National Park is located immediately north of the U.S.-Mexico border in Brewster County, southwest Texas (Fig.1a).  The park forms part of the eastern portion of the Chihuahuan Desert, which extends across parts of Texas,  New Mexico, Arizona, and northern Mexico.  For the purposes of this study, an experimental transect has been defined across the western part of the park on the basis of the wide diversity of geological and botanical classes contained within its boundaries.  This transect extends northward from the Rio Grande, across Rattlesnake, Bee, and Tule mountains, to Maverick and Dogie mountains in the northwestern part of the park.  A wide range of material types is exposed across this transect, including those related to sedimentary units of the Aguja, Pen, Javelina, and Black Peaks formations, sedimentary and volcanic units of the Chisos and Canoe formations, Tertiary volcanic units, and alluvium.  The extent of vegetation cover within the transect varies widely, ranging from full cover to virtually no cover.

Especially common varieties of vegetation include creosote, mesquite, willow, sotol, agave (including Agave lechuguilla), rosaceae, cacti (including those of the Opuntia and Cylindropuntia genera), yuccas, and a diverse range of grasses.

3. HYPERION DATA  The Hyperion instrument [4] is one of several mounted on NASA?s EO-1 spacecraft, launched in 2000 and now operating on an extended mission in partnership with the USGS.  The instrument is an along-track sensor that collects optical data in 242 spectral channels in the visible, near- infrared, and shortwave infrared, with continuous spectral coverage across the range of ~0.4 - 2.4 m, and with channel spectral resolutions of ~10 nm.  The system images with a swath width of 7.6 km and a pixel size of 30 x 30 m.

A Hyperion image was acquired across the study area on the morning of July 23, 2007.  Noisy or otherwise unusable channels were first discarded, and the remaining 196- channel database was converted from measures of at-sensor radiance to measures of reflectance using standard ENVI / FLAASH-based procedures of atmospheric correction.

4. FIELD AND LABORATORY DATA  Three ground-truth reconnaissance surveys were conducted along sub-sections of the transect in 2007/2008.  In total, the spectral properties of approximately 40 surface-cover classes of both major and minor spatial importance were     Fig.1.  A) Location of Big Bend National Park (BBNP), Texas; B) reflectance spectra of selected geological classes present in the study area: 1 ? salt crust; 2 ? Javelina Fm tan-weathering sandstone; 3 ? Pen Fm tan-weathering shale; 4 ? Aguja Fm tan-weathering sandstone; 5 ? Chisos Fm ash; 6 ? Chisos Fm dark mafic unit; 7 ? Chisos Fm tan-weathering basalt; 8 ? Tertiary syenodiorite.  Spectra produced through utilization of an ASD Fieldspec3 system employing a contact probe.

determined using an ASD FieldSpec3 portable spectrometer.

The spectral properties of surface-cover classes were determined both in situ and, using a contact probe, in a laboratory setting.  On the basis of the data collected through these surveys, preliminary geological end members were defined and characterized.  The ground-based spectra of selected geological classes are given in Fig.1b.

5. PRELIMINARY UMMIXING RESULTS  Early tests involving linear unmixing of Hyperion data, conducted on the basis of field-derived geological end- member spectra, have produced encouraging results.  A capacity for spectral separation of the most distinct end members in the study area is evident, with the general spatial distribution of several key end members usefully determined from the Hyperion dataset, in addition to a general green-vegetation surface-cover class.  However, the spectral basis for separation of several important sedimentary lithological end members of interest (Pen Fm shale, Aguja Fm sandstone, Javelina Fm sandstone) is not sufficient for confident mapping of these classes, whose weathered surfaces can be indistinct relative to corresponding pristine surfaces.

The results of a basic four-class unmixing exercise over one part of the Big Bend transect are given in Fig.2.  Defined end members include only vegetation, sedimentary rock, mafic igneous rock, and felsic igneous rock.  Spectral characteristics of the weathered surfaces of sandstone and limestone units in the area are generally very similar and are  collectively represented here by the spectrum of an Aguja Fm sandstone sample.  Mafic igneous units in the area include both basaltic and gabbroic varieties, and are represented here by a dark basalt sample of the Chisos Fm.

Felsic igneous units in the area are predominantly syenite or syenodiorite, and are represented here by a Tertiary syenodiorite sample collected at Rattlesnake Mountain.

6. FUTURE WORK  Preliminary tests have focused on the discrimination of widely-distributed geological classes in the study area, on the basis of ground surveys conducted in selected sub- regions of the study area.  Future work will build on early results, expanding consideration to additional sub-regions of the study area as these regions are examined and sampled.

Future work will also focus greater attention on the mapping of the fractional lithological compositions of alluvial fans, and on the discrimination of botanical end members of interest.  The capacity of Hyperion data to produce information of greater specificity than that which can be produced using traditional image types will be determined through comparison of Hyperion results with those generated using ASTER databases and standard pixel-based classification algorithms.

Fieldwork conducted in support of this research was authorized by Big Bend National Park (BIBE-2007-SCI- 0038).  The assistance of Jeremiah Kokes (TTU) in the 2007 and 2008 field campaigns is gratefully acknowledged.

II - 1267    Fig.2.  Results of an unmixing exercise for one part of the transect at Big Bend National Park.  The field-mapped distribution of bedrock and alluvial units in this area is given at top left (modified after [5]).  End-member distribution maps generated through linear deconvolution of Hyperion data, produced on the basis of field-derived end-member spectra, are given at bottom (black = 0% cover; white = 100% cover).  Photographs of selected materials in the region are given in Figs. 3 and 4.

II - 1268    Fig.3.  Materials of the Alamo Creek Basalt Member of the Tertiary Chisos Formation (foreground), and mafic igneous units of the Chisos Formation (middle ground, center).

Fig.4.  Alluvium and Cretaceous sedimentary units (foreground), Cretaceous igneous units at Pe?a Mountain (middle ground, center), and Cretaceous limestone units of the Santa Elena Formation (background, right).

7. REFERENCES  [1] Goetz, A., G. Vane, J. Solomon, and B. Rock, ?Imaging Spectrometry for Earth Remote Sensing?, Science, v.228, pp.1147- 1153, 1985.

[2] Green, R., M. Eastwood, C. Sarture, T. Chrien, M. Aronsson, B. Chippendale, J. Faust, B. Pavri, C. Chovit, M. Solis, M. Olah, and O. Williams, ?Imaging Spectroscopy and the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS)?, Remote Sensing of Environment, v.65, pp.227-248, 1998.

[3] Kruse, F., J. Boardman, and J. Huntington, ?Comparison of Airborne Hyperspectral Data and EO-1 Hyperion for Mineral v.41, pp.1388-1400, 2003.

[4] Pearlman, J., P. Barry, C. Segal, J. Shepanski, D. Beiso, and S.

Carman, ?Hyperion, a Space-Based Imaging Spectrometer?, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, v.41, pp.1160- 1173, 2003.

[5] Lehman, T.,  ?Bedrock geology of Castolon Quadrangle, Brewster County, Texas?, 1:24,000, USGS, in preparation.

