BUILDING GOOD SPECTRAL VEGETATION BACKGROUNDS IN THE VNIR  James E. Kester

ABSTRACT It has been said that one person?s signal is another person?s noise, or alternatively, one engineer?s ground clutter is another engineer?s object of interest.  Vegetation observed with spectral imagers can be regarded either way.  Some users of spectral data (multispectral or hyperspectral) want to study the plants in the pixels, and others want to use characteristics of the plants to move them out of the way of more interesting things.  This is a difficult problem in either case in that vegetation is not time-static (spectral reflectance changes with seasons) and vegetation in general has smaller spatial scale than spectral data sets do.

One approach is to model the reflectance or other properties of plants at pixel scale, using various observed data and mathematical models to span both wavelength and spatial dimension.  Data collection at the leaf/branch level is known to be costly in labor, travel, and equipment and fraught with pitfalls for the field operator.  Models for scaling up from plant data to larger spatial dimensions also have assumptions and built-in limitations.  One big problem is to identify and avoid sources of error and variance which can cause a collection?s data to be suspect.

Remotely-sensed spectral data have been around for decades, and research on uses of these data continues even as commercial and government agencies use multispectral and hyperspectral sets to identify species cover in forests, monitor the health of crops, seek mineral deposits, track pollution, and monitor the condition of roadways.  Those who use spectral images get the data from sources like LANDSAT, ASTER, and SPOT, or newer systems such as AVIRIS, MODIS, and HYPERION.

The technical challenge is to aggregate, upward, the knowledge collected at the leaf level, to enable people to make inferences at the pixel level.  I will discuss some of these published efforts in more detail. There are several issues at each level in this aggregation, including calibration, drift, illumination, and sample integrity.  In measuring leaf reflectance, there are several protocols dependent on the measuring equipment.  The instrument also needs to be calibrated and controlled for drift.

Deterioration of the sample being measured will occur.

Illumination, if solar, will vary as measurements proceed.

The same issues occur in the greenhouse/laboratory setting.  We will explore several of these sources of non- representative spectra.

Researchers are attempting to bridge the gap from leaf to pixel using canopy reflectance models.  A few widely accepted models are SAILH and PROSPECT, and their variants. (Canopy models are also used for estimating biometric properties over large areas.)  Index Terms- Spectra, Vegetation, Hyperspectral, ground truth.

1. Introduction It has been said that one person?s signal is another person?s noise.  Vegetation observed with spectral imagers can be regarded in either way.  Some users of spectral data (multispectral or hyperspectral) want to study plants in the pixels, and others want to use characteristics of the plants to move them out of the way of more interesting things.  This is a problem in either case; vegetation spectra are not time-static (spectral reflectance changes with seasons) and plants in general have smaller spatial scales than do spectral data sets.

Another problem is to identify, and avoid, sources of error and variance which can cause a collection?s spectral data to be suspect.

For imaging, one approach is to model the reflectance or other properties of plants at pixel scale using various observed/measured data and mathematical models to span both the wavelength and spatial dimensions.  However, data collection at the leaf/branch level is known to be costly in labor, travel, and equipment, as well as fraught with procedural pitfalls for the field operator.  Models for scaling up from plant data to larger spatial dimensions also have limiting assumptions.

2. Methodology Remotely-sensed spectral data have been around for decades, and research on uses of these data continues.

Commercial and government agencies use multispectral and hyperspectral sets to identify species cover in forests, monitor the health of crops, seek mineral deposits, track pollution, and monitor the condition of roadways.  Those who use spectral images get the data from sources such as LANDSAT, ASTER, and SPOT, or newer systems such as AVIRIS, MODIS, and HYPERION.

To have ground truth data with which to correlate image data, researchers measure reflectance and other botanical properties at the leaf level of resolution.  The technical challenge is to aggregate, upward, the knowledge collected at the leaf level, to enable people to make inferences at the pixel level.  Plant structure and geometries affect how VNIR spectra can be aggregated.

In the LWIR, other phenomena come into play; da Luz and Crowley [1] have found that as the field of view gets larger, reflective properties of the canopy become smaller and the canopy becomes essentially a blackbody.

There are several issues at each level in this aggregation, including calibration, drift, illumination, and sample integrity.  Each piece of spectral measuring equipment has various protocols for proper measurement and calibration.  Prior to measurement, an instrument usually needs to be thermally stabilized, over a period of time specified as part of the equipment manual.  Lack of thermal stability may induce drift.  This becomes especially important with long wavelength IR equipment, where chilled detectors are used to reduce thermal noise.

Regular preventive maintenance and vendor calibration are needed even before the equipment is taken to the field.

During measurements, frequent baselining with both reflectance and wavelength standards will assure that spectral measurements are trustworthy.

It is very important to assure that sample illumination is as fully hemispheric as possible.  There must be no significant obstructions for the downwelling radiation.

Web pictures can be misleading ? web pages by vendors and some authors? publications show the optics head of the spectroradiometer, for instance, held by a field technician pointing down, near the technician?s body, which is a guarantee that reflected light off clothing will get into the measured spot.  The optics need to be remoted, at the end of as long a boom as the optics cabling will permit.  In greenhouse experiments, sunlight coming from skylights can be controlled by measuring at the same time of day for each measurement, but the skylights will also limit the directions from which the light arrives at the samples.

The use of a leaf holder, to measure reflected and or transmitted radiation, allows control of illumination (from the radiometer?s own source), angle of measurement, and the portion of sample in the field of view (FOV).

Measuring other than flat leaves (conifer needles in situ, for instance) creates issues with the angles of view on the sample, and also with the control of the light ? light passing through the sample may reflect off something behind the sample and come back through the sample into the detector.  A beam dump (light trap) behind the sample will solve the problem.  This trap must be calibrated to assure it does not return very much stray light; using the dump/trap for calibration will measure both stray light and the detector dark current.  It should be designed so that the sample leaves do not get folded or torn by edges of the dump or the holder.  Any clamping by the leaf holder has two risks ? the pressure of the clamp may damage the leaf, imperiling longitudinal studies, and any misalignment or faulty clamping may allow stray external light to enter along the surface of the sample.

For large leaves (where the FOV of the leaf holder is small compared to the size of the leaf) another issue is where to position the holder on the leaf.  This can be driven by the intended use of the spectra, but care must be taken to document the protocol so that users will understand the nature of the spectra.  The FOV can be placed over the mesophyll of the leaf, avoiding veins and stems (as well as anomalies like insect damage and dry spots), or it can be placed so as to include a little of each ? veins, membranes, and other features.  Detailed research has been done not only on the cellular structure of leaves but on the effect of structure on their reflective and transmissive properties [2].  If we are concerned with spectral nature of boughs and canopies, we tend to put more emphasis on the upward/sunward face of the leaves.

Those interested in the biology and chemistry of the leaf will weight the sides about equally.  The leaf holder can cover a range of levels of detail of leaf properties, which then may or may not be useful in modeling vegetation spectrally.

Some researchers pluck or cut branches and then make a heap in the instrument FOV, to measure bulk reflectance (Ustin [3], Damm and Hostert [4], Cipar [5]).  The time between cutting and measurement may make a difference in the spectrum observed, and the storage conditions of the cuttings will also affect the spectra.  Carefully documenting the protocol helps others with the utility of the spectra.  Dr Susan Ustin [3] describes, in the metadata for the OTTER/LICOR spectra at ORNL: ?All spectrometer measurements ... were taken under artificial illumination ... during a 3 day period between June 17-19, 1990. ... Branch samples were collected by the OSU participants from selected trees by shotgun or pruning poles. All spectral measurements were made  III - 787    within 15 hours of collection. Samples were immediately tagged and placed into plastic bags and stored in a cooler until spectral measurements were made. After reflectance measurements were made using the LI-COR 1800 on the branches, the sample spectra were immediately measured under the same lamp arrangement by Dr. Carol Wessman (University of Colorado) using a GER SIRIS spectroradiometer.?  Dr. Ustin also documents the possible sources of error in these methods: ?It is possible that branch spectra changed during the storage time before measurements due to changes in pigment concentrations. Previous studies on ponderosa pine have shown that the spectra and chlorophyll contents remain stable (within measurement error) for more than 48 hours when stored using methods employed in this study.

Changes in color and the loss of chlorophyll were visually noticed by the end of the set of scan measurements (ca.

1.5 minutes) on some samples, thus it is believed that it was possible for the light and/or heat of the lamps to have caused some deterioration and spectral changes in the samples during the measurement period? [3].  CACI has noticed similar changes with leaf holder samples.

Damm and Hostert [4] took spectra of chestnut leaves ?using an ASD Field Spec Pro II spectroradiometer. All measurements were taken under laboratory conditions within a van. The samples were arranged on a black background, the geometry of sensor and illumination was standardized using an ASD High Intensity Contact Probe.?  They also flash-froze samples of leaf tissue to transport to the laboratory for chemical analysis.  Dr. John Cipar [5] has measured spectra of senescent leaves in the laboratory with an ASD using the ?heap? method of filling the FOV.

Stress to plants takes a variety of forms.  Adverse chemicals can enter through the roots as liquids or gases, through the air, or by contact with the leaves.  Parts of a plant can be cut off and the spectral change due to drying observed.  The effects of these stresses will have characteristic time lags depending on the mode of stress [6].  What can be forgotten is that removing a sample (cutting off a branch, plucking leaves) will likely also stress the source organism, thereby possibly affecting future samples from the same plant.

In the extreme, cell and plant death reveal the cellulose skeleton of the leaves [7].  Chlorophyll, water content, and cellulose are all easily monitored remotely with hyperspectral imaging systems.  Seasonal variation of vegetation signatures may be viewed as change caused by environmental stress.   ?In any case, the primary underlying phenomenology of vegetation signatures is related to changes in the health and quantity of chlorophyll contained in the plant leaves.  It does not seem to matter what causes the stress.  Just about  anything that causes vegetation stress is manifested in changes in the chlorophyll content of the plant material? [7].

We must also account for responses which vary with species and climate.  Temperate-zone deciduous trees and conifers have their own patterns of coping with temperature and precipitation variations.  Desert vegetation species display even more diverse methods of surviving extremes of wet and dry [8].  Juniper in the desert will retain its green color all year, while grasses and shrubs like tumbleweed lose their chlorophyll and senesce during the dry season.

3. Modeling  Researchers are attempting to bridge the gap from leaf to pixel using canopy reflectance models.  A few widely accepted models are SAILH and PROSPECT, and their variants. (Canopy models are also used for estimating biometric properties over large areas) [9, 10]. Such models include assumptions about the leaf property data used as input, the geometry of the shrubs and trees in the FOV, and the nature of the surrounding environment.

The forest canopy is not uniform, having more of a fractal nature; models at least in early development assume bulk, uniform properties.  For example, the authors of GeoSail [11] write:  ?Scene reflectance is determined in the model by calculating an area-weighted average of three landscape components: illuminated canopy, illuminated background, and shadowed background.  The simplicity of this model is a result of the assumption that single values for the reflectance and transmittance of light by canopy clumps are enough to provide a reasonable overall description of scene reflectance and absorption.  ...? And later:  ?GeoSail is a simple model, it assumes all trees in the scene are identical and have identical reflectance and transmittance characteristics.  The model also assumes that tree shadows are uniform, and are very small relative to the size of the pixel.  In the model trees do not cast shadows on other trees.  GeoSail accounts for multiple scattering within tree crowns, but not between crowns? [11].

A last issue, which this paper will only briefly deal with, concerns the contents of the image resolution cell.  Except for dense forest and croplands, each pixel likely will contain not a uniform plant canopy, but views of multiple plant species, the underlying forest litter, and soil, rock, sand, and watershed material [12].  Research is still going on for techniques to combine the spectra of components of the field of view into a single composite spectrum for FOV or pixel.

III - 788    Conclusion:  Beware of these pitfalls; spectroscopy is a complex process with multiple phenomena which the researcher and user must acknowledge.

4. References: [1] Ribeiro da Luz, B., & Crowley, J. K. Spectral reflectance and emissivity features of broad leaf plants: Prospects for remote sensing in the thermal infrared (8.0?14.0 ?m). Remote Sensing of Environment (2007), doi:10.1016/j.rse.2007.01.008.

[2] Salisbury, Dr. Jack, private correspondence.

2005-2007.

[3] Ustin, Susan, http://daac.ornl.gov/OTTER/guides/LICOR_Spectral _Reflectance_Data.html, May 2008 [4] A. Damm and P. Hostert, Modeling Reflectance of Urban Chestnut Trees:  A sensitivity Analysis of Model Inversion for Single Trees, Humboldt- Universit?t zu Berlin, 10th International Symposium on Physical Measurements and Signatures in Remote Sensing, March 12-14, 2007, Davos, Switzerland.

[5] Dr John J. Cipar, AFRL/RVBY, private correspondence. 2006-2008 [6] Garc?a-Quijano, M., 2005, ?Claycap Anomaly Detection Using Hyperspectral Remote Sensing and Data Mining Techniques?. Mine Reclamation and Hazardous Waste Site Analysis, Baltimore: American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ASPRS (9 March) [7] Kelch, D.J., et. al., "Hyperspectral Technology Applications to Waste-Site Monitoring, Final Report", National Aeronautics and Space Agency Contract NAS13-98070, CACI MTL Systems, Inc., Dayton, OH, CACI MTL Document ITF426-034, July 2001.

[8] The Encyclopedia of Earth, Adaptations of Desert Plants, http://www.eoearth.org/article/Adaptations_of_desert_plant s, Mar 2008 [9] Zarco-Tejada, P.J., Miller, J.R., et al, ?Needle chlorophyll content estimation through model inversion using hyperspectral data from boreal conifer forest canopies?, Remote Sensing of Environment 89 (2004) 189?199.

[10] Schlerf, M. et al, ?Comparing Three Canopy Reflectance Models with Hyperspectral Multi- angular Satellite Data?, 2007, 4 pp, ?earth.esa.int/object/doc.cfm?fobjectid=5377&linkSo urce=fulltext?.

[11] BOREAS TE-18 GeoSail Canopy Reflectance Model, at web sites http://daac.ornl.gov/BOREAS/guides/TE18_GeoSail.html and http://daac.ornl.gov/boreas/TE/te18geos/comp/TE18_GeoS ail.txt.

[12] Reister, D.B., Ritchie, J.C., and Rango, A., ?Endmembers, Pixel Unmixing, and Clustering?, 2003, http://www.ornl.gov/sci/fossil/Publications/RECENT %20PUBS/FEAC320-1.pdf.

'Building good spectral vegetation models in the VNIR? was cleared for Public Release.

Disposition Date:  6/3/2008.   Document Number WPAFB 08-3525.

