An Intrusion Detection System in Ad Hoc Networks: A Social Network Analysis Approach

Abstract?We introduce a social network analysis method as a new approach to build an Intrusion Detection System (SN- IDS) in ad hoc networks. The SN-IDS utilizes social relations as metrics-of-interest for anomaly detections, which is different from most traditional IDS approaches. To construct proper social networks, we first investigate ad hoc MAC and network layer data attributes and select relevant social feature sets; then we build up a set of socio-matrices based on these features. Social analysis methods are applied to these matrices to detect suspicious behaviors of mobile nodes. NS-2 simulation results show that this SN-IDS system can effectively detect common attacks with high detection rates and low false positive alarm rates. Furthermore, it has clear advantages over the conventional association rule based data mining IDS in terms of computation and system complexity.

Index Terms?Intrusion Detection System, Social Network Analysis, Network Security, Ad Hoc Networks.



I. INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK  Social network analysis has emerged as an interdisciplinary technique in modern sociology, information science and eco- nomics. Social relationships are used to enhance system func- tions, performance, and security levels. Social Path Routing (SPROUT) algorithm exploits social path trust rating in struc- tured p2p networks [1]. Davis Social Links was proposed in [2], social closeness centrality metric was used for routing dis- covery. Coffman and Marcus applied Hidden Markov Models to identify suspicious communication evolutions for certain groups based on Social Network metric values [3].

In order to secure the perimeter-free ad hoc networks, many types of intrusion detection systems (IDS) have been proposed, including stand-alone IDS, distributed cooperative IDS and hierarchical (cluster-based) IDS. Distributed cooperative IDS was first proposed by Zhang and Lee [4]. If a node detects an intrusion with low confidence, it can initiate a global intrusion detection procedure through a cooperative detection engine. Yi and Lee [5] developed a cross-feature analysis using decision- tree based classification algorithm for local anomaly detection.

Mell and McLarnon proposed a hierarchical IDS architecture [6]. A cluster of neighboring MANET nodes randomly and fairly elect a monitoring node to run IDS.

In this work we attempt to study the capability of social network analysis as a new anomaly detection tool. Our objec- tive is to demonstrate that a set of properly constructed social networks can be as effective as some conventional data mining  based IDS in capturing network attacks, while with less system complexity. To the best of our knowledge, our work of building an intrusion detection system using the social network analysis method is the first of its kind.



II. SOCIAL NETWORKS ANALYSIS  There are three formal ways to analyze the huge amount of social network data: descriptive methods using social graphs; statistical modeling; and analysis methods using the adjacency matrix (socio-matrix). In this paper, we focus on analysis methods, especially the ?centrality? properties.

A. CENTRALITY  Freeman General Centrality [7] is a very important quan- titative parameter representing which members of a network are important. The three widely used centrality measures are ?degree?, ?betweenness? and ?closeness?.

?Degree? is defined as the number of direct connections an actor has to other members of the network. Actors with a high degree centrality are popular nodes with a large amount of links to other nodes in the network. If we represent the whole network graph as G, and the total number of nodes as N , degree centrality for node k is expressed as  CD(k) = ? ?j?G j ?=k  wkj (1)  where wkj is the edge weights between node j and k (j ?= k).

?Betweenness? shows the importance of a node in the  network. Geodesic Path (GP) is defined to be the shortest path between two nodes in the network. ?Betweenness? of node k takes the form of  CB(k) = ?  ?i,j?G, i?=j ?=k  GPNumikj GPNumij  (2)  where GPNumikj is the number of Geodesic paths from node i to j involving node k, while GPNumij is the total number of Geodesic paths with or without node k. An actor is considered in a favored position if it frequently falls on the geodesic paths between other pairs of actors in the network.

?Closeness? centrality means how close a node is to all the other nodes in the network by emphasizing all the distances, rather than only with its immediate nodes. Thus this parameter also shows the importance of the node. The definition of     ?closeness? of one node is the inverse of the sum of the geodesic distances (Geodesic Path length) from that node to all the other nodes.

CC(k) = N ? 1?  ?j?G j ?=k  GPLenkj (3)  B. EGO NETWORK  In this work, we focus our study on ?local? ego networks (local analysis). Ego network is a network which is made up of a single actor (ego) together with the actors who are connected to (alters) and all the links among those alters. Since global network topology information is hardly available at each node, ego network provides enough information for our system. It helps understand variation in the behavior of individuals, and whether behaviors of one node during a certain period match its routine ones. Analyzing centrality properties in the ego network is relatively simpler.

According to Equation (3), the ?closeness? of an ego k is 1 considering k has a direct connection with all the alter nodes.

The ?betweenness? metric calculation is also simplified since the length of Geodesic paths is either one or two. Assume ego k?s binary adjacency matrix A = [aij ]N?N is defined as  aij =  { 1, node i and j have a direct connection 0, otherwise  and B = A2 = [bij ]N?N , where N is the total number of nodes in the network. Thus for each element bij in B,  bij = ai1a1j + ai2a2j + . . . + aiNaNj (4)  it represents the total number of pathways from node i to node j (i ? 1 ? j, . . . , i ? N ? j) with the length two.

According to the definition of ?betweenness?, in ego net- works, we should only consider the cases with Geodesic paths? length equals to two, excluding the ones that two nodes i and j have direct links. As a result, the ego k?s betweenness can be simplified as  CB(k) = ?  ?i?=1,j ?=1,i?=j?B, i,j?{aij ?=1}  bij  (5)

III. SOCIAL NETWORK BASED IDS  A. FEATURE OF INTERESTS IN AD HOC NETWORKS  To characterize MAC layer normal behaviors, we define features based on the MAC layer data attributes, with one exception for DATA packets in the MAC layer. That is, we further associate each MAC DATA packet with information from the network layer, a MAC DATA packet may encapsulate a routing data packet (routingDataPkt) or a routing control packet (routingCtrlPkt). MAC information can help identify information of each pair of sending and receiving nodes, so it could either trace the exact attack source or at least the misbehaved node (a victim node) for most of the attacks.

But the MAC layer does not always provide enough infor- mation for social network analysis. For example, the network  layer blackhole attack will cause changes in social relations at the network layer among victim nodes, but nodes? social relations at MAC layer will not change since every node?s physical neighbors have not changed. Therefore in our system, features are selected from both MAC and network layers.

With different typed control and data traffic from both MAC and network layers, we can build multiple ego networks at the same time, with each network representing one relation. Table I lists our cross layer social feature set.

TABLE I SOCIAL FEATURE SET FROM MAC AND NETWORK LAYERS  Feature Value Space Time Timestamp  Flow direction IN, OUT MACPktType RTS, CTS, DATA, ACK  RoutingPktType routingDataPkt, routingCtrlPkt Neighboring nodes nodeIDs in the Routing Table  B. INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM PROPOSED  Data Collection  Data Preprocessing  Data Preprocessing  Module  MAC/Network layer Data  Metrics Analysis  Normal Profile Statistics Testing Profile Statistics  Detection  Global Response Local Response  Social Analysis  Module  Intrusion Response  Module  Control Matrices Data Matrices  RTS CTS RoutingData NeighborLists... ...

Generating Social Networks  Fig. 1. Social Network Based Intrusion Detection System  Figure 1 is our proposed social network based intrusion detection system. In this work, we are more focus on the data preprocessing and social analysis modules, to show how socio- matrices are collected and analyzed for anomaly detections.

Previous work of integrating local intrusion alerts with global intrusion alerts can be found in [8].

1) Data Preprocessing Module: The data collection com- ponent collects all audit data according to the feature set described in table I. Then the data preprocessing component will segment the data with a sliding window (sampling period), encode each data item into the appro- priate social formats, and categorize them to construct different ego networks in the subsequent module.

2) Social Analysis Module: This module provides much freedom for different IDS design objectives. One of the major advantages of applying the social network method     is its flexibility to define what the ?actors? are and what the ?ties? are. For ego networks with different types of actors and ties, the same metrics analysis methods can be employed, which means, the system does not have to change the analysis tool but the objects for different design purposes. The metrics analysis will apply the mathematical methods introduced in section II.

We use control and data traffic to construct social networks.

Each social network is represented by an adjacency matrix.

For control matrices, ?degree? centrality is calculated, since ?betweenness? does not mean anything for control messages; For data matrices, both ?betweenness? and ?degree? centrality are computed. Although we do not monitor other matrices such as MAC ACK/Route Request/Route Reply/Route Error, all these ego networks can be easily generated if needed.

The profile built up process is divided into two phases.

During the training phase, training data is collected over a long period of time relative to testing data. By repeating the simulation multiple times, a normal profile is constructed by averaging the outputs from the metrics analysis component.

During the testing phase, the calculated social metrics of the testing data will be compared to the normal profile, if testing data statistics violate the ones from the normal profile, an anomaly will be reported (details in IV. C).



IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION  The simulation platform we use is Network Simulator (NS- 2). Table II lists our simulation environment.

TABLE II NS-2 SIMULATION SCENARIOS AND PARAMETERS  Parameter Value/Choice Topology 500m x 500m  Node movement random waypoint model Radio range 250m  Routing protocol AODV Link capacity 11 Mbit/s  Node set count 30 Average transmission rate per flow 10packet/s, 512byte/packet  Maximum Connects 25 Pause time 1000/300/100/10s  Max Moving Speed 5 m/s  We use the following three metrics to evaluate the perfor- mance of our proposed detection system.

1) Single-node successful detection rate: the probability of at least one node in the network that detects the attacks correctly during a particular time frame;  2) Multi-node successful detection ratio: the ratio of the number of nodes that detect the attacks correctly during a particular time frame to the total number of nodes in the network;  3) Multi-node false positive ratio: the ratio of the number of nodes falsely identifying attack-free events as anomalies during a particular time frame to the total number of nodes in the network.

From a normal ?betweenness? profile in Figure 2, we can see that the ?local betweenness? will fluctuate around a local mean indicating changes of routing information due to node  movements or link failures. Thus in our work, during both training and testing phases, a sliding window is applied for alleviating the ?betweenness? fluctuation.

1 14 27 40 53 66 79 92 105 118 131 144 157 170 183  Time  B et  w ee  n n  es s  Fig. 2. Normal node betweenness  We set node15 as the malicious node playing the blackhole attack and study the attack impact on node15?s immediate neighbor node27. In Figure 3, during the attack time, the betweenness of the attacker node15 increases sharply with attracting many other nodes to join its ego network. At the same time, node27?s betweenness decreases as many of its alter nodes stop their connections to node27, thus its ego network is degenerated to a smaller one with fewer alters.

node15      1 15 29 43 57 71 85 99 113 127 141 155 169 183 197 211 Time  B et  w ee  n n es  s  (a) Betweenness of an attacker node15  node27      1 15 29 43 57 71 85 99 113 127 141 155 169 183 197 211  Time  B et  w ee  n n es  s  (b) Betweenness of attacker?s neighbor node27  Fig. 3. Betweenness change under a blackhole attack  Furthermore, the ?betweenness? impact is not constrained to the attacker?s immediate neighbors. Not being a neighbor to the attacker node15, node2?s ego network also changed during the attack. Figure 4 shows its ego network before and after the blackhole attack, with connection numbers dropped among the ego and some alters. If node2 has nodes on its neighboring list, i.e. node6, 21, 25, and 27, which are victims and immediate neighbors of node15, the connections from these victim nodes to node2 would immediately decrease to zero at the beginning of the attack period, thus the betweenness of node2 would increase sharply as the denominator in Equation (2) decreases.

Therefore, with neighboring nodes unchanged, node2 which is not on the victim list (within one-hop range) would detect the occurrence of an attack over multi-hop range.

Table III shows the average ratios of nodes that successfully and falsely detect the blackhole and sleep deprivation attacks for different pause time. As shown in the table, with a low                  (a) Before blackhole attack               (b) After blackhole attack  Fig. 4. Attacker?s non-neighbor ? node2?s ego network  false positive rate, our system performs well on these two attacks. It can achieve 100% successful single-node detection.

Meanwhile, the successful detection rate increases as the maximum pause time decreases. This can be explained by the ?small-world phenomenon? principle in social networks. The ?six degrees of separation? states that everyone is an average of six ?steps? away from each person on earth. Within our small ad hoc network of 30 nodes, the impact of attacks on nodes? relations will propagate from one node to the whole network over multi-hops, but only those nodes whose perceiving impact from the victims is big enough can detect the attacks. With less mobility, the number of nodes who catch this impact is more limited; while with more mobility, the information will propagate further in the network.

TABLE III AVERAGE RATES OF SUCCESSFUL AND FALSE POSITIVE DETECTIONS  Pause Time single-node Multi-node Multi-nodedetection rate detection ratio false positive ratio Blackhole Attack  1000s 100% 43.33% 2.22% 300s 100% 54.81% 1.48% 100s 100% 60.37% 0.37% 10s 100% 84.81% 0.37%  Sleep Deprivation Attack 1000s 100% 45.56% 2.96% 300s 100% 57.41% 1.57% 100s 100% 64.07% 0.37% 10s 100% 66.67% 0.37%

V. MULTIRELATIONS  Social actors are often connected by more than one relation- ship. Thus we here study how multi-relations help make de- tection decisions and improve system detection performance.

To measure the ?degree? of a node, the value of a ?tie? could be the direct traffic that the node sends, receives and relays, or all physical traffic that can be overheard within its transmission range at the MAC layer. For the packet dropping attack, Figure 5 is the observations from node16. As a neighbor of node15 (attacker), node16 (victim) sees that both the direct and physical traffic during the time slot 11, 12 are low, thus an alarm will be raised. Provided the bursty nature of wireless traffic, nodes may have no traffic to send or forward for some  period. Thus without applying the physical traffic matrix, in our experiment, six out of twelve nodes who are node15?s immediate neighbors will generate false alarms at the wrong time (50% false detection rate). But cases with two relations will reduce it to zero false rate in our scenario.

From node15 to node16      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Time Slot  D eg  re e  (a) Direct traffic from node15 to node16        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Time Slot  D eg  re e  other nodes to node15  node15 to other nodes  (b) Physical traffic into and out of node15  Fig. 5. Direct and physical traffic observed in node16?s ego networks under a packet dropping attack  Fig. 6. Ad hoc Topology  For the TCP SYN flooding attack, we use an ad hoc network topology as Figure 6, with node0/5/10 acting as fusion centers.

Within each subnet, all nodes request TCP services to these three nodes. Assume the number of TCP requests (TCP SYN) packets received at one node in a given time is a R.V. with a Poisson distribution, we define a ?deficiency ratio? R as  R = win[sumSY N ] ? win[sumSY N?ACK ]  win[sumSY N?ACK ] (6)  where win[sumSY N ] is the total number of sent SYN packets and win[sumSY N?ACK ] is the total number of received SYN-ACK packets fall in one sliding window. The difference between the number of SYN and SYN-ACK depends on the window size as well as the TCP requests frequency, thus we ?normalize? the difference by win[sumSY N?ACK ] to remove this dependency, and also, to exaggerate the difference if win[sumSY N?ACK ] is small.

Figure 7 shows how SYN-ACK Deficiency Ratio R is calculated using social metrics. {Mi} represent the matrices     M  M  M  M  M  M  M  time  M k-1  M k  M k+1  M k+2  M k+3  M k+4  . . .

50 55 60 65 70  Sliding Windows  M ' M  ' M3' M  ' M  ' M  ' M  ' Mk-1' Mk' Mk+1' Mk+2' Mk+3' Mk+4'. . .

. . .

. . .

SYN #  SYN-ACK #  R 1 R2 R3 Rk Rk+1 Rk+2. . . . . .

MatrixSum  Matrix  Division  Overlap slot Non-overlap slot  MatrixSum '  MatrixSum 2 MatrixSum   MatrixSum ' MatrixSum  '  Matrix  Division  Matrix  Division Matrix  Division Matrix  Division Matrix  Division  MatrixSum k/2  MatrixSum k/2  '  MatrixSum k/2+1MatrixSumk/2+2  MatrixSum k/2+1  ' MatrixSum  k/2+2 '  Fig. 7. Calculating SYN-ACK Deficiency Ratio R by social metrics  sequence for the SYN packets number while {M ?i} represent the sequence for SYN-ACK packets number collected at each node. The immediate two sliding windows are slightly over- lapped in order to alleviate the fluctuation in curves without losing the abnormal change points information.

During the attack period, two attacker nodes 1 and 2 send tremendous TCP SYN requests to the victim node0. Follow equation (6), by basic matrix adding, abstracting and element division, we get the the corresponding ACK deficiency ratio for several nodes as in Figure 8. For the attack free period, the numbers of SYN and SYN-ACK are close, so the R has a very small value; when an attack occurs, the R will jump to a high value compared to the normal situation. We use two relations for the detection, and a single relation will not produce a successful detection result. Even though detections can be made using other methods as in [9], comparable data can be easily obtained from the social network framework.

1 5 9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69  Time  D ef  ic ie  n cy  R at  io  Node3  Node4  Node5  Node10  Fig. 8. SYN-ACK Deficiency Ratio R

VI. RUNTIME COMPLEXITY COMPARISON  We briefly compare the runtime complexity of our proposed IDS with an association rule based IDS, which has been successfully applied to network intrusion detection systems.

There are two issues about association rule based mining algorithms. The first is the algorithm complexity, tremendous amount of time and computer resources will be consumed for  computing. The second is the cost for picking interesting rules even though aggregation and pruning steps are taken. Human manipulation for redundancy rules will be expensive.

We ran both IDS systems on a PC, with Intel(R) Core(TM)2 CPU 6400 @ 2.13GHz, MemTotal 1GB, running Linux OS.

Three ego networks are used to monitor MAC layer Rout- ingData and network layer neighbor lists information. Each node moves with a maximal speed of 5m/s, pause time 10s, and simulation time 30 minutes. The average detection delay for ?social analysis module? in Figure 1 (from generating ego networks to alarming on an attack) is 0.424s. For comparison, with the Apriori based IDS, we get an average of 930,000 data transactions for total 30 minutes at each node, with 7 features for each transaction. Before aggregation, 246 rules are gener- ated; 21 rules are left after. 11 rules are contributable for the final detection. The average detection delay for Apriori based IDS is 1.051s, excluded the time spent on picking valuable rules. Therefore, our SN-IDS system is comparably simpler in implementation and computation, while socio-metrics are comparable to the Apriori based anomaly rules.



VII. CONCLUSIONS  In this work, we introduced the social network analysis method to build an intrusion detection system (SN-IDS) for ad hoc networks. This SN-IDS is intended to monitor different relations among the ad hoc nodes, and generate alarms when one or more relation rules are violated. We also showed that the capability of the proposed SN-IDS can be further extended with the help of combining different matrices to study multi- relations simultaneously. Furthermore, the proposed system has a clear advantage over popular association rule based IDS in terms of computation and system complexity.

