2009 IEEE International Advance Computing Conference (IACC 2009) Patiala, India, 6-7 March 2009

Abstract-the volume of data storage capacity has changed a lot consideration like should the encryption be performed inside as compared with earlier times. As most computers were the database or in the application where the data is generated or standalone and only the users had access to data, security was not in a hardware device? Should encryption keys be kept inside a big concern. All this changed when computers became linked in the database or somewhere else where it is more secure?

networks, in form of small dedicated networks to large LANs, Should the granularity of encrypting data be applied to a WANs and the World Wide Web. With the growth of networking database, a table or a column level? [2] the security of data became a big issue. Data passes through various networks, communication protocols, and devices to In this paper we will focus on a security solution for protection ultimately reach to the user which has made data security of data at rest, specifically protection of numeric data that increasingly important. Security is becoming one of the most resides in the databases.

urgent challenges in database research and industry. Instead of ENCRXTION building walls around servers, a protective layer of encryption should be provided around specific sensitive data-items. This also laIl:tlXXT allows us to define which data stored in databases are sensitive PLAINTEXT and thereby focusing the protection only on the sensitive data, which in turn minimizes the delays or burdens on the system that |0|0001234 ENCRYPTION |3412 4 may occur from other bulk encryption methods.

This paper describes a highly original and new approach of securing numeric data of databases. It presents a practical ENCRPTT N PRO(CESS solution to the problem where numeric data was converted to alphanumeric type and hence encrypted data was not possible to Figure 1. Illustrating encryption of Plaintext (as numeric data) to Ciphertext be stored in the existing numeric field. The proposed algorithm (again numeric data) allows transparent record level encryption that does not change the data field type or fixed length. DECRPThON  Keywords-Encryption; Decryption; Symmetric Encryption; |IYffRTE NT Block Cipher; Key Expansion; Substitution box; Row Shifting; P =:ET AddKey.

5334f2 L00Q012 34

I. INTRODUCTION  The best way of securing the data is to restrict access to the LDECRXTPTION PROCESS data which can be achieved by the process of authentication and authorization. A user should be asked for authenticatingF nform zation bef and sorulounlyc Figure 2. Illustrating decryption of numeric data as Plaintext into numericinformnation before accessing the data and should only be data as Ciphertext allowed to perform the operations for which access rights are available. If the data to be accessed is on a local machine, applying access control is easy, but if data is accessed from a II. ABOUT 3KDEc ALGORITHM remote client, user credentials and data needs to be secured on The algorithm is named 3Kdec from its working as it the network. In such situations security protocols are used. encrypts numeric data which is in form of decimal using three Incase that a malicious user somehow breaches the above keys which can be changed anytime.

security provisions and gets access to data; the only solution is scrambling the data. So encrypting the data whether it is in- 3Kdec is a Symmetric key Block encipherment motion or at-rest - is the next level of security that will make algorithm.

the data worthless for the hacker F[10].the data wortless for thehacker [10].Symmetric key algorithm is one which uses a single secret  Encryption is the process of disguising data in such a way key for both encryption and decryption. Encryption/Decryption to hide its substance, is a very effective way to achieve security as visualized in Figure 1 and 2 above can be considered as an for data at rest. Implementation of a database encryption electronic locking where sender puts the message in a box and strategy raises several important factors that must be taken into locks the box using the shared secret key; receiver unlocks the  978-1-4244-2928-8/09/$25.00 ( 2009 IEEE 1501    box with the same key and takes out the message. The original 2. Find and Substitute message is called plaintext and the message sent through the h.

channel after encryption is called ciphertext. To create 3. Row Shift ciphertext from the plaintext sender uses an encryption 4. Add set Key algorithm and a shared secret key. To create plaintext from the ciphertext receiver uses a decryption algorithm and the same A. KEYEXPANSION secret key. In this step, the single key of the three keys are expanded to  The key can be visualized as a set of values/numbers that as many as three keys summing up the total of nine keys to be the cipher as an algorithm operates on [1]. used in the maximum nine rounds. Keyl is expanded as Key 10,  Key 1l and Key 12and similarly Key 20, Key 21, Key 22,Key 30,In symmetric key encipherment the encryption and Key31 and Key32.

decryption algorithms are inverses of each other. If P is the plaintext, C is the ciphertext, and K is the key, the encryption The complexity of key expansion is directly depending on algorithm EK(x) creates the ciphertext from; the decryption number of rounds. Incase of 3 rounds there will be algorithm algorithm DK(X) creates the plaintext from the ciphertext. complexity of one; while incase of 6 rounds there will be a Encryption algorithm EK(x) and the decryption algorithm complexity of two and similarly three incase of 9 rounds.

DK(x) are inverses of each other and they cancel the effect of The process of expansion of Key 1 into its constituent Key each other when applied one after the other on the same input. 10, Key 1 and Key12 is as follows in Figure 4:  Encryption: C= EK (P) Key 10is same as Key 1  Decryption: P= DK (C) Key 11 is shifting the row 1 zero times, row 2 elements one That is, time and row 3 elements two times with respect to original key P= DK (C) = DK (EK (x)) = EK (DK (x)) = x Keyl.

Block Ciphers means a group of plaintext symbols of size Key 12 is shifting the row 1 one times, row 2 elements twoBlokerem>l) areCencrypter togetheansreatia groupofpl of times and row 3 elements zero times with respect to originalm (where m>1) are encrypted together creating a group of key Keyl.

ciphertext of the same size [5].

With variable number of rounds and varying key expansions III. KEY COMPONENTS OF 3KDEC ALGORITHM the complexity of algorithm increases.

3Kdec algorithm uses: ICey I  * Numeric data to be encrypted. 5 2 l 5 -5 I* Three keys (stored as three 3 X 3 matrix) 2 X  * Substitution Box (commonly referred as S- | 2 1;2 2 Box) and an inverse S-box 2 7. 2_ 22 7 0  12 7 a 0 ., X.* Variable number of Rounds ( which can be 3, 6 or 9) DD: Algorithm operates on following steps in sequence for set  number of rounds as illustrated in Figure 3: 1 0 4 4 2  Input 4  .~~ ~~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ... ...._ K1|EYA T 4 2 51 2 |t125 4 -  AJ~I'Y I IyS lR~E1 N IROW S=TT DI  Output 2 5 9 I E I 0 5 a10 5 I i II5 R} 0  Figure 3. Illustration of 3Kdec Algorithm Working  1. Key Expansion Figure 4. Key Expansion Process  11502 2009 IEEE Internactionalz Advance Computing Conference (IACC 2009)    B. FIND AND SUBSTITUTE 1. Initially the user will be prompted for the plaintext to be encrypted and the number of rounds of the encryption process  In this step, the byte to be encrypted is found and that the user want to carry out.

substituted independently to provide the confusion effect. INPUT: 1234  There is no fixed mechanism or any mathematical The initial step is to pad the input data with Os i.e. the input to correlation in the formation of S-box. The entries of S-box can be encrypted becomes: 000001234 be different in different encryption processes. NUMBER OF ROUNDS: 9  So the simple structure and variable entries of Substitution Box makes the algorithm eligible to be used as a Personal THREE SET OF KEYS where eachkey is 3X3 matrix Encryption Algorithm where different S-Box variants can be Then the three are expanded using the Key expansion process used in encryption process depending on the party we are as described above. Number of key expansions depends upon dealing with and the varying complexity levels can be set the user input of number of rounds.

according to our needs.

Now the three transformations: Find and Substitute; Row Shift Example: and Add Set Key are carried out on input for the set number of  rounds.

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Figure6belowillustratestheabovestatedprocess: 7 3 6 1 0 9 2 5 4 8  Substitution Box o 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 4 3 6 1 8 7 2 0 9 5  Inverse Substitution Box I?I 7 7 7 7 2 9 7 Figure 5. S-box and Inverse S-box 8 2  C. ROWSHIFT 2 3 4 6 1 1 1 This transformation step shifts towards the left. The number  of shifts depends on the row number of the matrix. This means that the first row of matrix is shifted zero times, second row of 2 7 6 8 5 6 3 5 1 0 5 matrix is shifted one time and the third row is shifted two times towards the left.

During the decryption process, the Inverse Row Shift process is carried out and the shifting is done towards the right.

The number of shifts is same as the row number.

Where Row 0 has: no shift  Row 1: Shift 1  Row 2: Shift22oW 3  I~~~~~~~~~~7817 8lel31 D. ADD SETKEY  With each round the matrix is added using XOR operation with the above expanded keys. This means during first round of encryption Key 10 is used. In the next round Key 11 and then Key 12 andsoon... 9 3 |

IV. DESCRIPTION OF 3KDEc ALGORITHM  Let us have a look on the input data will be processed when our algorithm is applied to it: 4 4 4 o L L  Figure 6. Encryption Process  2009 IEEE Inxternational Advanxce Computing Conference (IACC 2009) 1503    Similarly the process of Decryption can be carried out as have low level of complexity and we need an algorithm used follows: by the cryptanalyst who is trying to break the code to have high  level of complexity. This means we need to perform encryption and decryption in short span of time, but at the  I~15 043 91 0i4~9 4 $ 5 same time we want the intruder to run her computer infinitely if trying to break the code.

| R{'dE' 2 4 11 73 1t 1 T 3 3 0 1 l lComplexity of program is based on two types of 21t5 40 000ioi1 & oresources: space complexity of algorithm which refers to  amount of memory needed to store the algorithm and the data and the time complexity which refers to amount of time needed to run the algorithm and get the results.

The time complexity of 3Kdec algorithm can be | 13lo W1 31315 06lD 13 15 1 14 1 7 1 measured (independent of the computer on which it isrunning) by defining the bit-operation complexity which  214144 1| ||9 1? 16 15 14 1 counts the number of bit operations the computer needs to perform to create the output from the input.

Bit operation can be defined as the time required for the computer to add, subtract, multiply or divide two single bits  1411T|13 ....1 02 12 s 11 116 111 3 1ortoperform one singlebit shift.

4 ~~~~~~Forexample: bit operation complexity of function that  4 0 0 0 adds two integers each having, d decimal digits can be calculated as: d log2 10.

RMu6 $ 7 a 7 7 7 3 0 0 1 B. 3Kdec Algorithm Security 2 3 11 |0| | 1 | 6 111 2 4  The main strength of 3Kdec algorithm is that it converts the numeric data input to numeric data output which makes it  Figure 7. Decryption Process harder to see and guess whether the input is even encrypted or not.

STRENGTHS OF 3KDEC * As the encryption is from numeric to numeric; one 1) Brute- Force attack  cannot know that the information is encrypted. It Also known as Exhaustive key search method tries to use all appears apossible keys. As in our algorithm the three keys are expanded  content. as if the encrypted data is itself the original based on the number of rounds; there will be 10 27 dfferent keycontent. combinations. Lack of weak keys is another advantage of  * As the number of keys are more and hence the key 3Kdec algorithm.

combination increases to 10 27 which makes guessing of keys harder. 2) Statistical Attacks  * As S-Box has simple structure and variable entries so The strong confusion and diffusion provided by the the 3Kdec algorithm can be used as Personal Substitution Box lookup and Row Shift transformations Encryption Algorithm where different encryption removes any frequency pattern in the plaintext.

processes can be carried out with varying degree of complexity depending on the user requirements. 3) DifferentialandLinearAttack  * Since 3Kdec Algorithm encrypts numeric to numeric The algorithm was designed to be resilient to linear and data, encrypted data is possible to be stored in the differential attacks.

existing numeric field thereby algorithm does not Differential cryptanalysis/Chosen-plaintext attack needs the change the data field type and set fixed data length. analysis of encryption algorithm to collect information about  plaintext-ciphertext relationships; with the goal of finding the

V. 3KIDECALGORITHMANALYSIS cipher key [11]. The probabilistic relationship can be created  from the information about the S-box input/output table. Incase A. 3Kdec Algorithm Complexity of 3Kdec algorithm the S-box values are not fixed and does not  depend on any algebraic structure the sender may use different To analyze the computational complexity of a S-box values each time attempting to encrypt the input. So the  cryptographic algorithm we need an encryption algorithm to  1504U 2009 IEEE Internaftionazl Advalnce Computing Conference (IACC 2009)    attacker has to even guess what were the values used for the S- [10] SK Bhatnagar,"Securing Data-At-Rest", Literature by Tata Consultancy Box in encrypting that data. Services.

[11] Srdjan Holovac "Securing Data at Rest: Database Encryption Solution Linear Cryptanalysis/Known-Plaintext Attack where the using Empress RDBMS", Security Whitepaper.

attacker needs to have information about plaintext/ciphertext pairs in addition to the intercepted ciphertext that needs to be broken along with the assumption that key has not changed.

Relationship between previous pair is used to analyze the current ciphertext.But the strong point of our algorithm is that every time the three keys as well as S-box entries can be changed which makes it difficult to find the appropriate relationships among the plaintext and the ciphertext pair.

C. Simplicity and Cost The 3Kdec algorithm has a simple structure that it can be easily implemented using cheap processors and minimum amount of memory.



VI. CONCLUSION Understanding the need to secure your data is the first step towards securing it. In today's age every detail - personal to corporate secrets - is present in form of data. For computers and networks which store and transfer this data, it is just numbers. It is for us to realize the damage this data can do if it falls into the hands of an unscrupulous person. Whether the data is on your laptop, desktop, or on an organizations storage network, it must be secured and should not come in the hand of an unauthorized entity. Proper access control mechanism should be enforced for securing the data. While in motion, data should be well protected. It is advisable to encrypt the data before putting it on a network even if it passes through a secure channel. The algorithm can be implemented for securing any corporate related accounting information to data of personal use. This algorithm does not take into consideration decimal point numeric data which opens up another area of research and improvements.



VII. REFERENCES  [1] B. Schneier. Applied Cryptography. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1996.

[2] Behrouz A.Forouzan.Cryptography and Network Security, Tata  McGraw Hill.

[3] G. Davida, D. Wells, and J. Kam. A database encryption system with  Sub keys. ACM Transactions on Database Systems, 6(2), 1981.

[4] J. He and M. Wang. Encryption in relational database management  systems. In Proc. Fourteenth Annual IFIP WG 11.3 Working Conference on Database Security (DBSec'00), School, the Netherlands, 2000.

[5] Koblitz, N., A Course in Number Theory and Cryptography. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1988.

[6] Maurer, U., "The Role of Cryptography in Database Security," ACM SIGMOD, 2004.

[7] Noor Habibah Arshad, Saharbudin Naim Tahir Shah, Azlinah Mohamed, Abdul Manaf Mamat," The Design and Implementation of Database Encryption", International Journal Of Applied Mathematics And Informatics, Issue 3, Volume 1, 2007,pagel 15- pagel22  [8] Rakesh Agrawal Jerry Kiernan Ramakrishnan Srikant Yirong Xu," Order Preserving Encryption for Numeric Data", IBM Almaden Research Center  [9] RSA Security, Inc., "Securing Data at Rest; Developing a Database Encryption Strategy," White Paper, 2002.

