Condition Monitoring of Induction Motors Using  Wavelet Based Analysis of Vibration Signals

Abstract   Condition monitoring of machines has its roots in the human ECG analysis for detecting cardiac arrhythmias.  Condition  monitoring  in  industry  is desirable   for   increasing   machinery   availability, reducing  consequential  damage,  and  improving  the operational  efficiency.  This is very significant in industries that use heavy duty machines for various processes.  A  monstrous  three-phase  AC  induction motor to drive a city water supply pump or very big, high power motors used in mills, huge generators for generating power in hydel plants etc. depict a few of them.  Also, for  safety  and  economic  considerations, there  is  a  need  to  monitor  the  behavior of motors working in critical production processes as well. This paper demonstrates how the condition of an induction motor can be monitored by the analysis of the acoustic signal that represents the non-stationary vibration data. The analysis has been done using various signal processing  algorithms  and  a  robust  fault detection scheme  has  been  developed  using  the PSD  (Power Spectral Density) concept in Wavelet Decomposition.

1. Introduction   Induction  machines  are  the  primary  source  of mechanical  power  in  industries  due  to  their rugged construction,  high  reliability  and  better efficiencies.

Early warnings on the physical condition of machines are important for increasing machinery availability, reducing consequential damage, and improving the operational efficiency. Even though electrical sensing with an emphasis on analyzing the motor stator current have  been  utilized  widely,  vibration-based  condition monitoring   has   attracted   the   attention   of   many researchers working in the area of induction machines, and  has  gained  industrial  acceptance,  as  vibration  analysis techniques are quite effective in assessing a machine?s  health [1].  It is claimed that vibration monitoring is the most reliable method of assessing the overall health of a rotor system [2] - [5]. Most methods are to analyze the vibration signal in either time- domain or frequency-domain.   Frequency-domain analysis is more attractive because it can provide more detailed information about the status of the machine [6].  Due  to  the  averaging  problems  in  classic  FFT analysis,  there is  a good  chance that the significant lines which correspond to certain faults may be hidden.

The  STFT  (Short  Time  Fourier  Transform)  has  the shortcoming that it uses a sliding window of constant width,  which  causes resolution problems in  analysis [7]. The variable time resolution given by the Wavelet Transform makes it a good choice for analysis of quasi-steady vibration signals. The power-distribution function  resulting  from  a  wavelet  transformation appears to be the optimal method to be applied to non- stationary signals to show  changes  in the amplitude and  distribution  of  the  harmonics [8].  This PSD concept has been tested in stator current analysis of the motor by the Authors in [8]. Much of the work done till now has been to identify faults like stator short circuiting, bearing damages and the broken rotor bars.

Electrical faults, which can go unnoticed in running conditions,   like   the   Single   Phasing   faults   and mechanical faults like the Loose Foundation bolts of the machine is equally dangerous for the motor health.

If the size of the motor is huge, the loose foundation bolts, if went unnoticed can even cause the destruction of the building in which the motor is kept. Also, the impact of variable load conditions along with the faults mentioned has not been  discussed till  now  and that opens  up  an  area  to  investigate  how  the  PSD parameters change with load, along with the faults and whether  these  faults  can  be  identified  using  them, under various load conditions.

The reasons behind failures in rotating electrical machines have their origin in design, manufacturing   DOI 10.1109/FGCNS.2008.22     tolerance, assembly, installation, working environment, nature of load and schedule of maintenance.  The induction  motor,  like  any  other  rotating  electrical machine,  is  subjected  to  both  electromagnetic  and mechanical forces [7]. The design of motor is such that the interaction between these forces under normal conditions leads to a stable operation with minimum noise and vibrations. When the fault takes place, the equilibrium  between  these  forces  is  lost,  leading  to further  enhancement  of  the  fault.  Experiments  were conducted  on  real  induction  motor  and  the  better classification  results  were  obtained  using  the  PSD concept in wavelet analysis.

2. Experimental Setup   The experimental setup has been created in lab  using a 10HP motor.  The Monitran (MTN 1130) ? piezoelectric accelerometer has been used for fetching the vibration data.    The motor was loaded directly using dynamometers. The Yokogawa?s DL1620? was used as the data acquisition system. A digital filter (0 10 kHz bandwidth), was used to remove the unwanted noise and useless overtones. The motor current, speed, load and the vibration data were measured.  Only vibrations are used for analytical purposes.  The sampling rate set for recording the data was 50 kHz. A high sampling rate is desired to avoid aliasing and thereby to preserve the integrity of the data. A high speed USB device has been used for transferring the data from the instrument.

Table 1. Machine details       3. Proposed Approach   The essence of the Fourier transform of a waveform is to decompose or separate the waveform into a sum of sinusoids of different frequencies. In the transformation towards the frequency domain, time  information is lost. When observing the Fourier transform of a signal, it is impossible to distinguish when a given event took place. This is a serious drawback for fault diagnosis because of the nature of signals to be analyzed, which are likely to contain time-varying frequencies. The Fourier and the STFT gives us the area in which more detailed processing is required. Therefore it is a tool which can be used to obtain only surface level information. The drawbacks of Fourier and STFT approach has lead to the widespread use of wavelets for processing the data.

Wavelet analysis can reveal aspects of data that other signal analysis techniques fail to spot, such as trends, breakdown points, discontinuities in higher derivatives, and self-similarity [8]. Also, for many decades scientists have wanted more appropriate functions than the trigonometrical sines and cosines, which have been the basis of Fourier analysis, to approximate choppy signals. By their definition, these functions are nonlocal (and stretch out to infinity). They therefore do a very poor job in approximating sharp spikes. But with the advent of Wavelet analysis, we can use approximating functions that are contained neatly in finite domains. Wavelets are well-suited for approximating data with sharp discontinuities [9]. All similar observations on the properties of wavelets make it an Ideal tool for our analysis.

CWT (Continuous Wavelet Transform) is defined as follows  ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )[ ]? ?= dtttxW    1, ??????             (1) The constant  (1/ )?  is used for normalization  purposes, ? is the time delay and ?  is the scale.

The DWT of a function x (t) can be expressed as:    ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )? ?? ?  =  ?  ??  ?  ?? +=  00 ,,   jj  kjjkjj tkdtkctx ??         (2)  In this expansion, the first summation gives a function that is a low resolution or coarse approximation of x (t) at scale 0j  . For each increasing j in the second summation, a higher or finer resolution function is added, which adds increasing details. The choice of 0j  sets the coarsest scale, whose space is spanned by, ( )tkj ,0?  [10].

These    wavelet    coefficients,    under    certain conditions,   can   completely  describe  the  original function,  and  in  a  way  similar  to  Fourier  series coefficients,  can  be  used  for  analysis,  description, approximation, and filtering. If the scaling function is well behaved, then at a high scale, samples of the     signal are very close to the scaling coefficients.

The Methodology adopted is given as:  1)     Acquiring the Vibration signal or Data 2)     Analyzing the signal using the classic Fourier analysis.

3)  Processing the data using the best tool  available for non-stationary signals - The Wavelet  4)     Choosing the proper wavelet for   analysis 5)   Calculating   the   PSD   of   the   wavelet  decompositions and finding out the proper Indicator for Healthy or Faulty conditions   3.1. FFT Analysis   The FFT analysis of the data was performed by taking sets of 65536 samples of data, and averaging of FFT was done to remove unwanted noise and to make significant lines sharper. The FFT analysis is performed with a high frequency resolution of 0.76 Hz.

Figure 1. Vibration data obtained for healthy  condition    Figure 2. FFT for healthy condition   Figure 3. Vibration data obtained for single  phasing     Figure 4. FFT for single phasing condition   The FFT analysis of the signature of the motor is shown in Figure 2 and Figure 4. From Figure 2 we can see that, there are no significant overtones pertaining to the machine signature after 10 kHz. Therefore, the data corresponding to the actual signature of the machine is in the range of (0-10) kHz. Similar FFT?s were obtained for Loose Foundation bolts as well. For a 4- pole, 50 Hz motor operating from 50 Hz and running at a speed of 1500 RPM, the following vibration frequency components will dominate under the Single Phasing condition: F1 = 1500/60 Hz; F2 = 2*50-(50/3) Hz; F3 = 2*50 Hz; F4 = 2*50+(50/3) Hz; F5 = (4*50) Hz [7].

Table 2. Comparison of frequency  magnitudes    Table 2 shows the dominance of frequency lines in  most of the cases, as expected. Also, it is seen that, the loose foundation bolts condition is also showing a hike in the respective frequencies, especially at 200 Hz. But these cannot be taken as clear diagnostic information, due to the averaging problems of FFT. Also, under the loaded conditions, these results were not found to follow.

3.2. Wavelet Analysis of the Data   Two wavelets were selected for processing. To avoid overlapping between two adjacent frequency bands, a high-order mother wavelet that results in high order frequency filter should be used [8]. Therefore, Daubechies10 was selected as suggested by these authors. But, upon detailed investigation, it was found that the response of the wavelet was poor for lower order frequency bands. Similar results were obtained for other wavelets of Daubechies family like DB6. The data was downsampled by 2 before processing. After downsampling, 32768 data points were taken for further processing. Four such sets have been chosen for all investigations and comparisons. The PSD values did not show any significant changes in the lower frequency bands, where changes do occur [6], [7] due to electrical faults, when DB family was used. Also, for the mechanical fault considered here, it was not found to be a suitable choice. Next, the Morlet wavelet was tested. This was also suggested by the authors for electrical faults [6], under no-load condition. This choice proved to be good one for fault detection under no-load and loaded conditions and also for the mechanical fault. An efficient Load Indicator was found using the proposed wavelet based PSD analysis.

Only analysis using the Morlet wavelet is discussed further.

Table 3. Wavelet frequency bands for  analysis    4. Experimental Results   The classic Fourier analysis has shown hikes in most of the respective frequency levels. Due to the shortcomings of this classic analysis in non-constant frequency signals, like vibrations, the wavelet based PSD analysis was done using the Morlet wavelet.

Case 1: Normal condition with increasing Torque   The motor is run under balanced three phase voltage and vibration data is collected for normal conditions, under no-load and then under different loads.

Figure 5. Variation of PSD?s for various  scaling factors for Morlet CWT under no- load   The Bar graph shown in Figure 5 indicates the PSD values in for the no-load condition. There are slight variations in the value of PSD in one scale itself. So, we are taking the average values, to take into account the variations that occur. It is seen that, the Morlet wavelet has a good response to higher scales which was not there for the Daubechies family of wavelets, due to which the changes at these levels were not getting reflected. This makes Morlet a better choice for analysis.

Figure 6. Variation of PSD?s for various  scaling factors for Morlet CWT: heavy load   It can be seen from Figure 5 and Figure 6 that the  PSD at scaling level six rises with load. From no-load to heavy load, this was found to show a linear rise in the value. The average PSD values were found to rise from 4.933349 J for no-load to 14.01358 J for the heavily loaded condition. Even though PSD values for other Scaling factors do change, only the level six scaling and the corresponding PSD could act as the load indicator under Healthy and Faulty Conditions.

Case 2: Single phasing condition and increasing Torque      The electrical faults affect the lower order  frequency ranges of the vibration data. Therefore, in the Single Phasing condition we expect a hike in the average PSD values in the higher scales. The fault was created by connecting a switch in one of the phases and opening it during motor running condition.

Figure 7. Variation of PSD?s for various  scaling factors for Morlet CWT under single phasing no-load   Figure 8. Variation of PSD?s for various scaling factors for Morlet CWT under  single phasing: Medium-load    From Figure 7 it is clear that, a noticeable hike in  PSD is there in the 50.78125 - 25.3906 Hz range. The average energy value was found to be 103.01 J for the four sets of data, for no-load condition. For the loaded condition the values of PSD for scaling factors four and five were found to be excellent indicators of the fault. The average value of PSD at fourth scaling factor varied from 26.58916 J to 44.89249 J from no-load to higher loaded conditions. It can be seen that in Figure 8, the PSD in fourth scaling factor has a notable rise, under load with an average value of around 50 J. In Normal Condition it ranged from 18.66039 J to 25.87709 J only. PSD at the fifth scaling was found to  increase with load, which was the reverse trend in case of healthy condition. Both of these with average PSD for ninth scaling factor (For no-load) were found to be excellent indicators of the fault for all conditions.

Case 3: Loose foundation bolts and increasing Torque   The Foundation Bolts of the machine were loosened. The machine was run under unloaded and loaded conditions, and the vibrations were fetched.

Figure 9. Variation of PSD?s for various scaling factors for Morlet CWT  under loose foundation (light load)   In Figure 9, the value of PSD for different scales in Light-load condition is shown. We can see that PSD for the fourth scaling factor has a high average value, which is a good indicator for the fault. Same PSD was found to be a sufficient indicator of the fault for higher load conditions. Even though this fault indicator is good enough to detect the fault, it has an overlap with the Single Phasing condition, under light load (below 10% load). It may be noted that the PSD value corresponding to the sixth scaling factor was found to be a good load indicator in fault conditions as well.

5. Conclusion   This paper presents the methods for the online detection of Induction motor faults based on wavelet based PSD analysis of the vibration data. The method is useful for effective online monitoring and diagnosis in industrial applications. The experiments performed and the results obtained show that wavelet based PSD analysis achieves good results in the field of fault diagnosis for every operating point of the induction motor.

The PSD method which has been experimented for faults like broken rotor bars and shorted stator     windings has proved to be a good indicator in case of other potential faults like Single Phasing and Loose Foundation bolts, under various load conditions. More investigation with no-load and variable load conditions may be done with different motors to make the results obtained more concrete.

6. References   [1]  H. Su and K. T. Chong, ?Induction machine condition monitoring using neural network modeling?, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol.  54, no.  1, pp.

241-249, February   2007.

[2] J. S. Mitchell, Introduction to Machinery Analysis and Monitoring, 2nd ed. Tulsa, OK: Pennwell, 1993.

[3] R. A. Munoz and C. G. Nahmias, ?Mechanical vibration of   three-phase induction motors fed by non sinusoidal currents,? in Proc.  Int.  Power  Electron.  Congr., pp.166- 172, 1994.

[4] F.Filippetti, G. Franceschini, C. Tassoni and P.

Vas,?Broken   bar  detection  in  induction  machines,? Proc. IEE-IAS  Annu. Meeting Conf., vol. 1, pp. 95-102,  [5] C.  M.  Riley,  B.  K.  Lin,  T.  G. Habetler,  and  R.  R.

Schoen, ?A method for sensorless on-line vibration monitoring of induction machines,? IEEE Trans. Ind.

Applicat., vol. 34, pp. 1240-1245, Dec. 1998.

[6] Giovanni Betta, Consolatina Liguori, Alfredo Paolillo and  Antonio Pietrosanto, ?A DSP-Based FFT-Analyzer for the  fault  diagnosis  of  rotating  machine  based  on vibration analysis?, IEEE     Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol.  51, no.  6, pp. 1316-1322, Dec. 2002  [7] G. K. Singh, Saleh Al Kazzaz Sa?ad Ahmed, ?Vibration signal analysis using wavelet transform for isolation and identification of electrical faults in induction machine?, Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 68, pp. 119-136, 2004  [8] Jordi Cusido, Luis Romeral, Juan A. Ortega, Javier A.

Rosero, Antonio Garcia Espinosa, ?Fault detection in induction  machines  using  power  spectral  density  in wavelet decomposition?, IEEE   Transactions   on Industrial Electronics,  vol. 55,  no. 2,  pp. 633-643, February  [9] Amara Graps, ?An Introduction to wavelets?, IEEE Computational science and Engineering, pp. 50-55, Summer1995.

[10] Ali M.  Reza,  Spire  Lab,  UWM, ?From Fourier Transform  to  Wavelet  Transform?,  WHITE PAPER  IEEE,pp. 3-17, October 27,1999.

