

Abstract?A Digital Elevation Model of the lunar south pole was produced using Goldstone Solar System RADAR (GSSR) data obtained in 2006.12  This model has 40-meter horizontal resolution and about 5-meter relative vertical accuracy [Ref 1].  This Digital Elevation Model was used to compute average solar illumination and Earth visibility with 100 km of the lunar south pole.  The elevation data were converted into local terrain horizon masks, then converted into lunar-centric latitude and longitude coordinates. The horizon masks were compared to latitude, longitude regions bounding the maximum Sun and Earth motions relative to the moon.  Estimates of Earth visibility were computed by integrating the area of the region bounding the Earth?s motion that was below the horizon mask.  Solar illumination and other metrics were computed similarly.  Proposed lunar south pole base sites were examined in detail, with the best site showing yearly solar power availability of 92% and Direct-To-Earth (DTE) communication availability of about 50%.  Similar analysis of the lunar south pole used an older GSSR Digital Elevation Model with 600-meter horizontal resolution.  The paper also explores using a heliostat to reduce the photovoltaic power system mass and complexity.

TABLE OF CONTENTS  1. INTRODUCTION ............................................................... 1  2. BACKGROUND ................................................................. 2  3. ANALYSIS METHOD......................................................... 2  4.  RESULTS ......................................................................... 5  5.  CONCLUSIONS............................................................... 10  6.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS................................................... 10  7.  REFERENCES................................................................. 10  8. BIOGRAPHY ................................................................... 11    2 IEEEAC paper #1659, Version 2, Updated January 26, 2009  1. INTRODUCTION  The moon?s rotation pole is inclined 1.54 degrees to the Ecliptic pole.  This means the Sun never rises more than a few degrees above the horizon in the lunar Polar Regions.

Many depressions and crater floors near the poles are permanently shaded from the Sun, producing permanent low-temperature areas.  These permanently shaded areas may be reservoirs for water ice deposits [Ref 2].  The potential for using lunar ice to produce oxygen, hydrogen fuel, and drinking water is driving investigations of human exploration bases at the lunar poles [Ref 3].

The same geometry that creates permanently shadowed lunar polar craters also increases solar illumination on lunar polar mountains.  A typical lunar surface location is exposed to the Sun for half of the 29.5-day synodic month.  But a tall peak near the lunar poles could view the Sun during the entire synodic month.  These ?Peaks of Eternal Light?  [Ref 4] would provide base sites with near-continuous solar power and illumination [Ref 5, 6].  The analysis presented here shows no Peak of Eternal Light at either lunar pole, but shows several locations with more than 90% solar illumination average over the lunar year.

Evaluating the resource potential of lunar polar base sites is a high priority for future lunar exploration [Ref 7].  This includes determining the amount of Direct-To-Earth communications available from the polar base locations.

The orbital mechanics causing the lunar librations seen from Earth also cause the Earth to move several degrees of elevation and azimuth in the lunar sky.  Even though the moon is tidally locked, the Earth appears to move + 6.87 degrees in latitude and + 8.16 degrees in longitude3.

Therefore, lunar polar base DTE communications is only possible about half of each sidereal month (27.3 days).  This paper presents averages of solar illumination, solar power, and Earth visibility metrics for the lunar Polar Regions to help evaluate potential base sites.

3 R. Roncoli, ?Lunar Constants and Models Document?, JPL D-32296, Sept 23, 2005.

2. BACKGROUND  The latest Digital Elevation Model from the Goldstone Solar System RADAR (GSSR) was produced from observations taken during September 2006.  The GSSR uses antennas in NASA?s Deep Space Network to produce RADAR images of solar system objects [Ref 1] using interferometry techniques.  These data were acquired during lunar librations that increased the view of the lunar south pole.

The Earth?s selenographic latitude was -6.2 degrees, allowing the GSSR to see lunar terrain covering out to 70 km toward the Farside of the lunar south pole.  The RADAR data was processed into a Digital Elevation Model in polar stereographic projection coordinates.  The Digital Elevation Model covers an area approximately 880 km from Nearside to Farside and 500 km East to West across the lunar south pole.

The Digital Elevation Model uses a polar stereographic Cartesian coordinate system centered on the lunar south pole, with X-axis pointed East (90 degrees lunar East Longitude), and Y-axis pointed Nearside (0 degrees lunar East Longitude).  Figure 1 shows the lunar south pole region of the 2006 Digital Elevation Model data, along with some lunar features.  The lunar south pole is on the rim of Shackleton crater.  Figure 2 shows the lunar north pole region of the 1997 Digital Elevation Model data, with some lunar features.  The gray areas in both figures were not visible from the Earth during the RADAR imaging.   Both figures show two-letter designations of base sites used in this paper.  Most features names and locations are from the International Astronomical Union (IAU) lunar naming [Ref 8], however some of the mountain peaks use older, unofficial names [Ref 9].

Figure 3 shows the lunar south pole base locations around Shackleton crater.  The figure reveals the high resolution of the south pole RADAR Digital Elevation Model. The 40- meter spatial resolution of the data produces a topographic map with good internal consistency and rich detail.  Inside Shackleton crater, the missing elevation data within the RADAR shadow were filled in with values based on a parabolic elevation profile. Figure 3 also shows the rim of Shackleton crater covers a horizontal distance of about 200 meters (5 data points), instead of being an abrupt scarp.

This suggests the actual Digital Elevation Model point-to- point elevation error is close to the stated relative vertical accuracy of 5 meters [Ref 1].  Based on this vertical accuracy, the analysis used 2-meter tall towers for the baseline horizon mask computations.

3. ANALYSIS METHOD  Analyzing the Digital Elevation Model to produce solar illumination and DTE communications required several major steps.  Step 1 corrected the Digital Elevation Model elevations, by removing bad points and filling in RADAR shadow areas with approximate elevations.  Step 2  computed horizon masks from the Digital Elevation Model information.  Topocentric horizon masks were computed for a 2 meter altitude above the surface, and then converted into lunar-centered equatorial latitude and longitude coordinates.

Step 3 computed illumination metrics by projecting the horizon mask in lunar equatorial latitude and longitude onto the celestial sphere.  The horizon mask was then compared to the average motions of the Sun and Earth.  This step assumed a simplified time-average for the solar and Earth motions as seen from the moon, eliminating the astrodynamics calculations.  Solar illumination and DTE visibility metrics were computed by integrating along the horizon mask in the lunar-centered latitude and longitude coordinates.  Step 4 collected these illumination and DTE visibility metrics for areas around the lunar poles.  Those metrics were captured as contour plots and tables.

Step 1: Digital Elevation Model Corrections and Filling  During the 2006 GSSR data acquisition, the Earth was at - 6.2 degrees selenographic latitude.  This placed Earth at approximately +6.2 degrees of elevation angle as seen from the lunar south pole, so parts of the polar terrain were not visible to the RADAR.  For the 100 km x 100 km area centered on the lunar south pole, about 40% of the area was not imaged because it was in RADAR shadow.   In addition, several areas that were imaged had very low RADAR backscatter signal strength, leading to spurious elevation values.  In several locations next to the RADAR shadow edge, the algorithms for processing RADAR phase into elevation data produced erroneous elevation values.  These features of the GSSR Digital Elevation Model required correction prior to using the Digital Elevation Model for illumination computations.

The 2006 GSSR Digital Elevation Model file of elevations and the file of backscatter magnitudes were read into Matlab.  Because of the large file size, the program read a data subset covering 100 km x 100 km area at full 40-meter resolution (2501 x 2501 pixels) centered on the lunar south pole.  For coarser far-field computations, the program read in a 400 km x 400 km area and decimated it to 600-meter resolution by taking every 15th point (667 x 667 pixels).

The program then edited the Digital Elevation Model elevations to remove known artifacts.  Specifically, the areas (-8.5 km < X < -7 km, -14.5 km < Y < -13.5 km) and (-7 km < X < -3 km, -16 km < Y < -12 km) were scanned and all elevations greater than 800 meters were set to the value of the RADAR shadow areas (-10,000 meters).  This removed 2 steep-sided ?towers? or ?spikes? in elevation data on a ridgeline west of Shackleton crater.  GSSR experts at JPL confirmed these 2 ?towers? were probably anomalies from the processing algorithms.  The remaining area was 6,180 km2, or 61.8% of the 100 km x 100 km original area.

The Matlab program then pruned out elevations with local slopes in excess of 60 degrees.  Slopes greater than 60 degrees are physically unrealistic and are probably artifacts of the RADAR processing.  For the 100 km x 100 km area        centered on the lunar south pole, this removed 1.7% of the remaining elevation area.  Next the program removed elevation points with RADAR backscatter value less than 0.06%, removed 18.3% of the remaining elevation area.

Several elevation anomalies were eliminated by this backscatter limit, including hilly terrain inside the nearside- east rim of Shackleton crater.  This hilly terrain was explained as a processing artifact, because it would have obscured the Earth?s view of other RADAR-imaged terrain inside Shackleton crater.

The Matlab program then scanned the remaining elevation values and removed any points with less then 4 surrounding points.  This removed almost all small ?islands? of elevation data, which were artifacts of the RADAR processing.  This step removed 0.5% of the elevation data.  The cumulative effect of the data editing removed about 21% of the original elevation data.  This reduced the elevation data in the referenced 100 km x 100 km area from 6180 km2 to 4916 km2 or from 61.8% to 49.2% of the mapped area.  Similar percentages were removed for the larger coarse maps.

The Matlab program then created elevation data to fill in the missing points.  Inside Shackleton crater, the program created a parabolic surface with a center elevation of -2900 meters at X = 7.32 km, Y = -8.08 km.  This produced a more realistic three-dimensional plot of the crater, but did not affect the illumination results.  For the remaining RADAR shadow and edited areas, the program set the elevation value to the altitude of the RADAR shadow.  The program scanned each column of elevation data from the +Y to ?Y direction.  At each missing data location, the program computed a straight line from Earth at -6.2 degrees selenographic latitude that passed through the last known +Y elevation data value.  This means the elevation in the unknown terrain was set to values just under the GSSR RADAR shadow envelope.  This models an upper bound on the possible elevations.  If the actual elevations were higher, then the point would have appeared on the RADAR.  This upper bound provides a conservative estimate for solar illumination computations.  Actual terrain elevations inside the RADAR shadow area are probably lower than the RADAR line of sight, and would block less of the surrounding terrain.  The program also set a lower limit of - 5000 meters elevation to prevent elevation estimates toward the lunar Farside from getting excessively deep.

Similar pruning was applied to the lunar south pole Digital Elevation Model from 1997.  The program read in a 400 km x 400 km area at the 600-meter resolution of the Digital Elevation Model.  The same data pruning algorithms were applied, but no specific elevation artifacts were targeted for removal.

Step 2: Horizon Mask Computation  The horizon masks were computed by scanning along lines of constant azimuth.  For convenience in computation, the line of 0 azimuth was always parallel to the lunar prime  meridian at 0 degree longitude, not due North.  This made the conversion to the final equatorial coordinates easier and did not affect the results.  Maps were selected with ?coarse? or ?fine? grid resolution, described below.  For each point on the grid, the Matlab program scanned along lines of azimuth for at least 200 km.  This 200 km distance was determined from a requirement to examine far enough along the azimuth lines to find any peaks that would block the Sun.  At mid-Winter, the Sun?s elevation is -1.54 degrees as seen from the lunar south pole.  The tallest peak near the south pole is Leibnitz ?, with elevation 6055 meters.  Figure 4 shows how the lunar horizon falls off quickly with distance.  At 200 km from the pole, a mountain must be over 7000 meters tall in order to block the Winter Sun.  This gave a practical limit of 200 km for the distance to use when scanning along the lines of azimuth.  This also set the size necessary for the Digital Elevation Model subset maps.

The elevation angles were computed starting with the grid point at the center of the horizon mask and extending out to points on the lunar terrain along each azimuth line.  The maximum elevation angle for each azimuth was stored in an array of horizon mask elevation versus azimuth.  The horizon mask results depend on the altitude of the center of the horizon mask above the local terrain.  Unless otherwise stated, a tower 2 meters above the local terrain was used for the horizon mask computations.  This represented a practical height for solar array installation.  For some locations, horizon mask metrics were computed using taller towers.

Coarse resolution horizon masks were computed from a Digital Elevation Model decimated to 600-meter spatial resolution that extended +200 km around the lunar south pole.  The lines of azimuth were spaced 5 degrees apart.

Maps were generated covering 30 km x 30 km areas (51 by 51 pixels).   A total of 64 maps were generated to cover the region within 110 km of the lunar south pole.   For the lunar north pole, maps were generated in the same way.  Because there are no extremely tall mountains to consider near the lunar north pole, fewer maps were examined.  A total of 42 maps were generated, covering the regions within 105 km of the lunar north pole, except the farside which was covered to 75 km.

For the lunar south pole, medium resolution horizon masks were computed for specific areas of interest.  The medium resolution masks used 2 Digital Elevation Models: a coarse Digital Elevation Model decimated to 1000-meter spatial resolution that extended +200 km around the lunar south pole, and a fine Digital Elevation Model at 40-meter spatial resolution that extended +6 km around the location of interest.  This 12 km x 12 km area was removed from the coarse Digital Elevation Model prior to the elevation angle computations.  Horizon masks were computed for both Digital Elevation Models, using azimuth spacing of 5 degrees.  Then for each azimuth, the greater elevation angle of the 2 horizon masks was selected for the composite horizon mask.  This 2 Digital Elevation Model approach produced a higher resolution result, while keeping the        computation time reasonably short.  Maps were generated covering 1 km x 1 km areas with resolution of 40 meters (51 by 51 pixels).

For a small number of locations, fine resolution horizon masks were computed using 2 Digital Elevation Models: a coarse Digital Elevation Model decimated to 1000 meter spatial resolution that extended +200 km around the lunar south pole, and a fine Digital Elevation Model at 40 meter spatial resolution that extended +50 km around the lunar south pole.  This 100 km x 100 km area was removed from the coarse Digital Elevation Model prior to the elevation angle computations.  Horizon masks were computed for both Digital Elevation Models, using azimuth spacing of 1 degree.  Then for each azimuth, the greater elevation angle of the 2 horizon masks was selected for the composite horizon mask.  This 2 Digital Elevation Model approach produced a higher resolution result, while keeping the computation time reasonably short.  Horizon masks were computed for single point locations, and extra solar illumination and Earth visibility metrics were created from the horizon masks.  The fine resolution computations were performed only at optimal solar illumination locations found from the coarse and medium resolution maps.

Step 3: Computing Illumination Metrics from Average Solar and Earth Motion  Figure 5 shows a horizon mask profile in lunar topographic azimuth and elevation coordinates.  This mask was produced with 1-degree azimuth steps using the ?Fine? resolution technique described above.  The figure shows areas defining the limits for the Earth and solar motion, as seen from the moon.  The Earth is confined to a maximum east-west longitude libration of 8.16 degrees, and a north- south latitude libration of 6.87 degrees3.  These librations values are the maximum possible librations, not the typical average values.  The motion of the Earth?s center is shown by the parallelogram marked with red circles.  The Earth?s disk subtends an angle of 1.9 degrees, as seen from the moon.  The motion of the Earth?s South Pole is shown by the parallelogram marked with red dots.

The Sun moves across all degrees of longitude, but is confined to latitudes between 1.54 degrees north and south.

The motion of the Sun?s center is plotted with yellow circles.  The solar disk subtends an angle of 0.53 degrees, as seen from the moon.  The motions of the northern and southern limbs of the Sun are shown with yellow lines.

The Sun?s path is lowest on the horizon toward the lunar south pole, at azimuth = arctan(x/y) or 42.2 degrees.

Figure 6 shows the same information as Figure 5, but transferred to lunar equatorial coordinates.  In the equatorial frame, the Earth and Sun maximum limits are defined by rectangles.  The lunar terrain horizon mask has shifted with this coordinate transformation, raising up in the direction of the lunar south pole at 42.2 degrees longitude, and dipping  down in the direction of the lunar north pole at -137.8 degrees longitude.

The following assumptions were made to simplify the solar illumination and Earth visibility computations: 1) The Sun and Earth stay within the bounding rectangles.

The center of the solar disk stays within a rectangle defined by east-west longitudes 180 degrees, and north-south latitudes of 1.54 degrees.  The center of Earth?s disk stays within east-west longitudes 8.16 degrees, and north-south latitudes 6.87 degrees.

2) Averaged over many years, the Sun and Earth motions bring them to all locations within their bounding rectangles.

Particularly, during the 18.6-year period of the regression of the longitude of the ascending node, the Earth will cover all locations within its bounding rectangle.

3) Averaged over many years, the Sun has an equal probability at being at any location within its bounding rectangle.  A similar assumption is made for the Earth within its bounding rectangle.  This assumption is less accurate for the Earth, since the Earth does not reach the extremes of latitude libration in every year.

These assumptions bypass computing the exact location of the Sun and Earth at specific times of interest.  Instead, average illumination was computed using the area of the bounding rectangles in Figure 6.  Illumination metrics are proportional to amount the bounding rectangle area not covered by the terrain horizon mask.  The assumptions mean that the illumination metrics will not be exact for a particular date, but represent a multi-year average value.

These averaged values allow accurate comparisons between different lunar sites, since the only variable is the lunar terrain at the different locations.  These assumptions greatly reduced the amount of computation needed for computing illumination and Earth visibility metrics.

Step 4: Solar Illumination and DTE Visibility Metrics  Based on the assumptions above, several metrics were computed from horizon masks projected into the lunar equatorial coordinates.  Average solar illumination was computed by integrating the area of the Sun?s bounding rectangle above the horizon mask.  The integrated area was then normalized with the area of the entire solar bounding rectangle, resulting in the percentage of an average year that the Sun is visible.  Three types of solar illumination averages were computed, varying with the amount of visible solar disk (see Figure 6).  Since the solar disk radius is 0.265 degrees as seen from Earth?s orbit, the metrics vary with the amount of the solar disk covered.

The ?0% of solar disk visible? is the average computed by integrating the horizon mask over the solar bounding rectangle from -1.275 degrees +1.805 degrees latitude (for convenience, each pole was treated as the North pole where positive latitudes convert to higher elevations above the local horizon).  This bounding rectangle covers the Sun?s limb that is highest above the local horizon.  This metric        requires that the horizon mask cover the entire solar disk, up to the higher solar limb, to not be counted in the yearly average of illuminating the lunar terrain.  This metric is the percent of time that any solar light is available; no matter how small a section of the solar disk is visible.

The ?50% of solar disk visible? metric integrated the horizon mask over the solar bounding rectangle from -1.54 degrees +1.54 degrees latitude.  This metric requires that the horizon mask cover half the solar disk to not count as illuminating the lunar terrain.  This metric represents half- strength solar illumination.

The ?100% of solar disk visible? metric integrated the horizon mask over the solar bounding rectangle from -1.805 degrees to +1.275 degrees latitude.  This metric requires that the horizon mask merely touch the solar disk at the lower limb, to not count as illuminating the lunar terrain.  This 100% metric its the percentage of the year with full solar power available.

The three types of Earth illumination averages were computed in a similar way.  The ?0% of Earth visible? average integrated the horizon mask over the Earth bounding rectangle from -5.92 degrees +7.82 degrees latitude.  This metric requires that the horizon mask cover the entire Earth disk to not count as visible to the lunar terrain.  The 0% metric is the percentage of the year with some part of the Earth visible.

The ?50% of Earth visible? average integrated the horizon mask over the Earth bounding rectangle from -6.87 degrees +6.87 degrees latitude.  This metric requires that the horizon mask cover half the Earth?s disk to not count as visible.  For the lunar south pole, this metric is the amount of time that the Earth?s southern hemisphere is visible.

The ?100% of Earth visible? average integrated the horizon mask over the Earth bounding rectangle from -7.82 degrees to +5.92 degrees latitude.  This metric requires that the horizon mask merely touch the Earth?s disk to not count as visible.  This 100% metric is the percentage of the year with a full Earth visible.

Additional metrics were computed for solar power characterization.  The ?months 100% visible? gives the number of synodic months per year when the specified percentage of solar disk is visible.  It was computed by comparing the maximum horizon mask peak latitude to the upper and lower solar bounding rectangle limits.  If the maximum peak reached across 2/3 of the rectangle, then 1/3 of the year has continuous illumination.

The metric ?days dark in winter month? is the number of days during the lunar south pole Winter with less than the specified percentage of solar disk visible.  This was computed by finding the amount of each solar rectangle lower boundary edge that was below the horizon mask, normalizing with 360 degrees, and multiplying by 29.53  days.  For the ?100% of solar disk visible? rectangle, this metric is the sum of the number of days without full solar power during the winter synodic month.  For the ?0% of solar disk visible? metric, this is the sum of the days without any solar light during the winter synodic month.   This metric and the ?days longest darkness? do not consider possible solar eclipses, which last up to 3.9 hours for a partial eclipse [Ref 6].

The metric ?days longest darkness? is the longest continuous period with less than the specified percentage of solar disk visible.  For the ?100% of solar disk visible? value, this metric is the longest continuous period without full solar power.  For the ?0% of solar disk visible? value, this metric is the longest continuous period without any solar light.  The metric was computed the by finding the longest continuous stretch of a solar rectangle lower boundary edge that was below the horizon mask, normalizing with 360 degrees, and multiplying by 29.53 days.

The metrics ?days dark in winter month? and ?days longest darkness? can be used to set upper and lower bounds on a lunar base power system battery storage requirements.  For a worst-case number that ignores recharge rates, battery storage can be based on the ?days dark in winter month? value associated with ?100% of solar disk visible?.  Table 2 shows examples of these metrics.

4.  RESULTS  Results were assembled in graphical and tabular formats.

Contour plots from the coarse (600 meter resolution) horizon mask results were produced for the lunar south pole region.  These Coarse maps cover the region from X, Y = - 129 km, -114 km to X, Y = +111 km, +126 km in 64 maps that are 30 km x 30 km, and show yearly average solar illumination and Earth communications values (see Figures 7 and 8).  The boundaries for the Coarse maps were chosen so that the entire Shackleton crater fit within the Coarse map from X, Y = -9 km, -24 km to X, Y = +21 km, +6 km.

For the lunar north pole region, coarse maps cover from X, Y = -105 km, -105 km to X, Y = +105 km, +75 km.  Figures 9 and 10 show yearly average solar illumination and Earth communications visibility values.

For both lunar poles, solar illumination peaks were tabulated from the coarse maps and compared to illumination peak sites in the references.  For the lunar south pole, coarse map sites with more than 80% average solar illumination were then examined with Medium resolution maps covering areas 2 km x 2 km.  The Medium resolution maps were used to determine the size of each site in 40 m x 40 m pixels.  The location of maximum solar illumination in X and Y was then determined for each site.  These ?peaks of illumination? were then examined with the Fine horizon        mask analysis to verify the illumination results and produce additional metrics.

Coarse Horizon Mask Results  For the south pole region, only 5 of the 64 coarse (30 km x 30 km) maps have peaks with more than 80% average solar illumination.  These 5 maps cover Shackleton crater and the lunar south pole, the east ridge from Shackleton crater, the west ridge from Shackleton crater, The nearside-east rim of de Gerlache crater, and the nearside rim of de Gerlache crater.

