Using the MM5 model for wind energy resources  evaluation over a fuel-poor region, East China

Abstract?For the sake of wind energy exploitation, the Fifth Generation Mesoscale Model (MM5) has been applied to downscale 2.5? reanalysis data provided by the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) and the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) onto a 3.3-km grid covering the fuel-poor Jiangsu Province for the three representative years, 1972, 1997, and 2000 respectively. The simulated 10-m above ground level (AGL) mean wind fields are compared with observations at 64 stations comprehensively, by using the analog deviation. This score shows that the simulated wind pattern agrees well with the observed. More local characteristics can be found in the high-resolution simulated wind atlas. The wind speed is higher along the eastern coast and around inland lakes, while lower in urban and mountainous areas. Wind energy calculations have shown that the vicinities of big water bodies, such as Luoma Lake, Hongze Lake, Gaoyou Lake, the mouth of the Yangtze River and Tai Lake, are regions with rich wind energy resources. The average wind power densities in these areas are above 140W/m2. The wind resources decrease steadily when moving away from the coast, and the wind power densities are between 80 and 90 W/m2. Mountainous and urban areas are short of wind energy resources. The average wind power densities in Zhangba Mountains and cities of Xuzhou, Huai?an and Nanjing are less than 60 W/m2. Moreover, it is indicated that there are significant seasonal variations in wind energy resources in Jiangsu Province. The wind power densities are larger in winter than in summer. The values in rich regions increase to 200 W/m2 at 30-m-AGL and 320 W/m2 at 60-m-AGL.

Keywords-wind energy resrouces evaluation; MM5; dynamical downscaling; representative year; analog deviation

I. INTRODUCTION While the world economy is undergoing rapid development,  it will be necessary to ensure rational utilization of natural resources and protection of the environment. Wind energy resources have the potential to significantly reduce fuel costs, greenhouse gas emissions and natural habitat disturbances associated with conventional energy generation. Wind is rapidly becoming a practical source of electric energy around the world. 2007 was a booming year for the wind power industry, with growth in annual installed capacity of 27% globally, according to the up-to-date report released by the Global Wind Energy Council [1]. This takes the total installed wind energy capacity to 93,900 MW, up from 74,223 MW in 2006. The countries with the highest total installed capacity are Germany (22.3 GW), USA (16.8 GW), Spain (15.1 GW), and  India (7.8 GW). China added 3,304 MW of wind energy capacity during 2007, representing market growth of 145% over 2006, and now ranks fifth in total installed wind energy capacity with 5,906 MW at the end of 2007. Based on current growth rates, the Chinese Renewable Energy Industry Association forecasts a capacity of around 50,000 MW by 2015.

Conditions of wind energy are quite different in various parts of China [2]. Regions with rich wind energy resources are located mainly along the South-East coast and Inner Mongolia, Sinkiang, Gansu Province?s Hexi Corridor and in some parts of North-East China, North-West China, North China and the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. It is a wise choice to exploit wind power in China, especially in eastern areas. The eastern areas are China?s leading economic regions and massive manufacturing centers. It provides good market conditions for the wind power industry development, and the relatively higher costs of wind power can be afforded by residents with higher income. On the other hand, the conventional fossil fuels are deficient in eastern provinces. So as to ensure the energy supply, it is necessary to change traditional cognition and vigorously develop renewable resources. Additionally, the frequent electrical scarcities and the increasing demand for power require urgently developing wind industry. Jiangsu Province, located in the Yangtze River Delta region, is such a region that has witnessed a rapid development of wind power in recent years. By the end of 2006, the total installed capacity in Jiangsu had reached 108 MW, with all 68 turbines installed at Rudong wind farms [3]. Wind energy resources evaluation is the prerequisite for wind farm construction, and provides a scientific basis for the wind power exploitation. Accurate calculation of the wind energy depends on the long-term enormous observational data. For simplicity, the usual approach is to determine three representative years, which are the maximum, moderate and minimum wind speed years in the long-term time series of wind speed data. Then, the average values of wind energy are calculated based on the three years.

It has been found that 1972, 1997, and 2000 are the maximum, moderate and minimum wind speed years in Jiangsu [4].

However, the detailed characteristics of low-level wind field cannot be correctly obtained by the low-resolution observational data, provided by the conventional surface meteorological stations, the distance of which range from 20 kilometers to 50 kilometers. On the other hand, dynamical downscaling techniques have been proved as an adequate tool for characterization of regional atmospheric circulation. The  This work was supported jointly by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu under Grant No. BK2006730, and the Research Project for Public Utility of China Meteorological Administration under Grant No. 2008416048.

detailed characteristics of low-level wind field can be correctly obtained by high-resolution model output data [5]. Numerical meteorological models have performed well in wind energy assessment over different parts of the world [6-8].

The objective of this paper is to make an evaluation of wind energy resources, by using a numerical model to downscale reanalysis data over the fuel-poor Jiangsu region for the three representative years, 1972, 1997, and 2000. This paper is organized as follows. Details of model configurations are presented in Section 2. Here we describe nesting strategies, parameterization schemes, and so on. Results are discussed in Section 3. First, the simulated wind fields at 10-m above ground level (AGL) are verified comprehensively by a mathematical measurement. Then, the detailed characteristics of the 10-m-AGL are presented. Following are the wind energy calculations. The wind power densities in different seasons and at different heights are also discussed. At last, the main results are summarized in Section 4.



II. MODEL DESCRIPTION The meteorological model used in this study is the Fifth-  Generation Mesoscale Model (MM5) version 3.7.4, developed by the Pennsylvania State University (PSU) and the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). The nonhydrostatic MM5 is a full-physics limited-area model, with terrain- following coordinates [9-11]. The model was configured with three two-way-interacting nested domains, which are depicted in Fig. 1. The outermost domain has a mesh size of 151?131 with a horizontal resolution of 30 km, covering most of East Asia and part of the South China Sea and Western Pacific. The intermediate domain, which has a mesh size of 193?154 with a horizontal resolution of 10 km, has important influences on the weather conditions of Jiangsu region and its vicinity. The innermost domain, having 193?184 grid points with horizontal resolution of 3.3 km, encompasses the whole Jiangsu Province. MM5 has many options of physical process parameterizations. The main parameterization schemes employed in this study are as follows. Domain 1 and 2 utilize the Grell cumulus parameterization [12], but with no convection parameterization on the innermost grid. Moreover, the explicit mix phase microphysical scheme and the Medium- Range Forecast (MRF) model PBL parameterization are used.

Driving fields are the 2.5 reanalysis data provided by the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) and the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) at 6-hour intervals [13]. In the present study, downscaling was carried out by reinitializing the model every 4 days with fist 24 hours of each run were discarded as spin-up time. Up to 122 separate MM5 simulations are required to build a 1-year data set of the meteorological fields. Another option is a continuous run, but it is shown that periodic reinitialization of regional models provides better downscaling results than the continuous simulation, because systematic errors may accumulate during integration [14].

Figure 1. Area coverages for the three nested computational grids in MM5 (solid lines). The grid size from the outermost to the innermost domains are 30  km, 10 km and 3.3 km.



III. RESULTS  A. Validation of the Simulated Wind Field Daily surface data, covering the three representative years  of 1972, 1997 and 2000, from sixty-four stations operated by the Jiangsu Meteorological Observatory shown in Fig. 2 are collected to validate the performance of the simulated wind field over the Jiangsu region at 10-m-AGL. The validations are separated into two parts. The first part is to compare the simulated wind speed with observations, by using a comprehensive score. The second part is to present the local detailed characteristics in the simulated high-resolution wind atlas.

For simplicity, the differences between the model results and observations can be just expressed by  i i ierr p o= ?  and  1 N i  i  err err N =  = ,  (1)  where pi and oi are the simulated and observed annual mean wind speed, respectively, for station i. N represents the total number of stations. However, the quality of model products is determined not only by the mean speed but also by the spatial distribution of the wind speed. Analog deviation is a new mathematical measurement, by which a comprehensive comparison of analog degrees can be made between samples [15-17]. The analog deviation is defined as  ( )1  c s d= + ,  (2)  where s is the pattern parameter and d is the value parameter, both in the unit of the speed. Once the errors are known, the following equations can be used to calculate the two parameters, s and d:    Figure 2. The geographic distribution of 64 stations in the study area (Jiangsu Province).

TABLE I. PARAMETERS FOR THE ANALOG DEVIATION BETWEEN SIMULATED AND OBSERVED WIND SPEED.

err  (m/s) s (m/s) c (m/s) 1972 0.66 0.30 0.50 1997 1.45 0.41 0.93 2000 1.56 0.42 0.99   1 N i  i  s err err N =  = ?  (3)   1 N i  i  d err N =  = .  (4)  A value of 0 indicates perfect agreement between the model and observations while a larger value indicates less agreement.

The parameters for the analog deviation are summarized in Table 1. It is shown that the analog deviations for the three representative years are all close to 0. The analog deviation, 0.50, for the year of maximum wind speed is the smallest.

Additionally, the pattern parameter, s, is closer than the value parameter, indicating good agreement between the spatial distribution of simulated and observed wind field at large scales. It can be found in Fig. 3 that both the simulated and observed wind speed decreases from east to west. Regions with higher wind speed are located mainly on the coast, while inland areas with lower wind speed are the northern part of Jiangsu Province.

Figure 3. Comparison between (a) the observed and (b) the simulated annual mean wind field for the 64 stations in Jiangsu Province.

From the above discussion, it can be concluded that the simulated wind fields show good agreement with the observed at large scales. Induced by the topography and land cover variations, the detailed characteristics of low-level wind field cannot be correctly obtained by the low-resolution observational data, provided by the conventional surface meteorological stations, the distance of which range from 20 kilometers to 50 kilometers. The high-resolution model outputs can be used to present local wind features at small spatial scales. It is shown in Fig. 4 that there are more local features in the simulated wind field. Because the roughness differences between land and sea, wind speed rapidly decreases near the coastline, in the form of intensive contours of mean wind speed paralleling with the coastline. Areas near big water bodies, such as the vicinities of Luoma Lake, Hongze Lake, Gaoyou Lake, Yangtze River and Tai Lake, are regions with high wind speed. The wind speed is higher in the Lixiahe region where the topography is relatively flat, while lower in the mountains of Zhangba, which is located in the south of Hongze Lake.

Moreover, the wind speed is lower in building-intensive urban areas than in rural areas, because the urban constructions result in increasing surface roughness. The cities of Xuzhou, Huai?an, and Nanjing are all distinct regions with low wind speed.

Figure 4. The average wind speed at 10-m-AGL in Jiangsu Province.

B. Evaluation of Wind Energy The average wind power density is calculated by      n  i i  W v n  ? =  = ,  (5)  where  is the air density, and vi is the simulated wind speed for  time step i. Here n represents the total number of time steps.

In this study, the calculated average wind power density does not take the changes in air density into account and is set to 1.225 kg/m3. The average wind power densities in Jiangsu are shown in Fig. 5. Generally, the values decrease from the eastern coastal areas to western inland areas, with local variations matching the surface diversity. The average wind power density is between 190 and 240 W/m2 in offshore areas, and rapidly reduce to 90 W/m2 towards inland. The vicinities of big water bodies, such as Luoma Lake, Hongze Lake, Gaoyou Lake, the mouth of the Yangtze River and Tai Lake, are regions with rich wind energy resources. The average wind power densities in these areas are above 140 W/m2. In the vast flat region of Lixiahe, the values are between 80 and 90 W/m2.

Mountainous and urban areas are short of wind energy resources. The average wind power densities in Zhangba Mountain and cities of Xuzhou, Huai?an and Nanjing are less than 60 W/m2.

There are significant seasonal variations in wind energy resources in Jiangsu Province [18]. It is shown in Fig. 6 that the wind energy is richest in winter. The wind power density over land range from 80 to 120 W/m2, and regions larger than 120 W/m2 are mainly located on the eastern coast and the vicinities of larger water bodies. Summer is the season which wind power density is the smallest, mainly range from 60 to 80 W/m2 over land and from 80 to 170 W/m2 on the coast. The wind energy is moderate in spring and autumn, but richer in spring.

Figure 5. The average wind power density at 10-m-AGL in Jiangsu Province.

It is shown in Fig. 7 that at higher levels, the distribution pattern is similar to that at 10-m-AGL, but values increase significantly. The wind power densities are mainly between 150 and 200 W/m2 at 30-m-AGL overland and can reach 300 W/m2 oversea. The wind power densities over large water body regions are larger than 200 W/m2. At 60-m-AGL, the wind power densities are between 220 and 320 W/m2 overland and increase up to 400 W/m2 oversea. The values over large water bodies are larger than 320 W/m2.



IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS For the present paper, we aimed to use the MM5 model for  wind energy resources evaluation over a fuel-poor region, East China. Jiangsu Province was chosen in the study. The 2.5? reanalysis data provided by NCEP/NCAR was downscaled onto a 3.3-km grid for the three representative years, 1972, 1997, and 2000, respectively. Then the average wind speed and wind power densities were used to present local conditions of wind resources in Jiangsu.

First, we applied a new score to validate the model solutions comprehensively. It is shown that the analog deviations for the three representative years are all close to 0, indicating the simulated wind field show good agreement with the observed at large scales. Then, the local wind characteristics are presented in the high-resolution simulated wind atlas. It can be found that the wind speed is higher along the eastern coast and around inland lakes, while lower in urban and mountainous areas. Following wind energy calculations show that the vicinities of big water bodies, such as Luoma Lake, Hongze Lake, Gaoyou Lake, the mouth of the Yangtze River and Tai Lake, are regions with rich wind energy. The average wind power densities in these areas are above 140 W/m2. The wind resources decrease steadily as you move away from the coast, and the wind power densities are between 80 and 90 W/m2. Mountainous and urban areas are short of wind energy resources. The average wind power densities in    Zhangba Mountain and cities of Xuzhou, Huai?an and Nanjing are less than 60 W/m2.

Figure 6. The average wind power densities in (a) Spring, (b) Summer, (c) Autumn and (d) Winter in Jiangsu Province.

Figure 7. The average wind power densities at (a) 30-m-AGL and (b) 60-m-AGL.

Moreover, it is indicated that there are significant seasonal variations in wind energy resources in Jiangsu Province. The values are largest in winter, ranging from 80 to 120 W/m2, while it is smallest in summer, less than 80 W/m2. With  increasing height, the wind power densities inland are between 150 and 200 W/m2 at 30-m-AGL and between 220 and 320 W/m2 at 60-m-AGL. In rich regions the values increase to 200 W/m2 at 30-m-AGL and 320 W/m2 at 60-m-AGL. It is    indicated that the wind farms should be located on the coast or around inland lakes, and the vanes of wind turbines can be set at 30-m-AGL or 60-m-AGL, so as to extract more energy from the moving air.

