Mining Valid Association Rules in Incomplete Information Systems

Abstract?Extracting the association rules is an important research topic among the various data mining problems. Based on the rough set theory which is a powerful tool in dealing with incompleteness and uncertainty, an algorithm to mine association rules in incomplete information systems is presented. In the new algorithm, the support and confidence are redefined and a new judgment criterion is introduced in.

The algorithm can mine the positive, invalid and negative association rules directly without processing missing values.

The experiment shows that the new algorithm has short execution times, and can mine effective association rules efficiently.

Keywords-association mining;rough set;incomplete information systems; expectation effect

I.  INTRODUCTION Association rules mining as an important technique of  data mining was firstly developed by Agrawal et al[1]. Now association rules extracted are often positive association rules based on the support-confidence criteria. Let X, Y be a set of items, ?X causes Y to happen? is often called a positive rule. ?X causes Y not to happen? is called a negative rule. Negative association rules play an important role in decision making in the fields of investment analysis and competitive analysis. Brin et al[2] pointed out the importance of negative rules. Savasere et al[3] expressed the problems of negative rules . Luo Ke et al[4] added effect as a criterion, and mined both positive and negative association rules.

Incomplete information systems(IIS) are the widest forms of data existence. Incompleteness of objects is the biggest obstacle studying from data. There are two types of approaches for IIS. One is to transform the incomplete systems to complete ones. For example, removing methods[5], filling the missing values[6-7], and et al. But these methods above may make the data distorted to some degree, and noisy maybe introduced into datasets so that the rules extracted are unusable. Another is to obtain the rules from IIS directly without processing missing values. The common method is based on rough sets[8].

An algorithm to mine association rules in incomplete information systems is presented. The support and confidence are redefined and a new judgment criterion is introduced in based on the rough set theory. The algorithm can mine both positive and negative association rules directly without processing missing values.



II. BASIC CONCEPTS  A. Association rules The aim of mining association rules is to find out the  hidden, interesting relationships among the items in large datasets. The basic concepts of association rules are given as follows[9].

Let 1 2 m{ , , ..., I }I I I=  be a set of items and  1 2{ , , ..., }nD t t t=  be a set of transactions, where ti is a set of  items such that it I? . An association rule is an implication of the form X Y? , where ,X Y I?  and X Y? = ? . The rule X Y?  holds in the set D with support and confidence, where support is the percentage of transactions in D that contain both X and Y, and confidence is the percentage of transactions in D containing X that also contain Y.

An association rule must satisfy a user-set minimum support(minsup) and minimum confidence(minconf). The rule X Y?  is called a strong association rule if support ? minsup and confidence?minconf.

B. Classification of association rules The conventional framework for mining association rules  is the support-confidence. But using this conventional framework it may produce a lot of redundant, useless and even misleading rules. So people introduce into new criteria to strengthen the judgments of strong association rules. In [4], it added the effect in the judgment criterion, and gave two thresholds of effect E1 and E2(E1<0<E2, approaching zero).

It classified strong association rules into positive, invalid and negative association rules. The classification of association rules is shown in table I.

TABLE I.  CLASSIFICATION  OF  ASSOCIATION  RULES  Classification Support Confidence Effect positive rules ?minsup ?minconf effect?E2 invalid rules ?minsup ?minconf E2>effect>E1  negative rules ?minsup ?minconf effect?E1

III. MINING ASSOCIATION RULES IN IIS  A. Incomplete information systems(IIS) The definition of incomplete information systems(IIS) is  given as follows[10].

2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.402   2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.402   2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.402   2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.402     Definition 1 Information system IS is a tuple ( , , , )IS U A V f= ,where:  U  is a nonempty finite set of objects called the universe of discourse;  A  is a nonempty finite set of attributes; Va  is a set of values for the attribute a, a A aV V?= ? ;  :f U A V? ?  is a information function, it give a value to every attributes, i.e., a A? ? , x U? , ( , ) af x a V? .

If a A? ? , x U? , ( , ) *f x a = , the information systems is called incomplete information systems(IIS), otherwise it is complete.

B. Rough sets approaches It is hoped to handle data with no changes of the original  information for mining association rules in IIS. Rough set theory[11] is a new mathematical approach to deal with imprecision, uncertainty and incompleteness. In this paper, equivalence relation, upper and lower approximation, and boundary are redefined for mining association rules.

Definition 2 Let ( , , , )IS U A V f=  be a complete information systems, <attribute, value> is called a relation item, that is < ,a v > where a A? , av V? .

Definition 3 Let ( , , , )IS U A V f=  be a complete information system, equivalence relation RX  based on item X is expressed as:  { }| , : ( , )RX x U a v X f x a v= ? ? < >? =          (1)  RX indicates the set of objects which are match to X in U.

Because there are missing values(*) in IIS, equivalence relation doesn?t exist in datasets. But we can define the max set and the min set of objects matching to items. These definitions are similar to upper and lower approximation in classical rough set.

Definition 4 Let ( , , , )IIS U A V f=  be an incomplete information system, for x U? , we denote RX  the max set of the objects that are equivalent to X, i.e.,  { }| , : ( , )RX x U a v X f x a v= ? ? < >? =          (2)  and denote RX  the max set of the objects that are similar to X, i.e.,  { }| , : ( , ) ( , ) *RX x U a v X f x a v f x a= ? ? < >? = ? =  (3)  the boundary of X is defined:    ( )Rbn X RX RX= ?                                                        (4)  It can be seen from Definition 4 that U RX?  indicates the set of objects which are surely unable to match X; and U RX?  indicates the set of objects which may possibly not match X.

C. Redefinition of support and confidence The support and confidence can not be calculated exactly  in incomplete information systems as complete ones, so some concepts of association rules are redefined in this paper.

1) Estimates of support and confidence: Based on the definition 4, the minimal and maximal possible values of support and confidence are defined as follows.

Definition 5 Minimal possible support(Supmin) of items of X is:  ( )min RX  Sup X U  =                                       (5)  Maximal possible support(Supmax) of items of X is:  ( )max RX  Sup X U  =                                        (6)  Definition 6 Minimal possible confidence(Confmin) of the association rule X Y?  is:  ( ) ( )min  RX RY Conf X Y  RX RY RX U RY  ? ? =  ? + ? ? (7)  Maximal possible confidence(Confmax) of the association rule X Y?  is:  ( ) ( )max  RX RY Conf X Y  RX RY RX U RY  ? ? =  ? + ? ? (8)  2) Expectations of support and confidence: Above formulas give the estimates of support and confidence of rules in IIS. When the difference between the minimal and the maximal possible support is big, it is still very difficult to process the data. It is very favorable if the values of support and confidence are closer to the actual ones.

In the rough set theory, the uncertainty of rough set is caused by the uncertainty of rough boundary[11]. The bigger the rough boundary of X is, the smaller the certainty of rough set is. When the difference between the minimal and the maximal possible support is big, it shows that the boundary of rough set X is big. It can reduce the difference based on rough boundary so as to get the expectation value of support which is close to the actual one.

Definition 7 Expectation support(Supexp) of items of X is:     minexp R  Sup (X) Sup (X)  1 - bn (X) U =                              (9)  According to the definitions of Supmin, Supmax and boundary of X, property 1 is expressed as follows:  Property 1 Let X be a set of items, ( ) ( ) ( )R max minbn X U Sup X Sup X= ? .

Proof. From (4), it can be derived ( )Rbn X U =  RX RX U? = RX U RX U? , from (5), (6), it can  be derived  RX U RX U? = ( ) ( )max minSup X Sup X? ,  so ( )Rbn X U ? ( ) ( )max minSup X Sup X? .

Then Definition 7 is redefined as:   ( )  ( ) ( )  1 ( ) ( ) min  exp  max min  Sup X Sup X  Sup X Sup X =  ? ? (10)  Definition 8 Expectation confidence(Confexp) of the association rule X Y?  is:   ( )  ( ) ( )  pre  exp  pre  Sup X Y Conf X Y  Sup X  ? ? =                      (11)  It can be seen from (10) that when the difference between the minimal and the maximal possible support is big, the rough boundary is big too, i.e., the denominator in the formula becomes small. Judging from this, the difference is reduced by enlarging ( )minSup X  which is the most conservative value of support, so that the support value is much closer to the actual one.

After expectation support and expectation confidence are introduced in, the effect in [4] is redefined so as to mine both positive and negative association rules in IIS.

Definition 9 Expectation effect(Effexp) of the association rule X Y?  is:  If minsup ? ( )expSup Y <1 and ( )expConf X Y? -  ( )expSup Y ? 0, then   ( ) ( )  ( ) 1 ( )  exp exp  exp  exp  Conf X Y Sup Y Eff X Y  Sup Y  ? ? ? =  ? (12)  If minsup ? ( )expSup Y <1 and ( )expConf X Y? -  ( )expSup Y <0, then   ( ) ( )  ( ) ( )  exp exp  exp  exp  Conf X Y Sup Y Eff X Y  Sup Y  ? ? ? =        (13)

IV. DESCRIPTION OF MINING ALGORITHM A new algorithm for mining positive and negative  association rules in incomplete information systems(MPNAR_IIS) is put forward based on classical Apriori[1]. The expectation support, expectation confidence and expectation effect are introduced into the mining algorithm in this paper. The process of the algorithm is expressed as follows.

Step1: inputting the thresholds of support, confidence and effect, that is minsup, minconf, E1, E2;  Step2: generating the frequent items based on Apriori, while the support of each rule is expectation support;  Step3: computing the effect of association rules from frequent items, and giving away the invalid rules. For the rules whose effect values are minus values, considering their negative rules and recalculating their support and effect;  Step4: computing the expectation confidence of the association rules by Step3, reserving the rules which meet Confexp( X Y? ) ? minconf.

The strong association rules are generated following the above steps.



V. EXPERIMENTS The experiment uses Mushroom dataset obtained from  UCI machine learning repository. This dataset contains 8124 samples and 2480 missing values. In this paper, we only mined mushroom edible or poisonous. To testify the effectiveness and performance of MPNAR_IIS, MPNAR_IIS was compared with the classical association rules mining algorithm based on Apriori. And before Apriori, missing values were completed based on fuzzy- clustering in [6]. The setting of parameters: minsup=0.15, minconf=0.6, E1=-0.1, E2=0.2. The software using in the experiment was VC++. The experiment results are shown in table ?.

TABLE II.  CLASSIFICATION  OF  ASSOCIATION  RULES  MPNAR_IIS Algorithm based on Apriori  Number of rules 1353 1367 Testing accuracy 98.71% 92.34% Execution times(s) 304 375  The strong association rules mined by MPNAR_IIS are composed of 631 positive rules, 283 invalid rules and 439 negative rules. It indicates that positive rules are sometime a part of the strong association rules, and another part maybe invalid.

It can be seen from table ?  that MPNAR_IIS has obvious advantages in testing accuracy and execution times compared with the algorithm based on Apriori. It indicates that completing missing values may obtain the rules unusable and also has higher time complexity. In brief, the experiment results prove that the new algorithm has high speed and efficiency without processing missing values, and can mine both positive and negative association rules.



VI. CONCLUSION The new algorithm of mining association rules in  incomplete information systems based on rough set has the following advantages.

(1)It does not change the structure of incomplete information systems and keep the original information not false;  (2)Equivalence relation, upper and lower approximation, and boundary are defined based on relation items;  (3)Some concepts of association rules such as support and confidence are redefined in incomplete systems.

Expectation support, confidence and effect as the judgment criteria of rules are proposed. We can effectively discover both positive and negative association rules directly without processing missing values in IIS based on the expectation values.

