Web Structure Optimization Appraisal Plan Based on Visiting Thing

Abstract?The optimization and appraisal of Web structure is a significant hard problem. In this paper, using the association rule to discover the effective link, using the false association rule to discover invalid link, and the definition of the false association rule is given n. An evaluation function of the Web site optimization is proposed by combination between maximal forward reference path and reference length, which makes the transaction more accurate to optimize the Web structure, and the related experiment is given, the experimental result verifies the credibility of the appraisal plan, the result of the study is a good reference for related research.

Keywords-Web Structure Optimization; False Association rule; Maximal Forward Reference Path; Reference Time Length; Appraisal Function

I. INTRODUCTION Along with Internet rapid development, the Websites  have already become main places where people gain the resources and communicate now and in the future. However, the Web link structures of Website also become more complex, which causes the users hard to search the need information. In order to help users to fast search the useful information, it is necessary to carry on the optimization to the Web structure, which achieves the initiative recommendation of the information. Nowadays, many people study the optimization of the Web structure, for example, using the mining of Web logs to realize the optimization of the Web structure, but few people study the appraise of the result of Web structure optimization. In fact, it is very significant to appraise the result of Web structure optimization, because the appraisal goal is for optimizing well.

In this paper, an evaluation function of the Web site optimization is proposed by combination between maximal forward reference path and reference length, which make the transaction more accurate to optimize the Web structure, and verified through the experimental data.



II. WEB STRUCTURE OPTIMIZATION PROCESS AND SIGNIFICANCE  The Web structure optimization mainly carries on the optimization to the Web page link structure, its optimized goal is for increasing the valid link, and enhancing the search result place, which will be advantageous for the users to find need information quickly.

The Web link structure may divide into the basic link structure and the additional link structure, once when the Web structure gets down fixedly, we cannot change the basic  structure at will, because changing the structure will cause the customers hard to find the page which they have visited before, thus it will cause the outflow of the customers. The Web structure optimization is generally through mining and analysis the Web logs files which the users stay on the server when they glance over Web to realize.

To optimize the website, two aspects must be analyzed: not only to discover the association pages, but also to discover the unreasonable ultra link. This article mainly aims at the Web link structure, resting on the result of mining Web logs files, using the association rule and the false association rule to analysis, dynamic to optimize the Web structure.

Based on the association rule analysis, many associated patterns can be found, but with business change and time pass, these patterns are often also no longer established. We need one method to confirm these patterns, the false association rule can be available to discover the kind of obsolete and unreasonable pattern, and the definition of false association rule are as follows:  To suppose },{ EVG =  to express the oriented graph which is composed by an item of collection and during the items of collection association rule, in which V  expresses an item of collection set, lVj ? , we call it a k - item of collection set, k =| jV |. l  expresses all of item set. E expresses association rule set, namely EYX ?? .

If ?  is a real number, called it the most doubting, recorded it suspectmax , then there is ??? )( YXconfidence .

Now we carry on the confirmation to each by the association rule EYX ??  to distinguish whether it was still established or not. If the support or the confidence level of association rule is lower than the threshold value which assigns separately, then we call this rule false association rule, with YX ?>  expression.

YX ?  is existence , if the expression portYXport supmin)(sup ??  or  suspectYXconfidence max)( ??  is established, we call YX ?  association rule and record it YX ?> .

Speaking of the false association rule, it should be to discover he association rule which has been discovered, which support is smaller than portsupmin  or confidence level is smaller than suspectmax . In here the significance of the support and confidence level of false association rule and association rule is same. No matter the support is association rule?s or the false association rule?s, the incidence relation first should be satisfied; The smallest support of the false  2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.131   2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.131   2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.131   2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.131     association rule is equal to the association rule?s; The confidence level has reflected the rule strong or weak, when the confidence level is lower than the smallest confidence level of the association rule slightly, which is insufficient to explain that the rule is untenable, only when the belief level is enough small, namely which is smaller than the most doubting, we can explain that the rule has been untenable.

We should see the false association rule is compared to the association rule weaker.



III. APPRAISAL PLAN OF WEB STRUCTURE OPTIMIZATION BASED ON VISITING THING  A. Appraisal of Web structure optimization based on average of maximal forward reference path   When a user visits a content Web page, it is often not  because of the content of this page, but through the other navigation page. In order to appraise the optimized degree of the Web structure, we give the following several definitions:  The definition of maximal forward reference path: >=< mlllmfp ,......,2,1  l  is the reference page: >=< lengthltimelurlll .,.,. .

When the user visits the Web page, the page visited with  difficulty locates at the deep level generally, moreover takes the big storage space. To visit deep level page is essential to pass many intermediate level page, and all of the users on each intermediate level page have the possibility to change to visit other pages, therefore it will cause the possibility of he users visiting the page to reduce. Obviously, if two pages have not the ultra link to be connected but the incidence relation, the corresponding maximal forward reference path will be very long, thus it will take to the user to be inconvenient. Therefore, appraisal of Web structure optimization based on average of maximal forward reference path is reasonable, if average of maximal forward reference path of the website is shorter equally, the degree of optimization will be higher.

Generally speaking, one web log database contains tow nodes (source node ( is ), goal node ( id )) of a browsing patch. The start source node of a new browsing is empty. As follows is the algorithm of maximal forward reference path.

Step 1: i=1, Y=null, F=1// to initialize variables and suppose that user is glancing over page forward  Step 2: A= is , B= id . If A=null then Begin If Y<>null then Output Y to database DF Y=B; Go to Step 5; End Step 3:  If B?Y then Begin If F=1 then Output Y to database DF Delete mj YY ,......,  F=0 Go to Step 5 End Step 4: Append B to Y //to append B to Y If F=0 then F=1 Step 5: i=i+1 For DF mfpi = >< mlll ,......,2,1  do j=1 for k=(1?m) do Begin If  timelengthlk min. > Insert kj ll ......  into database MFP//MFP is improved thing  database j=k+1; End  B. Appraisal of Web structure optimization based on length of reference time User continues take the page as the navigation page to  visit other pages, after the user glances over a content page, which will increase length of maximal forward reference path. Theoretically, the action of visiting can be divided into two or more things, but from the viewpoint of maximal forward reference, it is actually one thing.

The length of reference time is based on the kind of supposition: The total time of user glancing over a page and the page whether is the navigation page or the content page is related. Generally speaking, the time of user spending on navigation page is always short, but it spending on the content page is longer. Therefore, we can judge that the page is navigation page or content page through expenditure of time which the user spends in glancing over on the Web page.

Now we redefine the thing as follows: ).......,.,.{(,,. 111 lengthltimelurlluidtrltrliptrl  rlrlrl ttt=<  >)}.,.,.( lengthltimelurll rlrlrl tm t m  t m  In which, mk ??1 , Ll rltk ? ,  iptrlipl rltk =. , uidtrluidl rltk =. . L expresses the set of logs. LI ? , which contains ipl. ? uidl.

?URL ? timel.  and lengthl. . If the page is a content page, there is timelengthltrlm min. > .

imeM int , average time of visiting the page, is the smallest time value for discrimination of navigation page and content page. The definition is as follows:  n  lengthl time  n  i  t i  rl .

min 1  ? ==  C. statement of Web logical structure optimization appraisal objective function  According to above analysis, we can judge the page whether is navigation page or content page through the     average time of reference. If the reference length is shorter equally, then we can think the degree of the Web page optimization is higher.

In the ordinary circumstance, user always hope to find the page which one wants to visit as soon as possible, whether a Web link structure is reasonable or not, we can judge it through the maximal forward reference path when user visits the content page. Facing the circumstance that the different user visits different page, we can appraise the optimization of Web structure through the computation of maximal forward reference path. Obviously, when a user visits the identical content page, the page number which the user must pass through is smaller, the web link structure optimization is better.

Therefore, we should consider the factor of the maximal forward reference path and threshold value hypothesis of the average reference time length equally to appraise the optimization of Web structure. The hypothesis of appraisal objective function is as follows.

t  t  i  ts tf ?  == 1)(  In which, t  expresses the total number of things, ts expresses the total page number of each thing, )(tf expresses the average value of reference length?  In the database of MFP, the total page of each visiting thing is recorded. We can discover the total page number of each visiting thing. It is easy to calculate the total page number P  of all the things and the total number t  of all things. The result of p/t is the average value of reference length. Whenever the page is carried on an optimization to the website, the result of p/t should be as far as possible small, such optimization will be significance. It is worth of emphasizing, the result of p/t will tend to be smaller with optimization of the Web structure successfully and continually, if the page is carried on very big changing, the optimization value will not be comparative as last time.

Supposing that the log data has been already processed for the form of user conversation, we can describe the algorithm of the thing of reference length as follows:  For all sessions do For all pages of session do Begin p++ If timelengthltrlm min. > t++ End Result = p/t

IV. EXPERIMENT To test the Web structure optimization appraisal plan  mentioned above, here provides the following experiment system, experiment process and its result aiming at a high school website to optimize and appraisal the logic structure.

A. Experiment system framework The design of experiment system is based on Windows,  Java and Mysql. Its function can be approximately divided into log preconditioning, algorithm implementation, optimization analysis. The main task of system is to control the operation process of whole system, to call all other functional patterns. It includes data cleaning, user conversation identification, thing identification, association rule analysis, false association rule analysis, website optimization appraisal and so on. Among them the objective function will be used to appraise the optimization for website optimization appraisal pattern.

B. Log cleaning In log processing stage, the logs of pages ended with  .mpga, .gif, .css, .js ect, need to be cleaned, and other logs of pages ended with .jsp, .html, .asp,.php ect.need to be kept.

As figure 1 shows the cleaned log records storing in the Mysql database.

Figure 1.  cleaned log records  After log cleaned, the conversation and thing analysis is to be carried on. User maybe visits the same website for many times in Web server log of the wide spanning time section. The target of conversation analysis is to divide the visit record into single conversation. A conversation is composed of several things. Here we take 30 minutes as once conversation time, while taking average page visit timemin as once thing time. The log conversation and the result of thing processed are as figure 2 shows.

Figure 2.  the log conversation and the result of thing processed  C. Algorithm implementation The experiment system mainly uses algorithm of  association rule and algorithm of false association rule to analyze the Web hyperlink. The following is the result of     website log of a high school worked out by association rule and false association rule.

The process of association rule analysis: put the entire hyperlink pattern found by association rule into a database, then test every hyperlink pattern on the website. If the hyperlink exists, it will be deleted from the database, otherwise, keep it. Finally, hyperlink in the database will be man-analyzed to make sure whether it can be used to optimize the website or not, just as figure 3 shows:   Figure 3.  the result of association rule analysis of Web page  The process of false association rule analysis: Firstly, put the web hyperlink into database by web spider, then, in the cleaned log records, calculate its support and doubting to determine whether the hyperlink is still suitable or not one by one. If the hyperlink is suitable, it will be deleted from database, otherwise not. At last, hyperlink pattern in the database will be man-analyzed to make sure whether it is suitable to website optimization or not. Figure 4 is result of rule kuandai.htm and xgxx.htm carried on:   Figure 4.  the result of false associated rule analysis  D. Optimization appraisal analysis The procedure reads thing database firstly, then works  out average reference length value according to website optimization appraisal algorithm based on average reference length thing. The following is the result of appraisal of the website before optimized and after optimized, as figure 5, figure 6:   Figure 5.  the result of the first Web structure optimization appraisal   Figure 6.  the result of  the second Web structure optimization appraisal  From the figure 5 and figure 6 we can know, the value of second website optimization is 5.43, less than 5.58. That is to say, the web structure has been improved. It is necessary to remark that the web structure appraisal always refers to comparison of two optimization values now and last. If the website structure has been carried on a large-scale adjustment, the comparison does not have the significance.



V. CONCLUDING REMARK  The failed link of website is not only to reduce the  authority of website, but also to affect the corporation business or the sale of products. Web structure optimization can provide the effective server to users and enhance the visit quantity of website, while, to avoid obsolete and invalid hyperlink, it requests urgently us to dynamic appraise its optimization.

