Generalized Time Related Sequential Association Rule Mining and Traffic Prediction

Abstract? Time Related Association rule mining is a kind of sequence pattern mining for sequential databases. In this paper, we introduce a method of Generalized Association Rule Mining using Genetic Network Programming (GNP) with time series processing mechanism in order to find time related sequential rules efficiently. GNP represents solutions as directed graph structures, thus has compact structure and implicit memory function. The inherent features of GNP make it possible for GNP to work well especially in dynamic environments. GNP has been applied to generate time related candidate association rules as a tool using the database consisting of a large number of time related attributes. The aim of this algorithm is to better handle association rule extraction from the databases in a variety of time-related applications, especially in the traffic volume prediction problems. The generalized algorithm which can find the important time related association rules is described and experimental results are presented considering a traffic prediction problem.



I. INTRODUCTION  Data mining, the process of extracting hidden and/or predictive information from large databases, has become an important field since a large amount of data have been collected in various applications. Mining these data effi- ciently and effectively is too difficult and intricate when using conventional methods, especially for the sequential database in dynamic systems. Sequence pattern mining is the analytical process of digging through and exploring the enormous sets of sequential data for the search of association patterns and systematic relationships between attributes in sequential datasets.

For example, ?If Section S on the traffic map has high traffic volume, then the Section D also has high traffic volume.? is a typical relationship that we will obtain using the normal data mining methods, however, in dynamic systems with sequential datasets, we are more interested in the sequential association patterns such as ?If Section S on the traffic map has high traffic volume at time t, then Section D also has high traffic volume 10 time units later.?  In order to extract these sequential association patterns in the time-related databases and represent at what time the event will happen or how long the event will persist, we have already proposed a method of time-related association rule mining [1] using Genetic Network Programming (GNP) to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the rule extraction in time related databases. But, in this paper, we generalized the original time-related association rule mining in terms  Graduate School of Information, Production and Systems, Waseda University; Email: zhy836@toki.waseda.jp; mabu@aoni.waseda.jp; k.shimada@aoni.waseda.jp; hirasawa@waseda.jp  of multi-judgements, where there are a good number of branches in the judgement nodes instead of simple Yes/No- side branches in the conventional method.

The most popular model in the association rule mining is Apriori algorithm, in which Agrawal et al proposed the support-confidence framework [2]. However, Apriori algo- rithm may suffer from large computational complexity for rule extraction when extracting from dense databases. Many approaches have been proposed to extract association infor- mation in various directions, including efficient apriori-like mining methods [3], [4]. The variations of Apriori approach such as the hash-based algorithm have also been studied for efficiency [5], [6].

Genetic Algorithm(GA) [7],[8], proposed by J.H. Holland, has also been applied to data mining research in order to deal with dense databases. Holland proposed two kinds of approaches, Pittsburgh approach and Michigan approach.

However, because a rule is represented as an individual or part of an individual of GA, it is hard for them to give us a complete picture of the underlying relationships in problem domains, thus not easy to extract enough number of association rules.

Genetic Programming(GP) [9], [10] improved the expres- sion ability of GA by evolving individuals as tree structures.

Although, GP enables a more explicit representation of association rules, it may suffer from the problems of loose structure and bloating, especially in dynamic problems.

Unlike the other methods mentioned above, the main task of GNP-based data mining is to allow the GNP individuals to self-evolve and extract association rules as many as possible.

What?s more, it uses evolved individuals(directed graphs of GNP) just as a tool to extract candidate association rules.

Thus, the structure of GNP individuals does not necessarily represent the association relations of the database. Instead, the extracted association rules are stored together in the rule pool separated from the individuals. As a result, the structures of GNP individuals are less restricted than the structures of GA and GP, and GNP-based data mining becomes capable of producing a large number of association rules.

The basic feature of the proposed mechanism is like the following:  ? The GNP structure of rule representation is generalized to multiple branches instead of simply ?Yes-side? or ?No-side? transitions. Thus it could be applied to gen- erate candidate association rules in a more generalized and efficient way.

? The database is time-related considering the real-time     factor. Thus, the same attribute has different meanings at different time points.

? The process of searching the data for calculating the confidence, support and chi-squared value becomes two dimensional search.

? We aims at extracting rules to predict the traffic volume of all the the sections on the road networks. So Extrac- tion Mechanism at Stages(EMS) is applied, where all the sections are considered as the consequent part step by step.

? Better attributes are also accumulated gradually round by round in the evolution process using Attribute Ac- cumulation Algorithm(AAA).

? A simple classification mechanism is combined with the rule extraction system, thus the time related rules can be used to predict the future traffic volume on the traffic networks.

? Another feature of our method is that we can predict not only the traffic jam of a specific section on the road networks, but also can predict the low, middle and high traffic volume of all of the sections on the road network, which might be useful in future applications.



II. GENETIC NETWORK PROGRAMMING(GNP)  The basic idea of Genetic Network Programming(GNP) is briefly introduced in this section. GNP is an extension of Genetic Algorithm(GA) [7], [8], which represents directed graph structures as solutions [11], [12], [13]. GNP can reuse nodes, thus has compact structures and implicit memory function, which can deal with not only the current information but also the past information implicitly. Also, GNP can find solutions of the problems without bloating compared with Genetic Programming(GP) [9], [10], because of the fixed number of nodes in GNP.

The basic expression of GNP node is shown in Fig.1. This describes the gene of node i, then the set of these genes represents the genotype of GNP individuals. NTi describe the node type, NTi = 0 means node i is the start node, NTi = 1 represents node i is a judgment node and NTi = 2 represents node i is a processing node. IDi is an identification number, for example, NTi = 1 and IDi = 1 means node i is J1(Judgment node with ID 1). Ci1, Ci2,..., denote the nodes connected from node i. di and dij are the delay times required to execute the processing of node i and transition from node i to node Cij .

The basic structure of GNP is also shown in Fig.1. The graph structure of GNP includes three kinds of nodes: start node, judgment nodes and processing nodes. Judgment nodes are the set of J1, J2,..., which work as if-then type logical decision making functions. On the other hand, processing nodes are the set of P1, P2,..., which work as a certain kind of action/processsing function. The concrete roles of these nodes are predefined and stored in the library. Once GNP is started up, firstly the execution starts from the start node; consequently, the next node to execute is determined  : Sta rt Node : P rocessing Node  : Judgment Node  NTi IDi d i Ci1 d i1 Cij d ij......

n ode  gen e  con n ection  gen e  n ode i  0, 0 ,0 1,0Node 0:  1, 1, 0 2,0Node 1:  2, 2, 0 3,0 4,0Node 2:  2 ,3 ,0 4,0 1,0Node 3:  1 ,4 ,0 1,0Node 4:  Start:0      P 1  J 2  J3  P 4  D irected G ra ph  Fig. 1. Basic structure of GNP  according to the connection and if-then judgment results of the current node.



III. GENERALIZED TIME RELATED ASSOCIATION RULE MINING USING GNP  A. Outline of the Proposed Method  The whole procedure of the proposed algorithm is like Fig.2. The first step is the time related class association rule extraction step based on given class type and attribute set to extract the rules about time related database. In rule extrac- tion procedure, two kinds of iterations are included, i.e., the outer iteration represents the class association rule mining, which means to extract the class rules of all the consequent attributes with Attribute Accumulation Algorithm, while the inner iteration represents the basic procedure of the time related data mining, which uses GNP individuals to generate the candidate rules, then calculate the support, confidence and chi-squared values of the candidate rules based on the time related databases.

Class type  Time Related Class Association  Rule Extraction  Attribute set  Time related database  Classification Testing database  Prediction Result Actual Situation Compare  Accuracy  Fig. 2. Basic steps of proposed algorithm  2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2009) 2655    TABLE I DATABASE BEFORE DISCRETIZATION  Time A1 A2 0001 8 3 0002 4 4 0003 8 1 0004 2 9  TABLE II DATABASE AFTER DISCRETIZATION  Time A1 A2 Low Middle High Low Middle High  0001 0 0 1 1 0 0 0002 0 1 0 0 1 0 0003 0 0 1 1 0 0 0004 1 0 0 0 0 1  Middle threshold=4; High threshold=7;  The second step is classification stage in which we use the extracted rules to predict the future events using the degree of matching between data and antecedent part of the rules in each class, and the class with the highest degree of matching will be selected. The selected class is the classification result. If the classification result is the same with the actual situation, then the prediction is correct, otherwise incorrect, and we can obtain the accuracy of the prediction in this way.

B. Structure of Database  When processing the real-time information systems, the databases are to be designed and developed to satisfy the time related requirements. These kind of requirements allow us to predict the occurrence of the critical events in the time domain. Traffic prediction is one of these problems. The traffic flow in each section of the road networks is changing constantly as time goes on. In order to better predict the traffic flow of the road networks in the future, the database should represent at what time the events in the road section happened or how long the events lasted.

Here, the time unit represent the conceptional time unit, i.e., it could be one second, one minute or the time for one episode, therefore, the time unit could be flexible enough according to the concrete problem to solve.

According to the range of the continuous values of the attributes, we divide the continuous values into three cat- egories, i.e., Low, Middle and High. Supposing that the Middle threshold is 4 and High threshold is 7, the attribute A = 9 is ranked as A?High, i.e., (A?Low, A?Middle, A ? High)=(0, 0, 1) as shown in Table 2.

C. Generalized GNP Mining  The proposed generalized method extracts important time related association rules using GNP supposing the connec- tions of nodes are represented as association rules. The generalized time-related association rule mining means that there a good number of branches in the judgement nodes in stead of simply ?Yes-side? or ?No-side? transition in the previous method. The basic structure of the generalized GNP network structure for class association rule mining  is shown in Fig.3. The jump mechanism is also used in order to determine the antecedent part, but we don?t have to decide the consequent part of candidates rules because we are considering classification problems. Therefore, we are now focusing on extracting rules with fixed consequent corresponding to each class of the attributes. In order to do that, all the items of the consequent part are placed in Consequent Table(CT ) shown in Fig.3. This means that GNP individuals are evolved to extract the class association rules for each class of the attributes, i.e., for each traffic volume level of each section of the road networks, and this procedure is repeated for all the consequent items. GNP individual exclusively extracts the association rules about one consequent item in CT , which is called the current consequent item as shown in Fig.3. In addition, a sufficient fixed number(Nf ) of rules for each item in CT are obtained in the proposed method.

From Fig.3, we can see that each judgement node of GNP is in charge of examining the corresponding attribute, for example A1, e.g., Low, Middle and High of attribute A1. If A1 satisfies the ??High? condition, then, moves to the High- side of the transition, and ?a, b and c? are counts of the moves to the corresponding judgement result(High/Middle/Low) of attribute A1. Although the transition of the nodes changes according to the judgement result of High/Middle/Low, the transition from the same judgement node shares the same time delay as shown in Fig.3. The time delays are used for the two dimensional search related to the time [1], which will be explained later in more details.

The total number of moving to each branch from the pro- cessing node at each judgment node is calculated for every processing node, which is a starting point for calculating association rules as described above. In Fig.4, N is the total number of the search, and a, b and c are the numbers of search moving to A1(Mid), A2(Low) and A3(Mid) at each judgment node A1, A2 and A3. The measurements are calculated by these numbers.

For example, as represented in Fig.4, if processing node P1 jumps from A1 to A3, then the antecedent part of the candidate rules becomes ?(A1(Mid)(t = 0) = 1) ? (A2(Low)(t = 2) = 1) ? (A3(Mid)(t = 4) = 1)? and the current item in the Conse- quent Table(CT ) is, for example, ?(Ac(Mid)(t = 6) = 1)? considering the time delay T = 2, which can also be evolved.

Then, we can also pick up the candidate rules like ?(A1(Mid)(t = 0) = 1) ? (Ac(Mid)(t = 2) = 1)?, ?(A1(Mid)(t = 0) = 1) ? (A2(Low)(t = 2) = 1) ? (Ac(Mid)(t = 4) = 1)? and ?(A1(Mid)(t = 0) = 1) ? (A2(Low)(t = 2) = 1) ? (A3(Mid)(t = 4) = 1) ? (Ac(Mid)(t = 6) = 1)? in the same jumping operation, which we call Multi-Rules Mechanism(MRM ). During one Jumping of the processing node, several candidate rules will be generated and the times of moving to the Low/Middle/High connection are counted.

This count provides the basic data for the evaluation of the candidates rules. As a result, chi ? squared value can be  2656 2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2009)    calculated considering both the antecedent and consequent part of the candidate rules. We can repeat this like a chain operation in each generation by jumping the processing nodes in the class association rule mining with time series using GNP. Now, we define the important association rules as the ones which satisfy the minimum chi-squared, support and confidence value, i.e., ?2min, supmin and confmin, respectively.

In this definition, if the rule ?X ? Y ? is important, then, X ? ?Y,?X ? Y,?X ? ?Y, Y ? X, Y ? ?X,?Y ? X and ?Y ? ?X? are also important rules. The extracted important association rules are stored in a pool all together through generations in order to find new important rules.

A2,Mid  : H igh connection :Midd le connection  : Jumping  T: Time D ela y  : P rosessing Node : Judgmen t Node : moved position  : Low connection  C onsequen t Ta b le  A1,Low  A1,Mid  A1,High  A2,Low  A2,High  ...

...

AN,High  Cur r en t  Consequent  N P 1  N  J umping  A1 A2  A3  a  b c  d  T= 0  T= u T= v  P 1  T= 0  A6A5  A4 T= u  T= u  e f  T= v  T= v  j  k  l  Fig. 3. Basic structure of class association rule mining using GNP  Time Unit  A1 A2 A3 Ac  Low Middlle High Low Middle High Low Middle High Low Middle High  0000 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0  0001 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0  0002 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0  0003 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0  0004 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1  0005 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0  0006 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0  0007 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0  0008 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0  0009 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0  0010 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0  N  P 1  T= 0  P 1J umping : Low : Middle  : H igh  c  A1 Cur r en t Consequen t:  Ac, MiddleA2 a b  T= 2 T= 2 T= 2 A3  Fig. 4. Two dimensional searching method  D. Extraction Mechanism at Stages(EMS) and Attribute Ac- cumulation Mechanism(AAM)  We use Extraction Mechanism at Stages(EMS) here be- cause our method basically aims at extracting rules of all  of the attributes in the database, i.e., all classes of all the sections on the road networks. Unlike other conventional methods, one of the unique points of our methods is to get class association rules for all of the attributes. Thus, we need to get enough number(Nf ) of class association rules for each class of all attributes in order to acquire the high accuracy of the classification.

If the number of the extracted rules reach a certain fixed number Nf for the current class of the consequent attribute, then the stage for the current class of the consequent attribute ends and another stage for the next item in the CT will begin, likewise.

The number of the rules Nf for each class of the at- tributes should be sufficiently large enough. But, it might be possible that there do not exist enough number of rules for some classes of the attributes when using the current importance levels, especially in some rare cases when the instances do not occur frequently enough for the extraction of class association rules. Thus, in this paper, we introduce the self-adaptive criteria for the importance levels and they are adjusted gradually depending on the number of new class association rules extracted in recent generations. If the number of new rules generated in recent generations equal to 0, which means no more important rules can be found for the current item in Consequent Table(CT ), the criteria for the importance levels are changed until a certain fixed number Nf of rules are obtained using the following equations.

?2min ? ?2min ? s1, (1)  supmin ? supmin ? s2, (2)  confmin ? confmin ? s3, (3) where, s1, s2 and s3 in [0, 1], represent the step size  decrease for the minimum chi-squared, support and confi- dence value, respectively. ?2min, supmin and confmin are initialized for every item of the Consequent Table(CT ).

Attribute Accumulation Mechanism(AAM )[14] is also combined with Extraction Mechanism at Stages(EMS) to accumulate better attributes round by round in our algorithm, thus we can find better and fitter attributes in GNP in an exploitative way.

The proposed GNP-based mining method for extract- ing class association rules for each item in Consequent Table(CT ) is shown in Fig.5, where GNP based data mining consists of a sequence of generations.

E. Structure of Rules  Let Ai(?)(t = p) be an attribute in a database at time p and its value is 1 or 0. Ai(?) represents Ai(Low) /Ai(Middle) /Ai(High). The general association rule mining with time series extracts the following association rules:  (Aj(?)(t = p) = 1) ? ? ? ? ? (Ak(?)(t = q) = 1) ? (Am(?)(t = r) = 1) ? ? ? ? ? (An(?)(t = s) = 1)  Here, p ? q ? r ? s, and the first t always equals 0 and  2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2009) 2657    Tota l n u mber of  Con sequ en t Attr ibu tes  Consequent  Table  1 A1(Low)  2 A1(Mid)  3 A1(High)  ... ...

... ....

M-2 AN(Low)  M-1 AN(Mid)  M AN(High)  S tage 2 :  S tage M :  G et Attr ib ute SetS tart  Data M in in g R u le p ool for Con seq u en t 1  E xist Nf r u les?

S tage 1 :  E n d Next C onsequent Y  N  Decr ese Cr iter ia  M : N : Total number of Section Attributes  N= M/3  Total Rule Pool Rules are stored consequent item by  consequent item  Fig. 5. Procedure for extracting class association rules  other time points are the relative time shifts from the first attribute. In the case of class association rules mining, the structure of rules becomes the following simplified form:  (Aj(?)(t = p) = 1) ? ? ? ? ? (Ak(?)(t = q) = 1) ? (Ac(?)(t = r) = 1), where Ac(?) indicates the class of the attributes.

F. Fitness Function and Genetic Operators  We regard the rules containing many different attributes as important ones in addition to the conventional interest.

Therefore, the fitness function of the GNP individual is defined as:  F = ?  r?R {?2(r) + 10(nante(r) ? 1) + ?new(r) + ?mult(r)}.

The symbols are as follows: R : set of suffixes of important association rules which  satisfy the importance requirements of support, confidence and chi-squared value.

?2(r) : chi-squared value of rule r.

nante(r) : the number of attributes in the antecedent of rule  r.

?new(r) : constant defined by  ?new(r) = {  ?new, if rule r is new 0, otherwise  ?mult(r): constant defined by  ?mult(r) =  ? ?  ?  ?mult, if rule r has many different attributes  0, otherwise  ?2(r), nante(r), ?new(r) and ?mult(r) are concerned with the importance, complexity, novelty and diversity of  rule r, respectively. In each generation, GNP individuals are replaced with the new ones by the selection policy and other genetic operations. We used four kinds of genetic operators, i.e., uniform crossover, mutation for functions, mutation for connections and time delays of judgement nodes, respectively.

G. Classification  Firstly, classify the extracted association rules in the pool into consequent attribute classes. Every attribute has three consequent attribute classes, i.e., attribute Ai is classified into the following consequent attributes, Ai(Low), Ai(Mid), Ai(High).

Then, the association rules in each class are used to study whether the testing data satisfies the antecedent items. The testing data are called satisfied if they satisfy the antecedent items of the rules.

The ratio of the number of satisfied rules to the total number of rules for every class is calculated considering confidence, and the testing data is classified into the class whose ratio is the highest. The concrete process is like the following:  (1) Calculate Ck: Calculate the set Ck of the suffixes of the rules in class k, whose antecedent items satisfy the testing data.

(2) Calculate Creditk for every class:  Creditk = ?  j?Ck confidencej , (4)  (3) Calculate Scorek for every class:  Scorek = Creditk Totalk  , (5)  where, Totalk is the total number of rules in class k, that is, the fixed number of Nf in this paper.

(4) Compare the Scorek and the class with the highest value becomes the winner for the corresponding at- tribute, e.g., if Ai(Low) has the highest score, then Ai is classified into Low.



IV. SIMULATION  In this section, the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method are studied by a simple traffic simulation.

Unlike other methods in the traffic prediction of recent years, we not only aim at predicting the traffic jam on a specific section of the road networks, but also, we are interested in providing the whole traffic prediction for all of the sections on the road networks so that the navigation system can refer to this kind of information for the calculation of the Optimal Route.

For example, we can extract the time related association rules for classification using a large traffic database, which can provide a stable estimation of the traffic volume. And not only the traffic congestion/jam can be predicted, but also the sections with low traffic volume can also be predicted, which could be also interesting since drivers might want to take a path with few cars. So, the uniqueness of our method is that  2658 2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2009)    all of the traffic volume(High/Middle/Low) are predicted for all of the sections on road networks.

A. Traffic Simulator  Each section between two intersections in the road net- works has two directions, and we assume each direction of the section represents different literals, i.e., items or attributes. The traffic simulator used in our simulations consists of the road model with 7 ? 7 roads like Fig.6, i.e., each section has the same length, all cars have the same speed for simplicity, and the shape of the total road is like a grid network. Time shift in road setting in Fig.6 represents the time delay of the traffic lights between neighboring intersections.

Actually the cars on the road networks do not have the same speed. Every time unit, all the cars can move forward by length 1 if and only if there exist spaces before them, thus the actual speed of all cars are influenced by the traffic lights or traffic jams. For example, if a car encounters the red light or traffic jam, it has to wait until the red light period passes or all the hindrances before it are removed. Therefore, the cars have different speeds depending on the concrete traffic situations.

#N1 #N2 #N3 #N4 #N5 #N6 #N7  #S1 #S2 #S3 #S4 #S5 #S6 #S7  #W2  #W1  #W3  #W4  #W5  #W6  #W7  #E 2  #E 1  #E 3  #E 4  #E 5  #E 6  #E 7  :r epr esent ca r #** : r ep r esen t O /D na me  : r epr esent section fr om inter section W2N4 to W2N5  : r epr esent section fr om inter section W2N5 to W2N4  : r epr esent inter section W3N3  Roa d Setting  Maximum number of  cars  10 cars per section  Car arrival distribution  exponential distribution  Red traffic light  10 time units  Green traffic light  7 time units  Yellow traffic light  3 time units  Time shift 10 time  units  Fig. 6. Road model used in simulations  TABLE III PARAMETER SETTING FOR EVOLUTION  Items Values Number of judgment nodes 100 Number of processing nodes 10 Number of attributes 224 Number of attributes including classes 672 Number of time units 800 Number of generations per round 100 Minimum support value 0.1 Minimum confidence value 0.8 Minimum chi-squared value 6.63  The parameter setting of the proposed data mining is presented in Table 3. The attributes correspond to the judg- ment node functions, for example, the class of the attribute  ??W4N6,W4N7(Low)? can be interpreted in such a way that the section named?W4N6,W4N7? has low traffic vol- ume. We have 7 ? 8 ? 2=112 sections in our simulator and each section has two directions, so, there exist 112 ? 2 = 224 sections in total. What?s more, each section has 3 categories (High/Mid/Low), thus we have 224 ? 3 = 672 attributes including classes. Time units in Table 3 represents the number of total time units in our database.

B. Simulation 1  In simulation 1, the number of rules stored in the rule pool is compared between the proposed method with Generalized GNP and conventional method with Normal GNP. Each round has the same number of generations of 50 and the chosen set size for AAM is 100[14].

0 1000 2000 3000 4000  Rounds  T o  ta l N  u m  b e  r o  f R  u le  s E  x tr  a c te  d  Generalized GNP Conventional GNP  Fig. 7. Total number of rules extracted.

0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500  Round  N u m  b e r  o f R  u le  s E  xt ra  ct e d  Generalized GNP Conventional GNP  Fig. 8. The number of rules extracted per each round  Fig.7 shows the number of rules obtained in the rule pool versus round number. In the conventional method GNP individuals have only the Yes-side connection, while Generalized GNP individuals have multi-branches like Fig.3 in the proposed method. We can see from Fig.7 that the proposed method can extract important class association rules efficiently, when compared with the conventional one.

Fig.8 shows the number of rules extracted per each round.

Although in some rounds we can obtain more than 500 rules, the average number of rules extracted per round is not high. We can see that there exist some rare cases where  2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2009) 2659           A ve  ra g  e n  u m  b e  r o  f ru  le s  e xt  ra ct  e d  Generalized GNP Conventional GNP  Fig. 9. Average number of rules extracted per round  the consequent class does not occur so often in the entire database. In these cases, we can not obtain any association rules that satisfy the required criteria, so we can gradually decrease the criteria of interesting rules by the proposed method. As a result, it is found that in the proposed method a good number of the rules are obtained per each round.

Fig.9 shows the average number of rules extracted per round. The reason for Generalized GNP can get larger number of rules than Normal GNP is that Generalized GNP provided more exploration ability than Normal GNP, that is, even when the processing node jumps in the same way, Generalized GNP can generate different candidate rules based on its High/Middle/Low transitions, while Normal GNP has only one-way Yes-side transitions. As a result, Generalized GNP shows better efficiency than Normal GNP.

And also we can see that there are a number of rounds where no rules are extracted, and in such cases the self- adaptive mechanism adjusts the criteria of ?2min, supmin and confmin gradually round by round. As a result, although we can extract more than 500 rules in some rounds, the average number of rules extracted per round is not very high, which is caused by the rare cases we discussed in Section III.D.

C. Simulation 2  In simulation 2, the number of rules stored in the pool is compared between the method with Multi-Rules Mechanism(MRM ) and without MRM . Each round has the same number of generations of 50 and the chosen set size is 100.

Fig.10 shows the number of rules obtained in the rule pool versus round number. In the conventional method, we examined the number of candidate rules just using two dimensional search without MRM . We can see from Fig.10 that the proposed method with MRM can extract important association rules more efficiently, when compared with the conventional one.

D. Simulation of Prediction  In order to check the effectiveness of the extracted rules, we tested the accuracy of the classification using the classifier described in section III.

0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000  Rounds  A ve  ra g  e N  u m  b e  r o  f E  xt ra  ct e  d R  u le  s  case with MRM case without MRM  Fig. 10. Comparison between the method with or without MRM .

A 5-fold cross validation was carried out for 5 different databases, and we obtained the average accuracy shown in Table IV, where D represents database. The accuracy is defined in the following: if the traffic prediction result of the section at time t is ?Low? and the real traffic of this section at time t is exactly ?Low?, then, the accuracy is 100%. The low/middle/high accuracy means the accuracy when the real traffic is low/middle/high, respectively.

TABLE IV RESULT OF CROSS VALIDATION  D Overall Low Middle High 1 85.11 72.38 88.17 83.01 2 85.12 72.63 88.48 82.79 3 86.09 74.03 88.25 84.22 4 85.82 73.44 88.80 83.67 5 86.03 74.41 89.14 83.41

V. CONCLUSION  In this paper, a generalized sequential association rule min- ing has been proposed using Genetic Network Programming with time series processing mechanism. It is clarified from simulations that the proposed method can extract important time-related association rules for each class of the consequent attributes efficiently. These rules are used to decide to which class the time-related data belong. From simulations, we have also found the proposed method can be used in traffic predic- tion problems. We are now studying further improvements of our method in terms of more efficient association rules mining and classification to deal with rare cases and also have a plan to apply our method to more realistic and large databases using real time traffic datasets.

