Alarm Association Algorithms Based on Spectral Graph Theory

Abstract?currently those algorithms to mine the alarm association rules are limited to the minimal support, so that they can only obtain the association rules among the frequently occurring alarms. This paper proposes a new mining algorithm based on spectral graph theory. The algorithms firstly sets up alarm association model with time series; Secondly, it regards alarms database as a high-dimensional structure and treats alarms with associated characteristics as part of it. The algorithm discovers the underlying mapping low-dimensional structure embedding in high-dimensional space based on spectral graph theory. Experimental results based on synthetic and real datasets demonstrates that this algorithm not only discoveries association among alarms, but also acquires the fault in the telecommunications network based on the spectral graph transformation.

Keywords- fault management; alarm; association; Spectral graph theory

I.  INTRODUCTION A telecommunication network produces daily large  amounts of alarm data. We could obtain hidden valuable association rules from those alarms, find the root reason of alarm, and then locate problems by alarm association analysis. Currently, the main mining algorithm are: Apriori [1], improved algorithm [2~4], and incremental association rules algorithm [5]. Those algorithms to mine the alarm association rules are limited to the minimal support, so that they can only obtain the association rules among the frequently occurring alarm events.

Discovering the association rules algorithm, with the minimum support and the minimum confidence, have some problems. Because the appropriate minimum support threshold could not be selected by the current frequent pattern mining algorithms. If the threshold is too low, frequent association rules mining approaches may lose efficiency and the frequent association rules usually contain some items which are weekly related to each other. On the other hand, if the threshold is too high, many strong association rules involving items with low support levels will be missed [6].

Analyzing sequential  60,000 alarm records in a true alarm database of telecom service providers , we find that there are 1738 network elements to report alarms, but only 28 alarm network elements among them whose support are more than 1%, and 1669 network elements whose support are less than 1%. It is obvious that it?s important to study the associated-rules on non-frequent alarms. In addition, as the  non-frequent alarm datasets is massive, the mining algorithm [1-5] is inefficient to mine non-frequent alarm because it needs to scan all of the datasets.

It?s the key to find and locate the associated alarms in mining non-frequent alarms. The clustering algorithms are usually used, which firstly divide the alarms into several categories with the inherent characteristics, secondly mine in different categories. Each category of elements have the same characteristics as much as possible, the difference of characteristics in different types is as larger as possible.

Although some clustering algorithms are proposed, such as K-means algorithm, DBSCAN algorithm. There are some problems in clustering alarm data: 1) it is difficult to determine the number of cluster and different data sets alarms may have different number of cluster; 2) sometimes the types of categories are uncertain. 3) It is very difficult to cluster a high dimensional data due to massive data in Telecommunication network. This makes it a little difficult to use the traditional clustering algorithm in Telecommunication network alarms datasets.

This paper presents a new mining algorithm AAASG (Alarm Association Algorithms based on Spectral Graph Theory). In AAASG , the alarms database is regarded as a high-dimensional structure, all points in the structure is partly related, and alarms with associated characteristics can be treated as low dimensional structure embedded in it.

AAASG algorithm clusters the alarm data by finding potential low-dimensional manifold structure of cluster in high-dimensional data space. The algorithm first clusters the alarm data by frequency of alarm, then reduces the dimension and projects the alarms into low-dimensional space, finally provides the relationship between alarms to administrator in visualization methods so that the administrator can effectively limit mining scope with visual results and do directional mining to reduce the scope of the data scanning.



II. RELATED WORK  A.  Alarm associated window We consider the input as a sequence of alarms, where  each alarm has an associated time of occurrence. Given a set E of alarm types, an alarm event is a pair(A,t), where A?E is a alarm type and t is the occurrence time of the alarm. An alarm sequence S on E is a triple(s, Ts, Te), where s=<(A1,t1),(A2,t2)??(An,tn)>?is an ordered sequence of events such that Ai?E for all i=1,?n, Ts is called the  2009 International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  DOI 10.1109/JCAI.2009.187     starting time and Te is the ending time , and Ts?ti?Te for all i=1,?n  Formally, a window on a alarm event sequence S= (s, Ts, Te) is a alarm event sequence W=(w, ts, te), where ts<Te and te>Ts, and w consists of those pairs(A,t) from s where ts?ti ?te. The time span te - ts is called the width of the window w, and it is denoted width (w). Given an alarm event sequence S and a win, we denote by W(S,win) the set of all windows w on s such that width(w)=win.

Example: <(A,13), (A,36), (B,36), (B,119), (C,142), (A,168), (E,293). (F,312)>.

As shown in Figure 1.

Figure.1 The Example of alarm series   The essence of the width of the window is to determine  the largest interval of associated alarm. It is thought that only alarms that have taken placed in the width of the window are associated. The width will affect the granularities of the associated rules.

The sliding step of the window must be selected in scanning alarm datasets. If the step is longer, the algorithm efficiency will be higher and the accuracy of the rules will be lower; on the other hand, if the step is short, the algorithm efficiency will be lower, while the accuracy of the rules will be improved. In order to ensure windows overlapped sufficiently, the slide step is usually selected more than half of sliding window.

B. Alarm association The purpose of alarm association analysis is to  discover the root alarm caused by fault and locate fault by analyzing the association of the massive alarms and filtering the redundant alarms. Alarm association analysis can not only be used to assisting locating fault but also to predicting the fault. Some equipment?s alarms have strong associations because network faults have the characteristics of spread and there are associations in various equipments and the modules of the equipment.

Definition1 association alarm  There are two or more alarms, if the frequency of alarms which appeared simultaneously in associated windows w is greater than the threshold, they are called association alarms.

If 1 2, ,..., iA A A?  are association alarms, we say that  1 2 1 2  1 2  ( ... ) ( ... )min , ( ) ( )  i ifreq A A A freq A A A freq A freq A  ? ? ? ? ? ? ?    1 2 min ( ... ),...,  ( ) i  i  freq A A A f freq A  ?? ? ?? ?  (1)  Where freq(Ai) is the frequency of alarm Ai  occurred in different associated window; ?  freq(A1 ? A2? ? Ai) is the frequency of alarm A1,A2, ?,Ai  occurred simultaneously in different associated window.



III. ALARM ASSOCIATION ALGORITHMS BASED ON GRAPH MODEL  Alarm data can be seen as a high-dimensional Euclidean space?={A1,A2,?,AN}, Ai?RD. Each alarm type is a point in the space of RD, every point is partially associated with each other, and different faults correspond with different point structure of high-dimensional space. We mine the associated point structure embedding in the space of RD based on spectral graph theory. Firstly, the algorithm builds the association alarm model with time series; secondly, discovers the structure of low-dimensional manifolds embedding in the high-dimensional space based on spectral graph theory and displays the point structure by visualization.

The AAASG algorithm works as follows: 1) Sets up the alarm association graph with time series; 2) Calculates the similar matrices of alarm and  discovers low-dimensional manifolds structure in the high- dimensional space.

A. sets up the alarm association graph Studying the spectrum map of the matrix, we discovery  the implicit information in the graph. There are some associations among the alarm data in the associated window w. Therefore, the algorithm extracts alarms within time interval T with time series and obtains the frequency of alarms in associated window. To create the alarm associated graph, our AAASG algorithm takes the parameters shown in Table 1.

Table 1: Parameters X ?={Ai,i=1,?,n}  The given alarm datasets ? is the set of alarm type, where n is the number of alarm types, which is an integer  Step 1: We create the alarm frequency matrix within time interval T, where T is the interval of observation time.

11 12 1  21 22 2  1 2  ... n n  T  m m mn  f f f f f f  A  f f f  ? ? ? ? ? ?= ? ? ? ? ? ?  (2)  Where fmn is the frequency of alarm An in m?th window.

Step 2: We then generate set V=(A1,A2,?,Ap), V??, by  using the alarm type set ?  as the vertex of the graph.

Finally, we generate the set E by using the Co- occurrence(different alarm types appeared in same alarm windows ) relationship  to construct the edge, where the weight of edge is the Co-occurrence strength Wij of different     alarm types appearing simultaneous in the window w. it can be expressed as the adjacency matrix.

11 12 1  21 22 2  1 2  ...

( , )  p  p T  p p pp  w w w w w w  G V E  w w w  ? ? ? ? ? ?= ? ? ? ? ? ?? ?  (3)  Where Wij is the weight of edge between vertex Vi and Vj.

If Wij is not equal to zero, it means there is an edge with weight Wij between the vertex Vi and Vj; otherwise there is no edge between them. Thus, the alarm dataset can be expressed as a associated map GT(V,E), where T is the identification of the Time interval. GT(V,E) is the alarm associated map in the time interval, such as 1 hour?s, 2hours? alarm distribution map. Obviously, the map of alarm association is changing with time; similarly, the weight of edge in the graph model is changing with time too.

B. Alarm Data Visualization Algorithm Alarm data is the sample data of high-dimensional (D  dimensional) space. Generally, the alarm is not filled in the space of RD, otherwise there is no useful information in dataset. In fact, those data exist in low-dimensional manifolds of the high-dimensional space, where the dimension of manifolds is the intrinsic dimension of the data.

Classic techniques, such as principal component analysis (PCA) algorithm[7] and multi-dimensional scaling analysis (MDS)[8] algorithm, to deal with high dimensional data is to lower the dimension by linear methods, but these algorithms can only find the linear structure in high-dimensional space.

Isomap algorithm [9] is an effective algorithm based on manifold learning to nonlinear higher-to-lower dimensionality, which is not only able to reveal the intrinsic structure of the high-dimensional observation data, but also to discover the map of low-dimensional parameter space. It first calculates manifolds geodesic distances, and then applies it as input to classical MDS. The [10] proves the existence of Isometries between a continuous high- dimensional data and low-dimensional manifolds parameter space.

AAASG algorithm, based on Isomap, first calculates geodesic distance on Manifolds; and then creates weighted similar distance matrix with the alarm characteristics; finally finds the low - dimensional structures embedded in high- dimensional space by applying MDS to the similar distance matrix. It uses geodesic distances between data to reserve inherent geometric distribution. The algorithm consists of four steps to obtain low-dimensional manifolds structure in the high-dimensional space.

Step1: Compute shortest paths.

According to the alarm associated relationship graph  GT(V,E), the algorithm estimates the geodesic distances dM(i,j) on the manifold M by computing their shortest path distance dG(i,j) between all pair of points in the graph G to obtain the matrix DG=dG(i,j), which is in the shortest distance between any two points in graph G.

Step 2: Generate a similar distance matrix  The purpose of the algorithm is to discover the association between alarms, so it need to calculate the similarity matrix S=(sij) by using DG T = {dG(i,j)}, where S?=S, and sij?sii. A similar distance matrix DS T = d(i,j) can be gotten from S because there is some association between Similarity coefficient and distance. When the similarity coefficient matrix is a non-negative matrix, it is concluded that DS  is a Euclidean distance matrix by theorem in [11] .

Step 3:  Construct d-dimensional embedding Apply classical MDS to construct an embedding of the d  dimensional Euclidean space Y, as detailed in [9].



IV. EXPERIMENT AND ANALYSIS In order to demonstrate the validity of our proposed  algorithm AAASG, two experiments are shown here. One is on the artificial data sets, and the other is on the data sets obtained from a province?s Network Management Center alarm dataset.

A. Experiment on the artificial data sets In order to verify the effectiveness of the algorithm  AAASG, our experiment use the same data in [1] to compare with WINEPI Frequent result set. As shown in figure1. We generated 2 maximum frequent item sets: CEF, CEAB by setting windows W = 5S and step s = 2s.

It is clear in figure 2 that maximum frequent item sets are CEF and ABCE, and D is far from the other alarms.

Therefore, in mining association rules alarm, we can mine in 2 different dataset respectively with CEF and ABCE. This can not only improve the efficiency of algorithms by reducing the data sets, but also can improve the accuracy of the algorithm by reducing the impact of interference noise on the association rules.

Figure.2 The structure of alarm in synthetic datasets  B. Experiment on actual alarm data sets The simulated alarm in [1] is frequent, but there are a lot  of non-frequent alarms in the actual network management dataset. The key to this algorithm is to classify these alarms and observe their trend. A province?s Telecom network management center?s alarm dataset (about 150,000 records) is used in the experiment. Alarm identification (name of alarm network element, equipment manufacturers, network element type, alarm type, alarm level, the reasons of failure) and the occurrence time (unit s) are selected as keywords     ,window is set to 5 min and sliding step is set to 2 min. After visualization, the (N-1) T-interval point structure and the N T-interval point structure respectively are shown as in Figure 3 and Figures 4. Every graph is a mined alarm point structure distribution in 1 hour. (The alarm type is expressed by numbers in the figure, such as 2952 in categories A stands for the 2952th alarms).

Figure.3 The structure of alarms in No. (N-1) interval   Category A and B in Figure 3 and 4 are the same parts  in two continuous intervals and C is the increased alarm mode (that is a fault) at the N T-interval time.

Figure.4 The structure of alarms in No. (N-1) interval   The change of alarm mode can be observed in the  distribution maps of alarm, it means that the distribution of alarms will be changed to Figure 4 from Figure 3 due to a failure.  If there is no new fault, the alarm distribution and point structure will not change. When a new fault takes place, the distribution of alarm will be obviously changed.



V. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we present a fast algorithm; Alarm  Association Algorithms based on Spectral (AAASG), which is totally different from the framework of support - confidence. The algorithm can mine the association not only among the frequently occurring alarms but also among the non-frequently occurring alarms. Experimental results demonstrate that the algorithms has the following advantage: 1) it can effectively reduce the search data set by the distribution of alarm; 2) it can intuitively get association between alarm through the point structure graph of alarms; 3) it can quickly find fault by the changes in the point structure and help the networker to quickly locate and clean the fault.

