The study of auto-focus system for biomedical digital  microscope

Abstract - The bioengineering is a popular and fast-developing researching topic in recent years. Among them, the observation of microorganism is a very important experimental approach of bioengineering. As the biological sensing chip technology becomes mature, it is even beneficial to the research. Most of the biological sensing chips for measuring and observation adopt different type of precise microscopes and the corresponding software. However, the size is very big and the cost is expensive.

Besides, the manufacturing processes and requirements of different biological sensing chips are different, different software are required for analysis. This limits the applying scope.

Therefore, we focus on manufacturing low-cost, small size and portable auto-focus digital microscope in this study. The auto- focus technology is combined with microscope so that it is more convenient for the users to observe the biological sensing chip.

Different objects for observation have been considered in the design process. Therefore, the microscope has been designed for both standing inverted or upright. Observers can use the standing inverted microscope to observe the behavior and track of microorganism on biological sensing chip, such as cell separation chip. Besides, the standing upright microscope can be used to observe cell slides, such as animal or plant slides. In addition to the low cost and portability, the free focus technology also makes the focus concentrating on the target and it can link up with computer so that the observed data can be processed with different types of operation and analysis. This includes counting of cells and analysis of motion tracks so that the application of microscope would be wider.

Keywords - Microorganism behavior, Biological sensing chip, Microscope, Auto-focus

I.  INTRODUCTION The cost of microscope for general microorganism  behavior observation and biological sensing chip is too expensive and the portability is low. In addition, there is restriction on software. These cause the limitation on using the resources. Therefore, it has been decided to manufacture a set of low cost, multipurpose and portable basic model of Auto-focus Digital Microscopic Image Platform [1] [2]. In addition, the existing biological resource - paramecium has been used in the test so that the biological sensing experiment can be processed. This is the most important  objective of this study. In the experiment of paramecium observation [3] [4], most of the paramecium must be injected with different drugs in order to record large amount of primary data. It is not easy to get the drugs. Besides, the cost of general digital microscope is expensive or the size is too big. Thus, our objectives are to save the valuable paramecium resources and fully utilize the equipments in the laboratory for resources sharing. This study will develop a set low cost and small size Auto-focus Digital Microscopic Image Observation System. The network camera found in the market replaces the expensive CCD camera as the source of image capturing. Moreover, different lens, Z-axis automation device [5], homemade lighting circuit and peripheral are used to make an auto-focus digital microscope.

It is then used to observe and record the behavior of paramecium for the computer to analyze the behaviors of the paramecium. Besides, according to the diverseness, the different types and meaningful algorithms are developed.

In addition, the dielectrophoretic cell-separation microchip and Hemocytometer provided by professor Zhang Xian Zhang from Institute of Biochemical Engineering in Cheng Kung University are used as the samples for observation. This shows the focus effect and the applicable scope of the Auto-focus Digital Microscopic Image Platform standing inverted.



II. METHODOLOGY  A. Hardware The microscope used in this study is homemade auto-  focus digital microscope. The structure is divided into three parts: light source, Z-axis automation device and eyepiece. A photo of our lab-built prototype microscope is shown in Fig.

1. An inverted microscope is shown in Fig. 2.

The bottom of platform is light source comprising a backlight unit and a driving circuit. For the light source at the bottom, the power circuit, high-luminance LED and light guiding plate are used for the light source. We use the 9V voltage transformer to supply the power. Through the voltage stabilizing IC 7805, the voltage is decreased to around 5V. The variable resistor is added so that the     brightness is adjustable. For the light source on the top, the small white light torch is put on the XY platform.

The objective lens is the most important component of the optical system in terms of the quality of the final image.

And there are many commercial objective lenses with several fixed magnifications ranging. We use commercial objective lens for one part of the proposed system. Because of the complementary metal?oxide?semiconductor image sensor only responds to input light received without the ability to tuning the imaging range, a lens is applied to focus the image on the sensor, necessitating the knowledge of the focus length of the used lens. The lens formula is shown in Equation (1).

fSS   =+ ????????????. (1)  This formula describe how and where to build a virtual reverse image at the lens? one side when a real object is placed at another side. In the formula the distances from the object to the lens and from the lens to the image are S1 and S2 respectively, and f is the focal length. In the proposed system, we designed a custom Z-axis automation device to change distance between objective lens and image sensor make focus point lie on the sensor. We use different optical lens to achieve the requirement for observing different microorganism. Different lens have different focal length.

Therefore, there should be moving control on Z-axis. For the automation of Z-axis, the ball screw (KR26, THK) has been adopted to make a platform that moves vertically and the lens is put on the platform. Considering the load of the screw, we make use of aluminum plate 130 mm (long) x 40 mm (width) x 2 mm (thick) as the platform. The drawtube is a hollow aluminum tube with 16 mm (internal diameter) x 22 mm (external diameter) x 120 mm (long). The inner side of the hallow tube is processed with thread by CNC lathe (thread pitch 0.75 mm threat depth 0.5 mm) in order to fix the lens. The length of the drawtube with the lens is 170 mm.

The stepper motor (2 phase step PH268-22, VEXTA) together with coupling (JCFC-16, HIWIN) are used to drive the screw. Regarding the control of stepper motor, a homemade drive circuit and single chip ATMEGA8535 (Atmel Corporation) are used for the control. A photo of drive circuit is shown in Fig. 3.

The manufacturing and design of digital camera and built-in camera mobile become mature gradually. Since this study is to observe micro-image, the high resolution is not necessary. Therefore, we can make use of network video camera commonly found in market as the image-capturing eyepiece. The WEICHI 130 millions of resolution network video camera has been adopted in this study. The system flow diagram is shown in Fig. 4.

Figure1. Our lab-built upright microscope with web  camera.

Figure2.  An inverted microscope.

Figure3.    A homemade drive circuit and single chip  ATMEGA8535 (Atmel Corporation) are used for the control.

Figure4.  The system flow diagram  B. Software  The MATLAB Simulink software (Version 7.5.0.342(R2007b), The MathWorks lnc) has been used to process image analysis and auto-focus algorithm in this study. Through the RS232, the control chip ATMEGA8535 can send the signal to control the rotation of stepper motor and the move of Z-axis. For the auto-focus algorithm, the image is processed by Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) [6], and the high frequency portion of the signal is captured in order to determine whether the image is properly focused.

The block diagram of the auto-focus algorithm is shown in Fig.5.

Figure5.    The block diagram of the auto-focus  algorithm

III. RESULTS  After the experimental platform is prepared, this system has been adopted to observe the paramecium and the dielectrophoretic (Ningbo Hinotek Technology Co., Ltd, china) cell-separation microchip provided professor Zhang Xian Zhang from Institute of Biochemical Engineering in Cheng Kung University. This chip makes use of irregular alternating electric field to produce different asymmetrical electric polarization to microorganism so that the microorganism moves to the strong or weak electric field under the effect of electric field force. This achieves the separation of different microorganism. The size is 75 mm x 32 mm. The standing upright microscope is used to observe the paramecium. The paramecium is put on the Hemocytometer for observation. There is a 0.25 mm x 0.25 mm grid on the Hemocytometer that is convenient for counting the magnification. Since paramecium moves very fast, the focus speed cannot catch up the tracing speed.

Therefore, the accurate focal length of the rapid moving object cannot be obtained. However, the fixed object can be focused accurately, such as the Hemocytometer. A photo of Hemocytometer focus result is shown in Fig. 6. A photo of Hemocytometer not focus result is shown in Fig. 7. For the observation of dielectrophoretic cell-separation microchip (provided by professor Zhang Xian Zhang from Institute of Biochemical Engineering in Cheng Kung University), it is focused on observing the channel that cells have to pass through. The width of the channel is around 0.01 mm and the standing inverted microscope is used for observation.

Since the channel is small, high magnification of lens must be used, such as the 10x lens of general microscope. The result of focus is satisfied. A photo of dielectrophoretic cell- separation microchip focus result is shown in Fig. 8. A photo of dielectrophoretic cell-separation microchip not focus result is shown in Fig. 9. At the beginning of the observation, the loaded slides are adjusted manually so it is not able to focus the rapid moving object accurately.

Therefore, in coordination with the tracking object algorithm, an automated XY platform has been made. It is convenient to adjust to the position of observation accurately and the automatic microscopic image system is made.

Figure7. The Hemocytometer focus result and analyze frequency.

Figure8.  The Hemocytometer not focus result and  analyze frequency.

Figure9.  The Hemocytometer not focus result and  analyze frequency.

Figure10.  The Hemocytometer not focus result and  analyze frequency.



IV. DISCUSSION  In addition to the magnifying function of the microscope, the auto-focus function is added. The main objective is to focus rapidly and reduce manual error during the observation. The 30 millions - 130 millions resolution of network video camera found in the market is used to capture the images. During the paramecium behavior test, the moving track and direction can be recorded to an AVI file storing in computer. Then the software such as MATLAB, VB, VC and LabVIEW is used for analysis to get the useful data, including the counts of cells. Besides, the observation can be processed on the computer screen directly. This avoids the traditional microscope that is apt to make the eyes tired. The whole set of equipment is enough for primary observation. It is expected that the whole system will be designed to fully automated in the future so that the system can be applied more extensively.

