Millimeter-wave SMT Low Cost Plastic Packages for Automotive

Abstract ?The cost of the millimeter-wave functions in the  system overall price is today one of the main limiting factor for new high frequencies applications like wide band automotive RADARs or high data rate radios. A big difficulty for the new devices above 60GHz is to be intrinsically low cost, but also to comply with simple and standard assembly techniques at the module level. This very hard challenge has already been overcome for applications below 40GHz with low cost plastic Quad Flat No- Lead packages (QFN) in the last three years. This generation of plastic packages has strongly contributed to decrease the weight of packaging and assembly in the system?s cost. It has also enabled the assembly of microwave devices on standard SMT lines achieving industrial and competitive microwave solutions.

Today, the same demand exists for millimeter-wave applications.

And plastic packaging solutions has to be pushed to their limits to fulfill these objectives. This paper will present new ultra-low cost packaging concepts involving plastic over-molding techniques.

The realization of a 77GHz transmitter for automotive RADAR packaged in a plastic QFN will be detailed.

Index Terms ? Plastic packaging, Surface mounting, MMICs, Microstrip antennas, Rectangular wave guides, Millimeter wave devices, Millimeter wave RADAR, Quad Flat No-Lead Package (QFN).



I. INTRODUCTION  This paper introduces a new concept of low cost packaging  techniques for commercial millimeter-wave applications above  60GHz. The cost of the millimeter-wave devices is of course  only one part of the system?s price. The compatibility between  the device and low cost assembly techniques like SMT lead  free processes is also a key factor of success for new  generations of millimeter-wave devices. Today, the E band (60  GHz -90 GHz) is more and more popular for new applications.

It has been unoccupied during a long period due to very high  technical difficulties and a strong duality between  performances and cost. But the high occupancy of the lower  frequency standards and the increase of performances required  by the new applications are forcing to develop new  generations of devices in this frequency band.

For example, in telecom the objective is 2 Mbits/s at least  at the end-user?s terminal in urban and dense areas. This very  huge demand for data pushes the telecom system manufacturer  to develop new equipments offering more than 1 Gbits/s for  the last miles connections. Despite of breakthrough with new  modem generations or new HPAs offering very high linearity  (IP3 point) the frequency of millimeter-wave carrier has to  increase consequently. Two frequency bands have been  attributed for these applications: 71-76 GHz and 81-86 GHz.

Automotive RADARs applications are also requiring  more and more functionalities in E band at very low cost [4].

Existing generations of RADARs for Long Range  Applications (LRR) at 77 GHz (76 ? 77 GHz) are being  replaced by new generations offering more functions coupling  long and short range detection capabilities like parking aid or  pre-crash detection (Short Range Radars SRR). Today, these  SRR functionalities are covered with 24GHz chip-sets  packaged in plastic QFN. But the trend is to integrate them on  one single chip-set covering an extended frequency band from  76-81GHz at the same cost. Since SMT plastic packages are  considered to be the lowest cost solution, the new generations  of devices in E band have to use these packaging techniques if  they want to rise.

The work reported in this paper has been done in order to  define a low cost millimeter-wave package based on the over  molded plastic QFN technology usable in E-band for telecom  and automotive applications. In a first paragraph, the solutions  at the state of the art will be described and their limitations  will be highlighted. A second paragraph will present the new  concept developed by UMS. The last paragraph will report the  performances obtained with a transmitter operating at 77GHz  for automotive RADAR application packaged in a plastic  QFN.



II. STATE OF THE ART PACKAGING TECHNIQUES  Packages at high frequency introduce generally very  important parasitic elements causing un-matching or detuning  of the MMICs enclosed. The package?s dimensions have to be  down-scaled in respect of the signal wave-length, causing  incompatibilities with mechanical fabrication techniques, and  chip assembly processes at low cost. One of the main  limitations in the MMIC connection to the package is the wire-  bonding length used to link the chip to the package?s accesses.

Despite of manual or very accurate new automatic wire-  bonding equipments it is difficult to achieve shorter wire  connections below than 0.3 mm chip to chip or chip to  package?s bond pad. The self-inductance equivalent to the  wire can not be easily decreased below 0.2nH with a good  repeatability and yield in production. At 77GHz, a wire  equivalent to 0.2nH comes in resonance with a capacitance of       21 fF. This is typically the capacitance equivalent to bonding  pad. These figures help to understand the difficulty to match a  MMIC in E-band and explain why the package?s leads or  contact pads act as real low pass filters. Furthermore, with  leaded packages, the motherboard where is assembled the  device has also to be designed in respect of the millimeter-  wave signals, causing design complexities and high costs at the  module level. In order to over-come these difficulties at the  package?s interfaces, UMS has developed some years ago [1]  a SMT package at 77GHz for automotive RADARs (LRR)  including a radiating element (see Fig. 1). The packaged  device is attached on a low cost PCB mother-board made of  FR4 by using a standard SMT reflow process. The radiating  element acts as an electromagnetic probe converting a  microstrip propagation mode at the GaAs chip output into a  TEM01 rectangular wave-guide mode at the package interface.

The main advantage of this technique is to enable the coupling  of the packaged device to a rectangular wave-guide managed  in the system without any direct mechanical contact at the  operating frequency. This configuration solves the low-pass  filtering effects observed with standard leaded solutions, and  complies for the fist time at millimeter-wave frequencies with  surface mount low cost assembly techniques (SMT) on  standard PCB materials which are normally not compatible  with 77GHz signals. The MMIC internal matching is also  simplified, improving the device fabrication yield.

Despite of the strong cost decrease obtained at the system  level by using surface mount techniques (SMT), the metal-  ceramic package used was too much expensive in comparison  to the objectives of the new commercial millimeter-wave  applications.

Fig. 1. Ceramic-Metal transmitter module at 77GHz compatible with SMT assembly processes.



III. NEW CONCEPT OF PLASTIC PACKAGES FOR E BAND  FUNCTIONS  The key advantage of the over-molded plastic packages is the  capability to perform the assembly of the MMIC on mass  production equipments at low cost. These equipments  originally developed for digital or RF devices for consumer  markets, have been optimized and refined in order to increase  the devices density with very short connections inside the  package. In the family of the plastic over-molded packages,  the Quad Flat No-Lead package (QFN) answers perfectly to  applications up to 30GHz or 40GHz [2] [3] with very short  connections from the chip?s bond pads to the packages leads  (see Fig. 2). But the QFN is still limited by the bonding wire  length for applications above 40GHz and it has to be soldered  on a PCB compatible with the high frequency signals.

In order to define an optimal package for millimeter-  wave applications, it has been decided to take advantage of the  QFN topology for cost aspects and to integrate inside a contact  less transition as developed for the ceramic package presented  in the paragraph above.

Fig. 2. Example of plastic QFN build-up structure.

The main challenge has been to integrate a low cost radiating  element into the package (see Chip#2 at Fig. 7) able to connect  the device to the system without any mechanical contact. As  explained previously this element has to convert a microstrip  propagation mode at the MMIC?s output (see Chip#1 at Fig. 7)  into a TEM01 rectangular wave-guide propagation mode  (WR12 flange). This wave-guide transition (see Fig. 3) has  been designed and fabricated by using a PCB technique based  on a low cost organic material and integrates a microstrip  patch antenna.

Fig. 3. Picture of the organic microstrip to wave-guide transition.

Two of these transitions have been realized on one chip and  measured back to back in order to estimate the transmission  losses of one single transition. The two transitions are  connected on chip through a 50? transmission line. The chip  is measured on a test jig designed to be connected to two  Top-side view Bottom-side view  Microstrip access  Wave-guide access (WR12)       WR12 wave-guides. The scattering parameters measured with  this chip are given at Fig. 4. Less than 3.5dB of transmission  losses corresponding to the two transitions and the 50? line  connecting them together have been measured. After de-  embedding, one single transition presents about 1.2dB of  losses at 77GHz.

Fig. 4. Scattering parameters measured for two microstrip to rectangular wave-guide transitions connected back to back on chip.

In order to define a very low cost device, the wave-guide  transition has to be handled like a standard MMIC on the QFN  assembly line. So, it is conditioned and delivered to the  assembler in a wafer format (see Fig. 5).

Fig. 5. Wave-guide transition conditioned as a 6 inches wafer.

This conditioning enables to use a very standard QFN  fabrication flow for the assembly of the millimeter-wave  packaged device. This flow is described on the Fig. 6. The two  chips (see Fig.7), Chip#1 which can be a GaAs or SiGe  MMIC, and Chip#2 which is the wave-guide transition made  of organic material are die-attached in one step on the copper  lead-frame constituting the package?s base.

MMICs  picking on  film & Die  attach Chip#1: SiGe or  GaAs  Chip#2 : organic  Conductive  adhesive epoxy  die attach  Wire  bonding  Chip#1 & Chip#2 :  Gold wire, 1mil  Molding  Low stress  molding resin  RoHS compliant  Top side  marking  & Leads  plating Mate tine (pure  Sn,  RoHs)  Singulation  Sawing  MMICs  picking on  film & Die  attach Chip#1: SiGe or  GaAs  Chip#2 : organic  Conductive  adhesive epoxy  die attach  Wire  bonding  Chip#1 & Chip#2 :  Gold wire, 1mil  Molding  Low stress  molding resin  RoHS compliant  Top side  marking  & Leads  plating Mate tine (pure  Sn,  RoHs)  Singulation  Sawing   Fig. 6. Millimeter-wave plastic package assembly flow.

The general concept of the E band SMD plastic package  applying the new approach reported in this paper is given at  the Fig. 7. On this cross-section view, the device is represented  soldered on a PCB mother-board. In this configuration, the  Chip#2 transfers the millimeter-wave signal from the MMIC  (Chip#1) to the rectangular wave-guide which is aligned with  the package?s output access below the PCB.

Fig. 7. Cross section view of the plastic millimeter-wave package.



IV. 77GHZ TRANSMITTER DEMONSTRATOR    A first demonstrator has been developed targeting the long  range automotive RADAR application at 77GHz. The existing  77GHz transmitter chip CHU3377b based on the UMS GaAs  technology PH15 (PHEMT 0.15?m) has been assembled  inside an over-molded plastic package following the concept  described at the Fig. 7. The outlines of this device packaged in  a 9x6 mm? QFN are given at the Fig. 8. This transmitter  operates as a frequency multiplier and is driven by an input  signal at 12.83GHz (Fout/6). The bare die delivers about  14.5dBm at its output at 77GHz (Fout) when measured on  probes station. The die is packaged using a production  assembly line normally dedicated to standard QFN products  without modification. This demonstrator highlights the  capability to fabricate millimeter-wave devices at low cost.

The cost objective for package and assembly is extremely low  in production and has been already divided by ~40 if it is  compared with those of previous versions based on metal  ceramic technologies (see Fig. 1).

Top-side view   Bottom-side view Fig. 8. Photograph of a 9x6 plastic QFN embedding a 77GHz transmitter GaAs MMIC.

This packaged device has been assembled by soldering on a  low cost microwave PCB from Rogers (Ro4003, h=203?m,  copper cladding 17?m) using a standard RoHS SMT process.

A photograph of the QFN?s land pattern on PCB is given in  Fig 11. The device has been measured on test fixture (see Fig.

10) and 11dBm of output power have been obtained at the test  fixture output at 77GHz. The output power of the packaged  device measured on test fixture is 3dB lower at 77GHz than  typically obtained with the bare die when it is measured on       probes station (see Fig 9). This difference is mainly due to the  wire-bonding connection inside the packages between the  GaAs chip and the wave guide transition. The test fixture  contributes also for about 0.3dB. For this first prototype, the  wire length between the two devices has not been optimized  (wire length ~0.5mm) and a standard ball bonding process has  been applied. A strong improvement on the output power can  be expected with a second iteration when this wired  connection will be optimized. A gain between 1.5 to 2dB can  be expected by decreasing the wire length by 0.15mm.

Fig. 9. Output power of the 77GHz transmitter in plastic QFN 9x6 (output power measured at the test fixture output).

Fig. 10. Photograph of the 77GHz transmitter packaged in plastic QFN 9x6 assembled on test fixture.

Fig. 11. Photograph of the PCB used for the evaluation of the 77GHz transmitter in plastic QFN 9x6.



V. CONCLUSION  A new concept of packaging for millimeter-wave devices  beyond 60GHz has been developed. A first generation of  77GHz transmitter packaged in plastic QFN has been  designed, fabricated and tested on test fixture. It takes  advantages of the lower cost packaging techniques available  for mass production with plastic QFNs. Furthermore, the  contact-less transition included into the package enable to  assemble this millimeter-wave SMD device on low cost  motherboards made of laminated organic PCB like FR4 or  Ro4003 despite of the 77GHz output frequency. The  rectangular wave-guide transition is very tolerant and can  accept placement errors generally observed with fully  automatic SMT assembly equipments (~+/-50?m) applying  solder paste screen printing processes. With this new  approach, only low cost solutions are used from the packaged  device to the system architecture.

In production, the testability of such millimeter-wave  devices will be also very simplified since there is no direct  contact between the package and the test socket.

Measurements repeatability issues generally observed with  leaded packages at high frequency will be solved with this  contact-less transition.

The first 77GHz packaged transmitter presented in this  paper demonstrates the capability to assemble on standard  QFN fabrication lines the new generations of SMD millimeter-  devices.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  This work has been supported by XLIM (UMR CNRS  n?6172, FRANCE) for the electromagnetic modeling of the  microstrip to rectangular wave-guide transition.

