System Design and Resource Allocation in 802.16j  Multi-hop Relay Systems under the User Rate

Abstract?IEEE 802.16j multi-hop relay task standard includes two mutually exclusive options: transparent relay stations (T-RS) and non-transparent relay stations (NT-RS). In this work, a system design approach is proposed to compare different relay systems in term of their capacity with rate fairness constraint among the Mobile Stations (MS). Single-Input Single-Output (SISO) and Multi-Input Multi-Output (MIMO) antenna systems are considered in the links between the Base Station (BS) and Relay Stations (RS). 1 and 3 RSs per sector are considered. Our simulation results show that for any case, the highest capacity is achieved by NT-RS with 3 RSs per sector in distributed scheduling mode. In addition, the effect of the MS association rule, which determines the access station (BS or RS) for each MS, is also investigated. Two rules: Highest MCS scheme with the highest Modulation and Coding Rate, and Highest (Mod) ESE scheme with the highest (modified) Effective Spectrum Efficiency, are studied along with the optimal rule that maximizes system capacity with rate fairness constraint. It is demonstrated that Highest (Mod) ESE scheme performs closely to the optimal rule in term of capacity.

Keywords-Multihop relay networks, IEEE 802.16j, WiMAX, resource allocation, network capacity, rate fairness.



I.  INTRODUCTION Systems based on IEEE 802.16 OFDMA standard (mobile  WiMAX, or 802.16e) [1] is one of the leading candidates for 4G wireless networks. Mobile WiMAX is designed to provide high data rate to mobile users with Quality-of-Service; however, initial field trial of mobile WiMAX system has limited coverage and poor service for indoor users as well as users at cell boundaries. Using relay station (RS) is a well known method to extend the coverage of the base stations in cellular systems. IEEE 802.16j multi-hop relay standard [2] has been developed as an extension to the 802.16e OFDMA system for coverage extension and capacity enhancement with full backward compatibility to the 802.16e mobile stations (MS). In 802.16j relay system, relay station serves as a relay node between the multihop-relay BS and the MSs. The radio link originates from or terminates at an MS is called access link; while the BS-RS link is called relay link.

Two modes of PHY layer operations are defined in 802.16j: transparent relay mode and non-transparent relay mode. In transparent relay mode, a transparent RS (T-RS) does not  transmit control signals including frame-start preamble, FCH, UL/DL-MAP and DCD/UCD. Instead, a MS that access the network through a T-RS depends on the BS for these control signals. In non-transparent mode using a time-division transmit and receive relay (TTR) mechanism, a non-transparent RS (NT-RS, or TTR RS) transmits all the control signals as well as data packets like a regular BS to the MS. T-RS and NT-RS have different and incompatible frame structures and hence present mutually exclusive options: transparent relay system and non-transparent relay system (denoted as T-RS and NT-RS as well). In addition, a NT-RS can operate in either centralized or distributed scheduling mode if the transmission schedule of the RS is generated by the BS (centralized) or the RS itself (distributed); clearly, a T-RS can only operate in centralized scheduling mode. For NT-RS, in this paper we only consider distributed scheduling mode.

It is important to understand the benefit and limit of each option. Based on methodologies specified in [3, 4], a system- level simulator is introduced in [5] for multi-cell 802.16j multi- hop relay systems. Also, performance is compared in [5, 6] through simulations for these options of 802.16j two-hop relay systems, in terms of network coverage and system capacity with assumptions on relay link for simplification. This paper is the further work on capacity analysis and resource allocation.

The resource allocation problem in 802.16j relay network has been studied in [7?11]. It is demonstrated in [7] that in 802.16j multi-hop relay system, 1 or 2 RSs per sector can improve the per-cell uplink (UL) throughput (e.g., by 25% or 38% with 90 data users per cell, respectively). RS deployment and resource reuse strategies for 802.16j multi-hop relay system are investigated in [8, 9]. It is shown that using RSs with resource reuse among all RSs can substantially improve the system capacity. In [10], system performance is evaluated for 802.16j multi-hop relay networks with both conventional and its proposed spectrum efficiency based adaptive resource allocation (SEBARA) method. Simulation results show that SEBARA outperforms the conventional one in terms of throughput, delay and packet loss. In [11], several heuristic scheduling schemes for a WiMAX-based OFDMA system have been compared in term of throughput and delay.

In this paper, we study and compare the capacity of the two different 16j relay systems through joint resource allocation  This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings     and user (MS) balancing under the user rate fairness requirement. Special attention is paid to the MS association rule in determining the access station between the BS and the RSs. We carry the study in the downlink (DL) direction of two- hop systems where a MS connects to the BS through at most one RS; the same schemes apply to the UL direction as well.

We first propose a system design approach to evaluate the per- user throughput and total system capacity. Then the maximum capacity among different frame partition is obtained for each type of 802.16j system, and compared with the BS-only system (802.16e) used as a baseline. The effect of increasing the number of deployed RSs per sector, and the usage of SISO or MIMO in the relay links are also investigated. Furthermore, for each 802.16j relay system with rate fairness constraint, two MS association rules are compared with the formulated optimal rule that achieves the maximum capacity among all the association rules and frame partitions. The effective spectrum efficiency (ESE) is used in T-RS networks, and is further modified to account for the aggressive frequency reuse in NT-RS networks.

The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the 802.16j relay system models. Section III first gives our proposed system design approach for capacity analysis of each relay system with certain MS association rules under the user rate fairness constraint, and then evaluates and compares their resulted capacity with respect to different relay systems and/or MS association rules. Section IV summarizes the paper.



II. FRAME STRUCTURES AND SYSTEM CONFIGURATION  A. Frame Structure of Two-hop Relay Networks 1) Transparent Relay Frame Structure: Fig. 1 shows the  frame structure when T-RSs are used [2].

Figure 1.  Frame structure for a two-hop transparent relay system [2].

DL subframe is partitioned into DL Access Zone and Transparent Zone. DL Access Zone can be further partitioned into BSMS zone and BSRS zone, where the BS sends out data bursts to the RSs and the MSs, respectively. Transparent Zone is also denoted as RSMS zone in which a RS forwards data bursts from the BS to its MSs. The BS and the RSs will never transmit in the same frequency segment simultaneously (we ignore the case of cooperative TX diversity where BS and RS transmit to the same MS), therefore no cross interference exists between transmission from the BS and the RSs. The R-RTG  gap allows the RS to switch from RX mode to TX mode and its length is set 2 symbols.

2) Non-Transparent Relay Frame Structure: Fig. 2 shows the frame structure when NT-RSs are used [2]. DL subframe is partitioned into Access Zone and Relay Zone. In DL Access Zone (BSMS, RSMS zone), the BS and RSs transmit data bursts and control signals to the MSs simultaneously, using the same or different frequency segments. In DL Relay Zone (BSRS zone), the BS sends data bursts to RSs for forwarding to MSs in the next DL Access Zone. BS?s Access Zone is 2 symbols longer than a RS, because of the gap (R-TTG, set as 2 symbols) a RS needs to switch from TX to RX mode.

Figure 2.  Frame structure for a two-hop non-transparent relay system [2].

B. Network Configuration and Simulation Results Table I lists some parameters of our 1/3/3 system. One slot  is one subchannel by two symbols for DL PUSC [1]. For demonstration purpose, the entire frame is assigned to DL.

TABLE I.  DL WIMAX PARAMETERS.

Parameters Value System Channel Bandwidth 10 MHz  FFT Size (NFFT) 1024 Number of Sectors per Cell 3  Frame duration (DL) 5 ms Number of OFDMA Symbols 47  Sub-channels 30 Slots per Frame (S) 705   RSs are placed evenly in each sector at the ? cell radius.

The topology of BSs and RSs in T-RS and NT-RS is the same except that a T-RS shares the same frequency segment as its BS; while a NT-RS may use a different segment than its BS and its peers in the same sector. Fig. 3 shows the frequency patterns in center cell for NT-RS with 1 or 3 RSs per sector.

Each color represents a different frequency segment. The DL CINR distribution for MSs in the center cell has been obtained through simulation. Details of the simulation results have been reported in [5].

On the relay link, both SISO and MIMO are simulated, producing different spectrum efficiency (SE). Note the same relay link results apply to both T-RS and NT-RS systems. The  This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings    Input: MS association according to any given rule.

For each feasible RSMS zone size yp, p = 1, ?, P {  Rate per user in RSMS zone:  ( ) 01 for 1  I  i ryryd Ik  e kp  e ii  RSMS p ??=??  ?  ?? ; BSRS zone size ? ??= 0j jjRSMSpp RNdz ; BSMS zone size ppp zySx ??= ; Rate per user when being served by BS in the BSMS zone: ( ) 010,0, for1  I  i  rxrxd  Ik kii BSMS p ??=??  ?  ?? ; };  The optimal frame partition ps is achieved at:  ( )( )  dd p RSMSpBSMSpps ,minmaxarg= .

(a) 1 RS per Sector   (b) 3 RSs per Sector  RS deployed in the center of a sector enjoys better relay link quality than other RSs. The DL CINR distribution of the SISO relay link is shown in Table II, along with the SE and required SNR at receiver for different Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS). In SISO cases, for 1 or 3 RSs per sector, the SE of relay link is 4.20 and 3.69 bit/symbol/subcarrier, respectively.

In MIMO 2?2 case, the spectrum efficiency is found to be 1.6- times that of SISO case [12].

Figure 3.  Topology and Frequency Reuse Pattern in Center Cell of Two-hop Non-Transparent Relay System.

TABLE II.  DL COVERAGE OF RS IN TWO-HOP RELAY SYSTEMS, SISO.

MCS (Rep: default = 1)  Required SNR (dB)  Spectrum Efficiency  DL Coverage (PMF) 1 RS per Sec 3 RSs per Sec  Not covered N/A 0 0.000 0.005 QPSK ? (4) ?2.50 0.25 0.005 0.003 QPSK ? (2) 0.50 0.5 0.004 0.005  QPSK ? 3.50 1 0.007 0.023 QPSK ? 6.50 1.5 0.007 0.029  16QAM ? 9.00 2 0.028 0.086 16QAM ? 12.50 3 0.024 0.083 64QAM ? 14.50 3 0.051 0.115  64QAM 2/3 16.50 4 0.070 0.153 64QAM ? 18.50 4.5 0.804 0.498   C. General Notations  S, x, y and z are the size of a frame, BSMS, RSMS and BSRS zone, respectively. xi and yi are the corresponding sizes for MSi if applicable. The size of each zone can be adjusted to one of all feasible sizes defined by the protocol. DS represents the resource for two symbols. From Table I, S = 705, DS = 30.

M is the number of RSs per sector. N, N0, N1, ?, NM are the number of total MSs, MSs served by BS and RS1, ?, RSM, respectively. I, I = {1, 2, ?, N}, is the set of all MSs. I0, I1, ?, IM are the set of MSs served by BS and RS1, ?, RSM, respectively, which form a partition of I such that I0 ?? ... IM  = ? (empty set) and I0 ?? ... IM  = I. ri, ri, 0 and ri, j are the SE of MSi if i ? I, I0 or Ij, j = 1, ?, M, respectively. Rj is the SE of RSj in BSRS zone, j = 1, ?, M. And si is the assigned resource in total for MSi. The capacity is C, C = f(r, I0, I1, ?, IM).

D. MS Association Rules The MS association rule determines how a MS chooses its  access point (BS or RS). For simplification, each MS can only choose between the BS and at most 1 candidate RS.

1) Highest MCS scheme: the BS or RS that provides the highest MCS level on the access link to the MS is chosen as the MS?s access station.

2) Highest (Mod) ESE scheme: each MS picks the BS or RS with the strongest (modified) effective spectrum efficiency (ESE) as its access station.

ESE is defined as the ratio of the end-to-end throughput and consumed resources. Then, for MSi in T-RS, the ESE is  ( )      1,, , 0  ,  0 ,0  ??  ? ? ?  =? ?  += =  = ??? ,...,M j Ii Ii  Rrr rr  r jjji  e i, j  i e  i, e i . (1)  Because NT-RS has more aggressive frequency reuse (BS and RSs transmit using the same frequency resources in the access zone), its ESE is modified as  ( )[ ] ,...,M jI i RrMrr jji, ji, ei, j 1,if,1110 =?+?+= ??? ? (1? )? 3) The Optimal scheme: it maximizes the system capacity  among all MS association rules under rate fairness constraint.



III. CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN 2-HOP RELAY SYSTEMS We now analyze the system capacity under the user data  rate fairness constraint. Each MS within the cell is provided with a similar date rate irrespective of its access station.

Consequently the total resource used by a MS is inversely proportional to its ESE. The system capacity is then defined as the number of users per cell times the minimal per-user rate.

A. Capacity in 2-Hop Transparent Relay Systems Fig. 4 describes our capacity analysis algorithm in T-RS  under the user rate fairness constraint. It can be used to analyze the system condition with arbitrary frame partition or MS association rule, or to search for the optimal point under the user rate fairness constraint. Note x ? DS, y ? 0 and z ? 0.

Figure 4.  Capacity Analysis Algo. in T-RS with Rate Fairness Constraint.

The capacity of the cell is given by  ? ?? ? ?=?=  Ii Ii  e i  e ii r  SNrsC /1  (2)  This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings     (a) Highest MCS Scheme   (b) Highest ESE Scheme (Optimal Scheme)  Input: MS association according to any given rule.

For any feasible BSRS zone size zp, p = 1, ?, P {  yp = S ? DS ? zp;                     % the size of RSMS zone ( )? ?= jIi ij rypAvgR 1)( ;      % tentative per user rate  ( ) ( )? ??= 0k kkjjj RNRNzz ;           % tentative slots ( )( ))(,min  p AvgRRNzd  k kk RSMS p ? ??  ( ) ? ? ??  ? ?=  ??? )(min,min 00 pAvgR RNz jjk kk ; x = x(p) = S ? z(p);                               % the size of BSMS zone  ( )? ?=? 0 10 Ik k BSMS p rxAvgRd ;    % per user data rate.

} The optimal frame partition ps is achieved at:  ( )( )  dd p RSMSpBSMSpps ,minmaxarg= .

It is clear that the capacity C is maximized when each MS chooses the access station with the highest ESE.

Fig. 5 shows the per-user rate in the 1-hop and 2-hop links of T-RS for Highest MCS scheme and Highest ESE scheme, respectively. Four cases are considered: 1 or 3 RSs per sector, SISO or MIMO in relay links. In Fig. 5(a), the per-user data rate increases in 2-hop links while decreases in 1-hop links; MIMO case has slower decreasing speed due to better relay links than SISO case. Compared with 1 RSs case, 3 RS case has worse relay links, better RS-MS links and more MSs under RSs; and their composite effect leads to its lower per-user rate in 2-hop links. Under the user rate fairness constraint, the optimal RSMS zone is determined by the intersection of the user data rate served by 1-hop (BSMS) and 2-hop (BS-RS-MS) links, marked as ?o? in Fig. 5.

Figure 5.  Capacity Analysis (Per-User Rate) in T-RS with Rate Fairness Constraint.

Fig. 5(b) is very similar to Fig. 5(a) except the different MS associations in SISO and MIMO cases in Highest ESE scheme.

Compared with Highest MCS scheme, its resulted per-user rate and system capacity is slightly better, because the MS favors the BS more in Highest ESE scheme; however, with a very high SE on the relay links, this only affects fairly small number of MSs for which both the BS and RSs can support MCS levels higher than QPSK-3/4. From our simulation results of SISO- 1RS case, e.g., only 1.4% of MSs falls into this category.

B. Capacity in 2-Hop Non-Transparent Relay Systems In the case of NT-RS, the size of the access zone is almost  the same for the BS and the RSs except a 2-symbol difference (DS). For those MSs served by RSs, their data rate is the minimal of the rate it gets on the BS-RS link and on the RS-MS link. In order to achieve the maximal system throughput, it is  not feasible for the RS-MS zone size to be the bottleneck for these MSs. This is because the system capacity can be improved by simply increasing the size of the access zone in this case. For this reason, the optimal access-zone/relay-zone partition is always achieved when the MSs served by the RSs are limited by relay-zone size and the MSs served by the BSs are limited by the access-zone size. For MSi served by RSj, j = 1, ?, M, let Li,j be the resource it actually consumed in RSMS zone, and zi,j be its assigned resource in BSRS zone by RSj regardless its usage. And let ? ?= jIi jij LL , , ? ?= jIi jij zz , .

Fig. 6 describes our capacity analysis algorithm for NT-RS under rate fairness constraint. Again it can be used to analyze the system condition with arbitrary frame partition or MS association rule, or to search for the optimal point under user rate fairness constraint. Note that x, y, z ? 0 and y + z ? S ? DS.

Figure 6.  Capacity Analysis Algo. in NT-RS with Rate Fairness Constraint.

Now we want to search for the optimal MS association rule that maximizes the system capacity. By bottleneck-BSRS-zone assumption, the per-user rate in 1-hop links (AvgR0) and 2-hop links by RS j (AvgRj) are  ??  ? ? ?  ?=?=?= ?=?=  ? ?  ?  ?  0,1 1)(   j/rLNzRLrAvgR /rzSsrAvgR  jIk k, jjjjji, ji, jj  Ik k, i, i,  with: Lj ? LT, where LT ? S ? DS ? z. For rate fairness among all MSs, AvgR = min(AvgR0, AvgR1, ?, AvgRM).

For any given MS association rule, considering the frame partition under the user rate fairness constraint, let Z1, Z2 be the BSRS zone size when the MSs under the BS or the MSs under a most heavily loaded RS is system wide bottleneck, respectively. Note Z1, Z2 are functions of MS association rules.

? ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ?  + ??  =  + ?  =  ?? ? ??  ?  ???  ?  ??  ?      )1(max )(   k kkIk k, jj  k kk  k kkIi i,  k kk  /RN/r /RNDSS  Z  /RN/r /RNS  Z  j  (3)  This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings    Tentatively determine the MS association (MS_A_0) according to NTRS-Rate-Op-I scheme.

Calculate its resulting 01Z  and  2Z  from (3).

Initially 011 ZZ = , 22 ZZ = .

If Z1 ? Z2 MS_A = MS_A_0;                % stop  Else {                                         % NTRS-Rate-Op-II scheme MS_A = MS_A_0;                % start from MS_A_0 While Z1 > Z2  {  )(minarg)( i,j Ii  rjk j?  = ;        % RS-MS with the lowest SE  { }0maxarg)( k, k(j)k  rjI =  = ;         % BS-MS with the highest SE  ( ) ( ))/1(max1)/1(maxmaxarg  )(, ,0)( ,0 ?? ????? ?+= jI kIk lkljlIk lkljI l rRrK ;  Switch MS K from its RS to BS and update MS_A, Z1, Z2.

}  }            % output MS_A and its corresponding capacity C by (5).

(a) Highest MCS   (b) Highest Modified ESE   (c) The Optimal Rule  Comparison of Z1 and Z2 provides a guidance to switch the MSs between the BS and the RSs in order to relieve the bottleneck and improve the system capacity.

1) Z1 ? Z2: The system capacity is:   ?? ??  = + ?=?=  1 1  k kkIi i, Zzj /RN/r  NSAvgRNC  (4)  It can be seen from Eq.4 that switching a MSi from the BS to RSj improves the capacity if and only if ri, 0 < Rj. Therefore the optimal rule (NTRS-Rate-Op-I) is as follows: i ? I0 iff either ri, 0 ? Rj, or ri, 0 > 0 and ri, j = 0, provided 02  1 ZZ ?  holds for its  resulting 01Z , 2Z . The second condition of NTRS-Rate-Op-I  means that only the BS can serve MSi.

2) Z1 > Z2: So for the frame partition corresponding to the user rate fairness, the system wide bottleneck lies at the MSs under the most heavily loaded RS. The system capacity is:  ?? ??? = +  ??=?=  )1(max )(   k kkIk k, jj Zzj /RN/r  NDSSAvgRNC j  (5)  We designed step-by-step switch-based rule (NTRS-Rate- Op-II), shown in Fig. 7, to approximate the optimal MS association maximizing the system capacity.

Figure 7.  Optimal Association Rule in NT-RS with Rate Fairness Constraint.

A perspective of the optimal rule in Fig. 7 is: if 02 1 ZZ ?  holds under NTRS-Rate-Op-I scheme, the optimum is achieved; otherwise, selected MSs under RSs are switched to the BS, according to NTRS-Rate-Op-II scheme, until Z1 ? Z2. At each step, it starts from MSs with the lowest MCS levels served by the RSs, and then among them, those with the highest MCS levels from the BS are picked as candidates. Finally the MS,  whose switch will incur the maximum capacity among all candidates, is switched to the BS.

Fig. 8 shows the per-user rate in 1-hop and 2-hop links of NT-RS with distributed mode in four cases for Highest MCS, Highest Modified ESE and the optimal scheme, respectively. In Fig. 8(a), for each case the two-fold line of 2-hop links results from the minimization of two straight lines for BS?RS and RS? MS links. The turning point (Z2) marked as the plus, is the change point of bottleneck from BSRS zone to RSMS zone. Its slope before or after the turning point (or the turning region) is roughly )()( rMrMR ??+ or RrMR )( ?+ , respectively. Here R and r are the representative SE of the relay link and access link in 2-hop links under rate fairness constraint, respectively, and M is the number of RS per sector. The intersection of 1- hop and 2-hop links (marked by circle) indicates the optimal BSRS zone size (Z1) under each MS association rule.

Figure 8.  Capacity Analysis (Per-User Rate) in Non-Transparent RS in Distributed mode with Rate Fairness Constraint.

Fig. 8(a) and (b) show a typical example of MS association rule when Z1 ? Z2 and Z1 > Z2, respectively. While in Fig. 8(c),  This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings    the resulted optimal rule locates in the critical situation in the between. Note that Highest Modified ESE scheme has significantly better capacity than Highest MCS scheme.

C. Capacity Comparison of Different 2-Hop Relay Systems Fig. 9 shows the system capacity comparison with different  association rules under rate fairness constraint. The system capacity with Highest (Modified) ESE scheme in NT-RS is based on the different per-user rate in 1-hop and 2-hop links due to the fact that no common per-user rate exists in Fig. 8(b).

In Fig. 9, the capacity improvement brought by the RS, especially with MIMO in the relay link, is clearly visible. With any MS association rule, the highest capacity gain is achieved in NT-RS with 3 RSs per sector in distributed mode and MIMO used in the relay link. This is because the radio resources in the access link in this configuration has the highest reuse factor, therefore the resources saved by MIMO in the relay link and then assigned to the access link can be used more fully. For example, with Highest MCS scheme, system capacity is improved by 133% and 155% over the 1-hop baseline system in SISO and MIMO case, respectively.

Figure 9.  System Capacity Comparison with Rate Fairness Constraint.

In T-RS, Highest ESE scheme is optimal with slightly better system capacity than Highest MCS scheme. While in NT-RS, Highest Modified ESE scheme is suboptimal but has the system capacity close to the optimal rule; it is also always significantly better than Highest MCS scheme. And Highest (Modified) ESE scheme requires only information relevant to MS itself and no iterations necessary in the computation. Hence it takes much less computation time compared with the optimal rule.

Highest (Modified) ESE scheme can be realized as follows: for T-RS, the BS performs the scheduling function with the known access and relay links? qualities; while for NT-RS in distributed scheduling mode, to calculate the modified ESE, the BS and RSs need to exchange the information: access and relay links? qualities, access station type (BS/RS) and the number of RSs per sector.



IV. SUMMARY IEEE 802.16j multi-hop relay task standard draft 16jD7  includes two mutually exclusive options: transparent relay  systems (T-RS) and non-transparent time-division transmit and receive (TTR) relay systems (NT-RS). A system design approach is proposed to compare these different options in term of capacity with rate fairness constraint. The effect of the number of RSs (1 or 3) and different antenna systems (SISO or MIMO) in the BS?RS link are considered. The simulation results show that NT-RS with 3 RSs per sector in distributed mode always achieves the highest system capacity, and that both 3 RSs per sector case and MIMO can improve the system capacity. Furthermore, two heuristic MS association rules: Highest MCS scheme and Highest (Modified) ESE scheme are presented and compared with the formulated optimal rule that maximizes system capacity under user rate fairness constraint.

It is shown that Highest (Modified) ESE scheme is optimal in T-RS; and that as a suboptimal rule in NT-RS, it has the system capacity close to the optimal rule with much less information exchange and computation time.

