Long-term Performance Observation of a   Free Space Optics Link

Abstract? New bandwidth demanding services for our data networks, especially the Internet, require higher data rates.

This ongoing certainty will be an issue accompanying the development of future networks and a certain focus will be kept on this in the next couple of decades. The already available high data rates in the backbone of the Internet have to be made accessible for the end-user. Free Space Optics (FSO) is a very fast and reliable endorsement to radio links using light to transmit data. Different FSO- systems have been developed at TU Graz in the past years ranging from cheap devices, built with components available on the mass market, to expert systems using components from space technology. Besides other influences, weather and in particular fog has a big impact on the reliability of a FSO link. One of these systems was used in a project to collect long-term performance data over a period of almost three years. This paper shows the results in terms of availability of the optical link used in the conducted project and the influence of fog.



I. INTRODUCTION In the last three decades the use of data networks has  increased enormously. In the beginning the Internet mainly provided text-oriented services like websites or emailing, whereas nowadays multimedia services, like Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) or application service providing (ASP) has come to the fore. All these modern services offered require higher data rates for the end customers. Optical networks are networks based on optical components providing high data rates and high capacities. Fibre-to-the-home delivers these high data rates to the consumer unfortunately fibre is not comprehensively available or the cabling costs are simply too high.

Free Space Optics (FSO) is a wireless technology for the last mile access capable to overcome the lack of fibre cables. FSO systems can be operated in a point-to-point mode to interconnect two locations or in a point-to- multipoint mode. In the past years different types of FSO systems have been developed at TU Graz. To undermine the high availability of FSO links, very short term observations have been conducted. Availability in general defines the proportion of time a system is in full operational condition. It is usually expressed in percentage. In terms of FSO systems the availability gives the percentage of time a link is available for communication. The results of these observations have revealed that atmospheric disturbances, especially fog, have an impact on the reliability of a FSO link.

Therefore a project was initiated in April 2006 to collect long-term data. In the municipality of Dobl, close  to Graz, Austria, a deactivated antenna mast of a broadcast station is used by public institutions to collect weather data and is therefore equipped with a broadband Internet connection. Dobl was interested to interlink its elementary school close to the antenna mast with the broadcast station to provide an Internet connection for the students [2]. The air-distance between the school building and the broadcast station is approximately 300 meters. Considering all these circumstances the location is ideal for measurements.

Figure 1.Visualization of the project area with the FSO link

II. FSO SYSTEMS / PROJECT A free space optics system (FSO) is a very flexible  broadband access solution providing high data rates without long cabling to access backbone networks. In comparison to other wireless access technologies (e.g.

point-to-point radio systems) a FSO system has outstanding advantages like higher bandwidth, better ability to concentrate beams, simpler assembling and disassembling, better beam bundling, no license fees for the usage of radio channels, better security against wiretapping. Disadvantages are atmospheric influences like rain, snow, fog and direct sun beams. Today FSO    point-to-point links are used for the quick setup of low range inner city links, broadband links between motorways, rail tracks or rivers, for the wiretap-proof connection between company buildings and corresponding institutions and to connect mobile sanitary and other equipment of executive authorities, the fire brigade, and armed forces to a backbone network during crisis operations. For these reasons FSO is the optimal technology to operate within the numerated and many more cases.

A FSO system which offers a bidirectional point-to- point function consists of two separated optical sending and receiving units (OSE) with integrated receiving and transmitting devices. The receiving part is realised with PIN diodes whereas the transmitting one is made up with LED or laser diodes.

The FSO devices used in the present (Fig. 2) project where built with components available on the mass market. The possible functional range of these devices is declared for a distance ranging from 30 m to 600 m with clear sky conditions. The recommended distance of operation is defined for an air-line of slightly less than 300 m.

Figure 2. FSO system developed by TU Graz and used in the project, mounted onto the antenna mast with a detailed front-view of the system  in the right hand corner   The optical transmitter consists of eight high power LEDs operating at 850nm with a total transmission power of 28mW and a beam divergence of 42mrad (2.5?). This complies with Laser Class 1M (IEC 60 825-1: 2001). The optical receiver is equipped with a Si-PIN diode with a sensitivity of 45?W/m2 and an additional optical band pass filter. The data and management interfaces are realised with a fibre connection, the data transfer rate is given by 10Mbit/s with a protocol transparent Ethernet interface. To adjust the system, both OSE units are equipped with LED indicators and an analogue measurement instrument to display the received power.

One OSE device was mounted onto the antenna mast (Fig. 2) the corresponding device onto a stable massive suspension arrangement outside a window of the school building. A clear line of sight is of course necessary and available between the locations (Fig. 3). Data collecting started in April 2006 and ended at the end of November 2008. All necessary power supplies were redundantly available not to lose data because of lack of power.

Figure 3. Line of sight from the school building to the antenna mast

III. ATMOSPHERIC INFLUENCES Short term observations of other installations have  shown that atmospheric influences affect the reliability of a FSO link on Earth. Different influences, like rainfall, snow, direct sunlight or fog cause diverse disturbances to the connection. FSO links used in space for inter-satellite communications are not confronted with this kind of atmospheric influences and are therefore not hindered by weather. Our atmosphere is divided into different layers with different characteristics. The Troposphere is the layer we live in and is also the layer where the entire weather pattern is happening. It is known from other investigations that dense fog can have the major impact on the reliability of a FSO link.

Everything falling down from the sky in terms of weather is referred to as atmospheric fallout. The continuous movement of water below, above and on the surface of the Earth is called hydrologic cycle. During this movement water changes from one aggregate state to another, always repeating the movement [10]. There are different processes during this movement, one of them is condensation. Condensation is responsible for producing clouds and fog through transformation of water vapour to liquid water droplets in the air. Fog is distinguished from clouds through the contact with the ground. Basically, fog is a cloud bank contacting the ground and causing the visibility to drop to a value less than 1000 m. Fog itself is again subdivided into many types, depending on how the cooling that caused the condensation occurred.

Figure 4. Fog covering the valley, seen from a mountain at 2000 m    For the formation of fog it is fundamental for the water to condense upon something. This could be dust, aerosols or anything else like pollutants. So environmental pollution can have an effect on the forming of fog which indirectly affects the availability of an optical link.

It is also very important to understand that there is a difference between maritime and continental fog [7]. For the average dense fog in the project area the attenuation can be defined with up to 100 db/km. The state of fog is very stable for a long time, like an hour, not causing fast changes in the attenuation. Figure 5 shows typical results found in earlier investigations for the area of Graz.

Figure 5. Specific attenuation for 850 & 950 nm at Graz   Dense maritime fog on the contrary is different and  can be defined with up to 400 db/km. Fast changes are very common because of the sea-side winds moving the air-masses quickly (Fig. 6). The results in figure 6 were collected in La Turbie, near Nice (France), along with the data show in figure 5 [7]. There is also a significant difference in the particle size. Particles of continental fog usually have a diameter of 4 ?m whereas particles of maritime fog have an average size of 20 ?m [8]. All in all the assumption can be made that the availability of a FSO link will mainly depend on the geographic location.

Different locations on Earth will bear different availability data for FSO links.

Figure 6. Specific attenuation for 550 nm and 850 & 950 nm  near Nice

IV. MEASUREMENT & DATA COLLECTION Data about the availability of the link was gathered  through permanently sending small Internet Protocol packets from one end and requiring the receiving side to reply to the sent packet. The measurements were conducted under real life conditions. The whole network of the school with about twenty personal computers was connected to the Internet using the broadband connection in the broadcast station accessed through the FSO link.

The broadband connection is limited to 4 Mbit/s, so even under full load the optical crosslink still provides sufficient resources to handle the measurement packets.

At both locations dedicated servers for collecting data were installed and used to initiate traffic over the optical wireless connection every 10 ms. The results of the measurements were stored into a remotely accessible database. Additionally every full hour a regular file download via the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (http) was initiated over the FSO link to protocol the data rate. The size of the transferred file was exactly 200 megabytes. A high layer protocol was chosen to fulfil the requirements of a real life test.

As stated before visibility drops enormously when fog comes into play. The project area is very close to an airport and so Austro Control, the official agency overseeing the Austrian Airspace, is also collecting visibility data for the area around the antenna mast. As fog is very stable in that area visibility is only measured once an hour, giving twenty four values a day.  Having two different sources of data made it necessary to correlate this information.



V. RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION The already available statistic data from Central  Institute for Meteorology and Geodynamics in Austria concerning the project area shows that there are approximately 140 days of fog every year, usually in the period between October and March. So we expect mainly failures in the optical wireless connection during the winter months. The availability for the present link is shown for every single year in the following diagram based on the raw data. The raw data reflects the correlated values from the sources without considering known breakdowns of the system.

Figure 7. Availability of the FSO link from 4/2006 to 11/2008 per year    In the year 2006 the overall availability based on the raw data is 94.79%, which is still a high value but low compared to the other two years. During December 2006 there was a scheduled renovation work going on for seven days demanding to shutdown the optical link.

Excluding the collected values during the intended shutdown gives the real availability (Fig. 8).

Figure 8. Availability of the FSO link from 4/2006 to 11/2008 per year  with corrected data of intended shutdowns  The availability of the link calculated with the corrected values increases to 97.35% which is very close to the values of the years 2007 and 2008. This allows the conclusion that the yearly cyclic weather pattern over the observation period behaved stable. Averaging the data of the almost three years gives the total availability of the FSO link for the present project (Fig. 9)      Figure 9. Average yearly FSO link availability based on the corrected data from 4/2006 until 11/2008   The average availability of 97.80% is a very good result for an optical wireless communication path. In comparison to a wired connection with availability of around or even more than 99.99% the investigated value seems to be low. Assuming a non leap year with 365 days gives a break-down time of the FSO link for slightly greater than 8 days (8.03 d). FSO links deliver a very high performance in terms of speed but the case study shows a downtime of eight days. So further projects should be conducted to couple FSO links with other wireless links to enhance the overall availability.

However, the question arises, taking all available data into account, if the assumption is correct and the FSO link mainly fails in the winter months from October to March due to the worse weather conditions compared to  the summer months. Again, it has to be stated that this is only true for the project area. In the area of Graz, Austria, dense fog mainly appears in the colder months due to low temperature. Fog is usually produced when the difference between temperature and dew point is less than 2.5 degrees Celsius.

Figure 10. Average FSO link availability ? a comparison of winter and summer months from 4/2006 until 11/2008   Figure 10 clearly shows the correctness of the assumption made prior. During the summer months the availability is exceptionally high whereas in the winter months the percentage of 95.61% reduces the overall performance to 97.80%. As we know that fog in the project area mainly occurs in the winter time we need to find a relation between the breakdown of the link and the decrease of the visibility caused by atmospheric influences. Only the winter months are of interest because no breakdowns occurred during the summer months. Due to the fact that the huge amount of data points cannot all be show in one diagram, a representative day was chosen.

Figure 11. Availability of the FSO link and corresponding visibility on  the 26th of December 2006.

Figure 11 shows the availability in an hourly resolution in blue colour and its ordinate is on the left hand side whereas the visibility has its ordinate on the right hand side and is shown in red colour. Values of the visibility higher than 350 m have been scaled to 350 m to fit into the diagram nicely. The documented maximum value of the visibility on the 26th of December is 20 km. Any visibility value greater than 350 m has no importance for    this setup. Analyzing all the available data reveals that the availability of the FSO link and the corresponding visibility relate to each other in a simple way. For the used FSO systems in the present project a threshold can be set. As soon as the visibility drops to a value less than 200 m the optical link is heavily disturbed by atmospheric influences and the crosslink dies. The components used to build the devices were chosen to overcome distances of up to 600 m with perfectly clear sky conditions and of about 300 m with light atmospheric disturbances.

However, dense fog definitely is a massive atmospheric influence and has therefore an impact on the availability of this very FSO link.

In contrary to radio communication in Free Space Optics the data rate does not drop to a smaller value under atmospheric influence. The optical link is either operational with the high data rate promised or completely lacks service. This is a great difference to other wireless technologies like Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) or satellite communication. The reason for this can be found in the way of communication. The pin photo diode at the receiving end tries to detect the incoming data from the sending site. Either the detection is successful, meaning sufficient information made its way into the receiving end with the full available data rate or the detection fails causing the communication to break down completely. The observations made during this project also undermine the very binary operation mode of FSO links. If a significant amount of photons can be detected by the photo diode then the full data rate is available. On the contrary if the threshold of detection is undercut no communication whatsoever is possible.

Deep analysis of the daily data and confirms this performance.

Furthermore not only the availability of the link is very high, also the devices themselves obviously provide great service over a long period of time. The initial installation of the FSO link including mounting the devices, alignment of the systems and testing the connection, took one and an half hours. Since then no maintenance work had to be accomplished.



VI. CONCLUSION Free Space Optics is an excellent wireless  communication technology, especially as last mile access and nomadic use technology [9]. The installation process is very easy and quick, the high data rates available are definitive a great advantage. This field study has shown that a standalone FSO link can provide a very reliable connection with a total availability of 97.80% over thirty two months. In any case FSO systems should not be seen in competition with WLAN or other radio technologies it should rather be seen as a widening to the wireless world.

Future work should concentrate on increasing the availability and reliability of FSO links.

Current researches at TU Graz deal with a topic called switch-over. Links based on microwaves and FSO connections are differently influenced by atmospheric incidents. Microwave links are mainly disturbed by rain whereas FSO connections principally interfere with dense  fog. The switch-over technology tries to combine both existing technologies to increase the overall reliability [4] of a link. Basically a FSO link is used for communication to provide a high data rate. However, parallel to the FSO connection a microwave link is installed to function as a backup channel. Whenever the atmospheric disturbances are too heavy for the optical link to work, a switch-over to the fallback microwave link is issued. As soon as the optical link comes available again the communication channel switches back to the more powerful FSO link in terms of data rates. The combined system is often called hybrid system [3], and a real fast switch-over is vital for it to work.

Another idea to increase the availability could be a change in the setup of the receiver side. In a very new approach someone could try to use greater areas like house walls as a receiver. The walls need to be coated with a special material collecting the information.

Finally, the collected data by the successfully conducted project has undermined the importance of fog for the FSO technology once more. The long-term observation of this link has shown that the availability of the optical connection in the summer months is better than in the winter months in the latitudes of Austria.

