Research on Mining Association Rules in Distributed System

Abstract?With the development of Intemet and the distributed database technology, a great deal of data is stored in the disrtibuted web nodes and it is impossible to be stored in one single node on account of communication, efficiency and security.So it's a very important research in the data mining domain.This paper makes a thorough research on mining association rules in the distributed database system.It extends the most classical algorithm Apriori based on distributed transactional database system.The system is realized based on the local global association rules mining solution. Finally the paper puts forward an efficient algorithm of getting association rules from frequent itemsets. This improved algorithm shows sound extension, short time complexity, small communication cost and simplicity.

Keywords-association rules; data mining; distributed system; support

I. I INTRODUCTION Automated acquisition of knowledge is most important in  Artificial Intelligence.If-then rules are well-known techniques for representation of knowledge. Traditionally, classification methods of machine learning or data mining are always used for knowledge discovering. They commonly deal with attributes without considering ordinal information.

However, we may come across many practical applications such as ranking of consumer products, ranking of universities and multi-criteria decision problem, etc.Data mining is the process of non-trivial extraction of implicit, previously unknown and potentially useful information from data [1]. Mining association rules is one of the most important aspects in data mining. Association rules are dependency rules which predict occurrence of an item based on occurrences of other items, it is simple but effective and can help the commercial decision making like the storage layout, appending sale etc.

We usually use distributed system as a solution to mining association rules when mass data is being collected and warehoused. With the development of web and distributed techniques, we begin to store databases in distributed systems. Thus researches on the algorithm of mining association rules in distributed system are becoming more important and have a broad application foreground.

Distributed algorithm has characters of high adaptability, high flexibility, low wearing performance, easy to be connected etc.



II. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY Suppose I={I1,I2, I3, I4, I5, I6?Im}is the set of the goods,  for given transaction database D, each transaction has an unique transaction mark TID and an itemset itemset ? I .

Association rule is an implication expression of the form X ? Y, where X and Y are itemsets and X Y=?.

Rule evaluation metrics: Support-Fraction of transactions that contain both X and  Y.

Confidence-Measures how often items in Y appear in  transactions that contain X.

Frequent itemset-An itemset whose support is greater  than or equal to a minsup threshold.

Given a transaction database D which consists of a set of  transactions T, the goal of association rule mining is to find all rules having support ?  minsup threshold and confidence ?  minconf threshold.

Two-step approach for mining association rules: ? Frequent Itemset Generation. Generate all Itemsets  whose support ? minsup.

? Rule Generation. Generate high confidence rules  from each frequent itemset, where each rule is a binary partitioning of a frequent itemset.

Frequent itemset generation is still more computationally expensive. So we?ll concentrate on the first step in the following discussion.

Suppose a transaction database D is stored distributed in  n spots Si(1 ?i?n) , D={D1,D2 ? Dn},D is the global database and Di(1 ?i ?n) is the local database. |Di| is the number of transactions in local database and |D| is the number of transactions in global database. For some itemset I, I.sup(i) and I.sup is respectively the support of I in database Di and D. If I.sup(i) ? |Di|?minsup then I is local frequent itemset. If I.sup ? |D| ? minsup then I is global frequent itemset.

Theorem: Suppose LLi(k) is the local frequent K-itemset in Si, Li(k) is the global frequent K-itemset then Li(k) ? n  i 1  LLi(k) =  [2].

The above theorem indicates that global frequent itemsets must can be derived from local frequent itemsets. In distributed database system, getting global candidate   DOI 10.1109/BIFE.2009.113         frequent itemsets from local frequent itemsets can greatly reduce the number of candidate frequent itemsets.



III.  APRTIDREC ALGORITHM Main algorithms for mining association rules consist of  Apriori[3], DHP[4], Partitionetc[5]. AprTidRec proposed is similar to Apriori in this paper,  the difference between them is that Apriori includes joint step and pruning step while ApriTidRec include only joint setp when generate frequent itemset. In AprTidRec,  a record structure called tidRec is defined for each candidate frequent itemset. The tidRec of itemset I consist of TID of the transactions who contain itemset I. I.tidRec is the tidRec of itemset I. The tidRec of 1- itemset can be got by scanning the transaction database. The structure of the record in the algorithm is < I , tidRec, count >, I.count is the support of the itemset I, it is equal to the length of tidRec that is count=| tidRec |. When generating candidate frequent k-itemset from frequent k-1-itemset, the tidRec and support of the candidate frequent k-itemset can be derived from the intersection of the tidRec of the two k- 1-itemsets.

AprTidRec-algorithm description:(Ck is candidate frequent k-itemset, Lk is frequent k-itemset)  Procedure get_association_rule: Begin  a) K=1,Lk= ? b) for  all  itemsets  I1? Lk-1  do  begin c)  for all  itemsets  I2? Lk-1  do  begin d) If I1.iteml=I2.iteml ? I1.item2=I2.item2 ? ? I1.item  k-2=I2.item k-2 ? I1.item k- I2 .itemk-1; e)  then f)  begin g)   Ck.itemsets = I1.item1.I1.item2?I1.itemk-1.I2.itemk-1 h) Ck.tidRec = I1.tidRec ?  I2.tidRec i) Ck.count = | Ck.tidRec | j) end k) if( Ck.count ? | D  | * minsup )then l) Lk= Lk ?  { Ck } m) end n) end End  From the above algorithm we see that when generate global frequent k-itemset we scan the local databases only once(during constructing the new storage structure) and prune step doesn?t need. So I/O spending is saved , time complexity of the algorithm is reduced and efficiency is improved. But reduction of time complexity is at the cost of increase of space complexity. Each candidate itemset need a tidRec structure in the algorithm so large of memory space is required if transaction database is huge. How to balance between the time and space complexity to get the best solution need yet further study.



IV. SYSTEM REALIZATION By using global knowledge database and local global  communication mode, construct distributed association rules mining system as following:       Figure 1.  System structure  Local websites generate frequent itemset from local database. Global website is responsible for generating the superset of all local frequent itemsets and computing the global support of each itemset then confirming the global frequent itemsets. Finally according to the global frequent itemsets and minsup given by the user, association rules based on the global database can be acquired and stored in the global knowledge database. Detail realization steps include:  A. step1 ?  Generate global frequent 1-itemset by scanning all  the local databases and exchanging support count between local websites.

B. step2 Generate frequent k-itemsets(k>1) by:  ? local websites generate lacal frequent itemsets based on local database by AprTidRec  ? ocal websites send local frequent itemsets and their support to global website  ? global website combine all the frequent itemsets from local websites then generate candidate global frequent itemsets  ? global website broadcast the candidate global frequent itemsets, local website determine the newly added itemsets (in candidate itemsets but not in local frequent itemsets) and their local support         ? local websites send newly added itemsets and their local support to global website, support is accumulated at global website thus the global support of each global frequent itemset is acquired  ? global website generate global frequent itemsets according to minsup given by the user.



V. EXPERIMENT AND ANALYSIS  A. Experiment Experiment is carried out on Pentium IV 1.6G 512M  PC to improve the efficiency of AprTidRec algorithm.

Database in the experiment is junk mail database get from http://www.ics.uci.edu/~mlearn. Name and corresponding parameters of two different test datasets is as table1 and table2.

TABLE I.  PARAMETERS? DEFINITION  |D| Number of records in the dataset  |I| Total number of itemsets  |T| Average number of itemsets in each record    TABLE II.  PARAMETERS? SETTING  dataset |D| |I| |T|  T1 1805 20 8   Run time of algorithms are shown as following Figure 2  based on dataset T1.

Figure 2.  Run time based on T1    B. Result From the above experiment, we can see that with the  decreasing of support, run time of Apriori and AprTidRec algorithm both increasing. While run time of AprTidRec increase less than Apriori with the decreasing of support.

Generally speaking ApriTidRec has less total run time than Apriori.



VI. CONCLUSION We have demonstrated in this paper the new approach to  mining ordering rules from ordinal distributed database system. Mining association rules in distributed database is an important aspect of data mining domain. A new algorithm based on AprTidRec for mining association rules is discussed in this paper. The efficiency of the algorithm is verified and the overall system realization is given based on the algorithm. There are plans to study how to improve run efficiency and how to deal with distributed non-isomorphic data sources. In the future, practical application and combination with other data mining method will be discussed.

REFERENCES [1] Lan H. Witten, Eibe Frank, Data Mining ,China Machine Press,  Beijing, 2003.

[2]  ShiZhongZhi , Knowledge Discovery, Tsinghua Press, Beijing, 2002.

[3]  R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski,  and A. Swami, ?Mining association rules  between sets of items in large databases?, Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD Conference on Management of data , Washington D C, 1993, 207-216  [4]  J.S. Park, M. Chen , and P.S Yu, ?An effective hash-based algorithm for mining association rules?, Proc of the ACM SIGMOD Int'l Conf on Management of Data, Jose, CA,1995, 175-186  [5] Ashok Savasere, Edward Omiecinski, and Shamkant Navathe ?An efficient algorithm for mining association rules in large database?, Proceeding of the VLDB conference, Zurich Switzerland, 1995, 432-  [6] Agrawal R,Strikant R.Fast algorithms for mining association rules in very large databases. New York:Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  [7] Park J S, Chen M, PS Yu.An effective hash-based algorithm for mining association rules A .Proc of the ACM SIGMOD Int'l Conf on Management of Data. Jose, CA,  [8] Ashok Savasere, Edward Omiecinski, Shamkant Navathe An efficient algorithm for mining association rules in large database A .Proceeding of the VLDB conference C Zurich Switzerland,1995  [9] KARGUPTA H,PARK B,HERSHBERGER D,et al. Collective datamining:a new perspective toward distributed data mining].Procof Advanced in distributed data mining. AAAI/MIT, 2000, :133-184 .

[10] Chen L D, Frolick M N. Web-based Data Warehousing Fundamentals,Challenges, and Solutions .Information System Management, 2000,1, (1) .

[11]  Symth P, Goodman R M. An information theoretic approach to rule induction from databases .IEEE Trans on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 1992,44, 4(4) :301-316 .

[12] Wilson R, Marinez T. Improved heterogeneous distance functions .Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 1997,61, 6(1) :1~34 .

[13]  Silberschatz A, Stonebraker M, Ullman J. What makes patterns interesting in knowledge discovery sysstems .IEEE Trans on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 1996,86, 8(6) :970974 .

[14]  Fayyad U, Piatetsky-Shapiro G et al. From data mining to knowledge discovery in databases .AI Magazine, 1996,173, 17(3) :37~54 .

[15] Eckerson W W. Scaling Web Warehouse .DB2 Magazine, 1999,2, (2) :12~15 .

