Organizational Silence: A Survey on Employees Working in a Telecommunication Company

ABSTRACT  How to break silence culture and establish a free climate to encourage employees' voice are big challenges faced to mangers. This study is to research the interactions between managers and employees and focus on employees' negative psychological state when organization silence occurs. In this sense, questionnaires were applied a mobile communication company in China, 444 pairs of questionnaires were delivered and 314 pairs of usable responses of were taken. Questionnaire data was analyzed, and according to the results our presumption is fully supported. Different leadership style has different effect on employees' inside feeling and negative psychological state is prone to withholding opinions in organization context. Adopting hierarchical multiple regression, we completely testify that negative psychological state is a mediator between participative leadership behaviors, information-sharing leadership behavior and employee silence. The results of Path Analysis also show the causal relationship of all the predicted variables.

Keywords: Organizational Silence, Leadership Behavior, Negative Psychological State, Mobile Communication Company  1. INTRODUCTION  Is silence gold? Silence is associated with many virtues: modesty, respect for others, prudence, decorum. People silence themselves to avoid embarrassment,  confrontation and other perceived dangers [ 1 ] .

Organizational silence refers to a collective-level phenomenon of saying or doing very little in response to  significant problems that face an organization [ 2 ] .

Morrison and Milliken [3] proposed that when most  members of an organization choose to keep silent about organizational matters, silence becomes a collective behavior, which is referred to as organizational silence.

Organizational silence may take various forms, such as collective silence in meetings, low levels of participation in suggestion schemes, low levels of collective voice, and so forth. In the current study, it is focused on only one aspect of silence, the withholding of opinions. This organizational-level silence differs from individual-level silence, employee voice, issue-selling, and whistle-blowing in two ways.

Organizational silence can have detrimental effects on decision-making and processes of change by blocking alternative views, negative feedback, and accurate  information [4].

Employees are regarded as major sources of change, creativity, learning, and innovation, which are critical factors to the success of organizations. However, many employees choose not to voice their opinions and concerns about matters in their organizations. While in a changing world, organizations need for employees who   express their ideas. Also, employees choose organizations in which they can express themselves.

Because, both employees and managers have high motivation and high performance in a place that silence doesn't exist. How to break silence culture and establish a free climate to encourage employees' voice are big challenges faced to mangers. This matter is quite important for telecommunication industry because of its service provision especially in Chinese context.

The purpose of this study is to shed light on the types of issues that employees are reluctant to raise, and identify why employees sometimes decide to remain silent rather than voice their concerns. We interviewed 444 employees and their supervisors and tried to find why employees were concerned about an issue but did not raise it to a supervisor. The framework emphasizes three specific employee negative psychological states based on existing management literature on silence and voice: distrust, cynicism and anxiety, resulting in silence. We integrate our conceptualization with prior work on silence by incorporating existing constructs into our framework. We extend research by proposing additional categories of silence and voice based on a more fine-grained consideration of the employee motivations behind the behavior: psychological feelings.

2. RELATED WORKS  The hierarchical relationship between subordinate and  supervisor appears to intensify the mum effect [ 5 ] .

More than half a century ago, Festinger [ 6] noted that  structuring groups into hierarchies automatically     introduces restraints against free communication, particularly criticisms by low-status members toward those in higher-status positions. Research by  Athanassiades [7], among others, suggests that this is  a form of instrumental, self-protective behavior.

Although the evidence is inconsistent [8], it appears  that employees are most likely to filter information that they convey upward when they have high mobility aspirations (which they do not want to jeopardize) and  when they lack trust in their supervisor [ 9 ] . More  recently, researchers have sought to explore factors that might make people willing to communicate up hierarchies or to "sell" issues to higher management.

Saunders, Shepard, Knight, and Roth [ 10 1for example, found that employees' willingness to voice work-related concerns and suggestions to their bosses depended on how approachable and responsive they perceived their supervisors to be. This fmding is consistent with  Glauser's [ 8 ] review of earlier works which suggested  that upward communication is affected not only by characteristics of the communicator, the message, and the organizational context, but also by characteristics of the supervisor-subordinate relationship.

It is not easy to break silence climate of employees and their managers. The behavioral cycles that maintain organizational silence will be hard to break in part because they are not subject to direct observation or discussion. To prevent silence from characterizing their organizations, leaders should not only permit, but reward, employees who come forward with sensitive or risky information, and should create formal mechanisms through which employees can speak up anonymously if they wish to do so. Otherwise, undesirable reactions may elicit from employees, such as not valued, lack  control, and cognitive dissonance [ 11 ] .

"Psychology is the logical starting point of action", we believe managerial behavior has effects on employees' inside world and leads to relative actions in some organization contexts such as organizational silence.

The study focuses on the research in participating leadership behavior and informing leadership behavior, seeking for the leadership behaviors that have significant impacts on Chinese employees in domestic telecommunication companies.

From management practice, taking employees' negative psychological state as moderator variable, this research tried to find the mechanism of employee silence behavior as well. In our research, employee's negative psychological state has been decompounded into 3 specific ones: distrust in management, cynicism and anxiety. Based on abundant literature research, this study pays critic attention mainly to Chinese managers' leadership behaviors, especially those with typical domestic management characteristics, according to the present Chinese particular economic, social and cultural environments.

3. RESEARCH MOTHODS  The survey was administered to employees in Beijing Mobile Communication Co., LTD. There are 9 functional departments and 11 operation centers in the company. We classified them into three categories by their attribution: marketing center, suburb operation centre, and other units. Then we draw 35 groups and each group members are above 3. Employees participated in this study, 444 pairs of questionnaires (a manger and an employee as a pair of sample) were distributed and 314 pairs of usable responses were obtained. The sample included 66% males and 34% females. Their average age was 31 years and their average working experience was 5.8 years.

Participative leadership behavior, information-sharing leadership behavior questionnaire are based on Arnold's  [ 12 ] leadership empowering behavior constructions.

We took two dimensions from five and got 12 items.

Measuring negative psychological state questionnaires are based on three separate constructs which are categorized into cynicism, distrust, and anxiety.

"Cynicism" is measured from Ryan et al [ 13] by 8  items, "Distrust" from Ronya et al [ 14] by 7 items,  "Anxiety" from Doby and Caplan [ 15 ] by 13 items.

Employees' silence is measured by 6 items developed  by Van Dyne et al [ 15 ] . In order to avoid data bias, in  this study, we assessed employees' silence behaviors from two resources: self-evaluation and superior-evaluation.

All these questionnaires are designed as five point Liker Scale from "I-strongly agree" to "5-strongly disagree" where the rating 3 was for interviewees who feel "neutral". The first version of questionnaire was pilot tested by 30 participants. Factor analysis showed that the multi-item scales used to test the research concept were multidimensional or unidimensional just as the original scales. The reliability of the questionnaire was measured in terms of coefficient alpha and was found to be over 0.7.

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS  The 314 pairs of responses were used to conduct the analysis using SPSS for Windows 13.0 and AMOS 6.0 to test hypotheses. Hierarchical multiple regression analysis was used to test the relationships among managerial behavior, employees' negative state and organizational silence. The results indicated that most of the relationships were significant.

The structural model tested with using AMOS 6.0 is shown in table l.Several goodness of fit indices of the measurement model have been widely used to assess how well the model explains the observed data: GFI, NFl, IFI ,CFI are above 0.90; RFI ,TLI are less than 0.90, RMSEA=0.090. The statistics indicates acceptance level of parsimony and fit of the overall model.

Table 1: Model measurement NFl RFI IFI TLI  CFI Model GFI X2 df X2/df Delta 1 Rho1 Delta2 rho2 RMSEA  1 0.915 211.013 60 3.517 0.900 0.849 0.927 0.887 0.925 0.090  5. MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS  This study gained quite rich results. At the same time of verifying the hypothesis, we also got some very interesting fmdings with strong practical significance.

To begin with, the effects of the three types of negative psychological feelings we selected on the silent behavior of the staff are different. That is, if employees are cynical and distrust their leaders, they will keep silence, while the employees who are in anxiety state are more willing to express their views. This requires that we should determine employees' inside psychological feelings from external behavior, and not blindly believe that employees have no negative emotions, as long as he can put forward some suggests.

Furthermore, the study confirmed the direct and indirect effects of participative decision-making leadership behavior and information-sharing leadership behavior on the negative psychological feelings of employees, employees' silence behavior, and the work performance. Establishing the evaluate criteria for, we should decide whether the manager has participative decision-making leadership behavior and information-sharing leadership behavior .In order to ensure the rationality of the evaluation, that need to be considered as one of the key to evaluate business managers. We can also give more guidance on how to implement the leadership behavior of effective participative decision-making and sharing-information in fostering outstanding managers. In short, the importance of the leadership behavior of participative design-making and sharing-information should be highlighted in work. It is benefit for enhancing the enterprise performance.

In hierarchical multiple regression, negative psychological state was put into the quotation as first independent variable then enter participative management and information sharing management subsequently.

Results in table 3 shows that when participative management put into regression quotation after negative psychological state, the coefficient of determination had no changes. That was to say, participative management had no stand-alone effect on negative psychological state and it proved negative psychological was mediator between participative that leadership behavior and employee silence. As well, information-sharing leadership behavior had effect in employee silence (self-valuation) mediating through negative psychological state.

T bl 2 S? I r  The statistics suggested that participative management and information sharing management were explained variables for employees silence behavior, coefficient of  determination were 0.017 ,0.082 ,0.016 ,0.214(p<.05).

Hypotheses are basically supported. The relationship between Participative management and employees' negative psychological state was negative and significant. The relationship between information sharing and employees' negative psychological state was negative and significant as well.

Employees' silence behavior (self-valuation) showed negative and significant relationship with cynicism, distrust, and anxiety. But employees' silence behavior (superior-valuation) only had positive relationship with distrust. The relationships with cynicism and anxiety were not been proved. Although, in measurement model we found employees' negative psychological state did have positive effects on silence behavior when cynicism, distrust, and anxiety regarded as just a variable. When we looked again, there are some new fmdings. First, there are differences between self-evaluation and superior-evolution in employees' silence behavior. To some extent, it confirmed our research plan that people would like to modify self behavior and show a better image to others. Results showed that when people feel bad they were prone to keep silence, while from superiors' view, trust was the most important thing to establish good relationship the their subordinates otherwise people might choose silence to against them.

Hierarchical multiple regression analysis indicated that participative leadership behavior and information-sharing leadership behavior have effect in employee silence mediating through negative psychological state. Table 2 is the regression results taking participative management and informational sharing management as independent variables by Enter method.

** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

a e Imp e mear regression Variables Employees' Silence Employees'  Silence (superior-valuation) (self-valuation)  Participative ~ -0.131 * -0.287 **management o R2 0.017 * 0.082 **  Information ~ -0.128 * -0.462 **sharing management  o R2 0.016 * 0.214 **     Table 3: Hierarchical multiple regression Employees' Silence(superior-valuation)  Variables ~ Employees' Silence(self-valuation)  B  Step1: Negative psychological state  Step2:Participative management  Variables  0.110* 0.012* -0.101 0.006  Employees' Silence(superior-valuation)  0.330 * * 0.109 * * -0.133 0.011 Employees' Silence(self-valuation)  B  Step1:Negative psychological state  Step2:Information sharing management 0.110 * -0.098  0.012 * 0.006  0.330* *  -0.416**  0.109 * *  0.108 * *  Finally, all of the managements or organizational policies which can touch the feelings of people ~ill have long-lasting impact on employees. We believe these implications of management that given in this study will be far-reaching, thought-provoking.

As with all research, this study has some limitations. It is limited by the sample size that responded to the survey. Another limitation is that the data were gathered from only one mobile communication company. Further research of a wider range of employees would have given even better sample for generalization.

