Home Health Telemonitoring System Based on Data Mining

ABSTRACT: More and more people are concerned of their health with the improvement of living conditions. Under the circumstances, the technology of telemedicine has been developed rapidly in recent years. But it faces the confusion of marine data as a result of long-term and continuous monitoring.

It is the focus research how to deal with the large amount of data and use it effectively, namely extracting the knowledge hidden in the data. To solve the problem, home health telemonitoring system based on data mining is proposed in this paper.

Technology of data mining is adopted to deal with biological parameters here, and functions of answering alarm and consultation are also realized with it. System structure is presented, and the functions of the system are also brought forward. Data transmission is realized with javasocket, and some key technologies are introduced.

KEYWORDS: data mining; association rules; health monitoring system

I.  INTRODUCTION With the development of society and science, the  technology of telemedicine has been developing rapidly in recent years following the progress of computer and communication network. Patient can communicate with doctor and can be real-timely monitored at home through some simple medical terminals with several vital sensors located at home, those terminals connect with hospital monitoring center via internet, and data will be real-timely acquired and compressed, continuously transmitted to a hospital monitoring center [1]. Many problems are solved with it, such as it is expensive and inconvenient for patients to seeing a doctor [2], and hospital can not afford the service to patients in time as there are too many patients [3], etc.

Long-term and continuous monitoring should be offered in order to provide exact cure to patients in time. However, there must be a large number of data in the server as a result of the long-term and continuous monitoring [4], and it is inconvenient for physician and specialists to diagnose because of those data. Thus, it is urgent to extract the implicit, the unknown, the potential, the deeper and the valuable information from those large data to support specialists to make decision.

For the purpose, the technology of data mining [5] was applied in this article to analyze and deal with a large number of data, so that healthcare experts can provide more accurate information for patients from a newer, higher and more comprehensive perspective. And the home health telemonitoring system based on data mining was put  forward, realizing specialist consultation of care through computer at home using the technology of data mining, which can extract the connotative and valuable information automatically. The system was set up in java, and client/server model [6] was adopted. The monitoring center and the terminals were connected with javasocket, and the server can answer many requests of client terminals and real- timely receive monitoring data. The client terminals can deal with the data received from the sensors and have the capabilities of real-time display, print, save and review. Data and alarm signals were transmitted to a hospital monitoring center from clients via internet, simultaneously, all received data in the hospital are instantly displayed on the central monitor screen and recorded into the knowledge [7] generated through the data mining techniques, and responses to the alarm and gives the care advice to the patient.



II. DATA MINING As the monitoring system faced the confusion of ?marine  data? [8], how to handle a large amount of data and use them effectively, namely extracting the knowledge hidden in the data through analyzing the relationship between the data has becoming the focus research for people who are undertaking the information technology. Data mining technologies have emerged under the circumstance. Data mining is the process of extracting the implicit, unknown previously, and valuable knowledge and rules from vast, incomplete, noise, ambiguous and the practical application of random data.

These rules imply the specific relations between the objects in the database, find a number of useful information, thus it overcame the bottleneck of acquiring knowledge. Specialists and physicians can identify those valuable rules and knowledge hidden in amount of data through data mining.

By analyzing the rules and knowledge, they will have a better understanding of their illness, and provide more accurate knowledge of care. There are many algorithms of data mining, for instance, rough set theory, artificial neural networks, decision trees, genetic algorithms and association rules, etc.

A. Process of Data Mining Implicit and valuable information can be found from vast  data using data mining techniques. First establishing characteristic database of monitoring by pretreating and extracting the monitoring data according to the monitoring data drew from the cases of elder people suffering from different diseases with different sensors and the relevant  2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.199   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.199   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.199   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.199   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.199   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.199   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Applications  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.199   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Applications  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.199   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Applications  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.199     medical explanations provided by hospital. Data mining is an optimizing process of the target and data. Figure 1 shows the process of data mining.

Figure 1.  The process of data mining.

The steps of data mining are as follows: 1) Data extracting: Extracting the relevant data according  to the raw data character.

2)  Data pretreatment: Data pretreatment is the process of  operating the data further more. After disposed, the data has the standard format and it can be provided for the later mining. The main tasks of pretreatment are data cleaning and data options etc. The data in the database are not all correct.

The dirty data we called are half-baked, variance, imprecise and repeated, and they all need to be cleaned before they are loaded to the data warehouse. The first step is the noise data should be cleaned, the next step is rules and method of selecting data should be decided according to the mode, thus, we can select the data which meet the request of the mode.

And the format of the data will be transformed if necessary.

3) Data mining and knowledge base: Data mining is the process of extracting data and forming knowledge among the normative target data congregate according to the specific model and algorithms. To achieving the knowledge mode which can meet the command of users? at last, it should have the support of knowledge base to communicate with users using the gained data again and again. The gained knowledge through mining is to be stored in knowledge base. That knowledge has different abstract arrangement and it can be applied to analyze data and make decision at different decision-making phase.



III. SYSTEM COMPONENTS  A. System Framework The system has formed the monitoring network based on  network, and it can monitor many physiological parameters, including pulse, electrocardiogram, blood pressure, temperature etc. It also has the functions of monitoring, curing in time, analyzing the state of illness and so on, meanwhile it also can execute the consultation on line between patient and doctor. Figure 2 shows the total structure of the telemonitoring system.

This system is mainly composed of two separate parts, a healthcare server and the client terminals. The main tasks of the client terminals are collecting the data of the pulse, temperature etc, and then amplifying them, A/D transforming, compressing and packing them and so on.

While the server?s main tasks are analyzing the data and managing them. The server which is at the monitoring center of a hospital or specialists? area of home healthcare can real- timely receive and display the characteristic information coming from the terminals, and it will also analyze the signals and return the result to patient. The client that is at  the terminal will take charge of measuring the data of users, collecting, and dealing with the data for the first time, and it can communicate with the server via internet, it was made of portable computer and a care bed [8] which can collect all kinds of physiological parameters.

The principle of the system is as follows: collecting information of patients through the function modules of blood pressure, pulse, temperature etc. The received data will be disposed by the monitoring equipments and displayed at terminal and also transmitted to the server via internet. After receiving the data, the server will real-timely display the data and store them in the database, then the mining system will clean, transform and eliminate the ?noise data? and constitute data warehouse through the data mining technologies, at the same time, it will produce rules and knowledge and establish knowledge base by distilling the useful information. Thus doctor will answer the alarm signals and feed back the doctor?s advice to the patient by obtaining the connotative and valuable knowledge from the knowledge base.

Figure 2.  Total structure of monitoring system based on data mining  B. the Detail Module of the System The server will real-timely analyze and display the ECG,  temperature and pulse waveform after receiving the data from the client terminals. Specialists may analyze the state of an illness according to the real-time waveform and data displayed, the system also has the functions of saving and   Home health telemonitoring system  Manage users System maintenance  Display alarms Telemonitoring and alternate diagnose  Display the info and monitoring data of patients?  User registering Query, modify or delete user information  Nurse advices Wave reviewing  Diagnose results  Wave analyzing  Manage the monitoring data of users?  Manage database and knowledge base  Wave  obser-  vation  Diagn- ose except ional wave   Figure 3.  The function modules of the monitoring center    Database Extracting Pretreatment Algorithm of data mining  Knowledge base     printing. The server not only can receive information coming from the terminal devices, but also can send the diagnostic results to the client terminals. The software of monitoring center has been divided into five subsystems, and Figure 3 shows the functions in detail.



IV. SYSTEM IMPLEMENT AND ITS KEY TECHNOLOGIES  A. System Implement The system is programmed based on Windows 2003  using java language, and its database is SQL Server 2000. It has many good characteristics including friendly interface, expansible and security etc. The system homepage is divided into four parts, each part displays different monitoring object, and each part will be zoomed out when you want to see the sub-interface more detail.

B. the Transfer of Monitoring Data The transmitting of the monitoring data is crucial to  whole of the remote monitoring system. At the terminal, intelligent monitoring terminals monitor patient and send the physiological parameters to the corresponding modules to make them converted to digital signals, and then save them through serial interface, and waveform will be given after dealing with received data such as pulse, blood pressure and temperature, and meanwhile the data will be sent to the monitoring center, which is the core of the whole system, and its main functions are receiving, disposing and saving physiological parameters coming from home users, displaying the physiological parameters of user who is real- timely connected with the server, helping doctor make decision. And the server has also the functions of analyzing the illness automatically, accounting the illness and storing the classified data.

In the system, Client and Server are connected with Socket, and data are exchanged through TCP/IP, the communication program at the server is implemented based on Socket under Java2 platform. There sets one monitoring port at the server and transfers the method of listening, and the method of accepting will be adopted when client terminals want to connect with the server. The server is at the state of waiting when the computer is starting, and responding to the client terminals at any time. When the system is running, the server starts first, and monitors the appointed port. The server agrees and founds connecting when home terminal puts forward the request of connecting.

After finishing it, the server and the client terminals will communicate with each other freely.

C. Implement of Answering Alarm with Data Mining In fact, the process of answering alarm is the process of  applying iatrical knowledge. The main algorithm used in the system is associated rules, it is an applied technique of data mining, it will find useful associated knowledge from a large number of data including pulse, blood pressure and temperature, and thus the cause of disease of patient will be given by using the acquired knowledge. An association rules can be translated into two parameters: supporting(s %) and credibility (c %). Here we will take the hypertension for  example, to analyze the potential therapy for patient. Table ? shows the solutions of the hypertension.

TABLE I.  SOLUTIONS OF HYPERTENSION  Number Solutions of Curing Hypertension 1 Take medicine on time, Improve on food,  Change habitation, Enough sleeping 2 Change habitation, Appropriate sports 3 Take medicine on time, Improve on food,  Appropriate sports 4 Improve on food, Appropriate sports 5 Take medicine on time, Improve on food, Enough sleeping  The algorithm of association rules are used on the data in the table, the detail is as follows: first working out L1 (namely gather of frequent 1 item), the results of L1 are take medicine on time, improve on food, change habitation, enough sleeping and appropriate sports. The next step is working out L2 (namely gather of frequent 2 items), the results of L2 are{(take medicine on time, improve on food), (take medicine on time, enough sleeping), (improve on food, appropriate sports), (improve on food, enough sleeping)}.

The following step is working out L3 (namely gather of frequent 3 items), the result is L3 = ?, the algorithm stops here. Thus supporting(s %) will be given. The supporting(s %) of L1 are as follows: (take medicine on time, 60%), (improve on food, 80%), (Change habitation, 40%), (enough sleeping, 40%), (appropriate sports, 60%). The L2?s are: (take medicine on time, improve on food, 60%), (take medicine on time, enough sleeping, 40%), (improve on food, appropriate sports, 40%), (improve on food, enough sleeping, 40%). According to these, we will get a lot connotative knowledge as follows:  ? Appropriate sports? > improve on food s=40%, c=40/ 60=66.67%.

? Take medicine on time?> improve on food s=60%, c=60/ 60=100%.

? Improve on food?> take medicine on time s=60%, c=60/ 80=75%.

Taking the first rule for example, it shows that 66.67 percent of the patients who take part in appropriate sports may pay attention to improving on food. Other rules can also show other different results. Medical experts and doctors can answer the alarm signals exactly according to these rules or knowledge.



V. CONCLUSIONS Home health telemonitoring system based on data mining  has been put forward in the paper, and the whole structure and functions of the system have also been given. Later some key technologies are presented. The system can real-timely connect with many client terminals and monitor patients for a long term. With it, many problems hardly to analyze and predict are resolved, and reliable data has been offered. Thus it will facilitate specialists to make exact judgment. The next step is to optimize the algorithms and make the system more perfect.

