Research on Wireless Network-based Power Line Inspection

ABSTRACT: Power line inspection is an important aspect of electrical production safety. In view of the current power line inspection system with low positioning accuracy, big human factors and high cost, by using wireless sensor networks (WSN) and WiFi technology, this paper proposed a new power line inspection solution. The power line inspection system is divided into tower/power line information collection system, handheld device and central station management information system(MIS). Information collection system collects information by various sensor nodes and sends it to data gathering node by WSN, the data gathering node uses WiFi to send information to handheld device, and handheld device send information to central station MIS. Finally, combined with wireless network, we discussed the prospect of using wireless network in power line inspection and the difficulties which should be overcome.

KEYWORDS: Power line inspection1; Wireless sensor network2; WiFi3; PDA4; GIS-based MIS5

I.  INTRODUCTION Power line inspection is an important basic work in  electric power production safety. It guarantees the safety of the power line and power equipments, and it also could found the safety risk of the power line as soon as possible so the electricity sector could take effective measures timely to avoid losses.

At present, the equipment, which is a PDA with GPS module, and GIS-based MIS are mainly used in power line inspection [1-3]. The PDA is used to record and store the information of the power line inspection. The GPS module is used to position the tower. The GIS-based MIS is used to analyze and store the information collected by the PDA and manages the inspection. Some power line inspection system also has GSM module, which could make a real-time communication with GIS-based MIS [2, 4-5].

There are many deficiencies in current solution of power line inspection. The accuracy of GPS is an important influence factor of the accurate position of potential fault. In the power line inspection process, data comes from tower and power line is recorded artificially. Low degree of automation leads to low efficiency, and the data collection and the judgment of fault are associated with the knowledge and experience of the inspection staff, so it is hard to make a correct and timely decision of the potential safety risk. The collected data is recorded artificially, that makes the standardization of data hardly to realization.

In view of the inadequate of the current power line inspection system, combined with the advantages of current power line inspection system, this paper proposed a new power line inspection solution based WSN and WiFi. It  could improve the efficiency and quality of power line inspection in large extent.



II. COMPOSITION AND MAIN FUNCTION OF SYSTEM The solution proposed in this paper includes three parts:  tower/power line information collection system, handheld device and central station MIS. The tower/power line information collection system collects the information which comes from tower and power line and sends it to the handheld device; the handheld device record and store the information comes from tower/power line information collection system and then send it to central station MIS; central station MIS analyzes and stores the information at last.

A. Tower/Power Line Information Collection System We use WSN in tower/power line information collection  system to collect and gather information of tower and power line.

In power line inspection, inspection staff mainly collects four kinds information as follows:  ? The basic condition of tower: including the tower?s mental surface condition and the tilted situation of tower.

? Conducting wire and ground lead: the conducting wire is pinch-off or broken, the conducting wire is damaged by lighting? the ground lead is rust.

? Insulator: the insulator is broken or burnout by high- temperature.

? The temperature of power line.

In above contents, the information of the tiled station of  tower, the station of insulator and the temperature of power line could be collected by sensor. In tower/power line information collection system, sensor nodes is deployed in the place where should be detected, the sensor nodes compose the WSN, each node send information they collected to the data gathering node. Collection system network topology is shown in Fig. 1.

Figure 1.  Tower/Power Line Information Collection System Network  Topology.

2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.342   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.342   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.342   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.342   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.342   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Application  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.342   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Applications  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.342   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Applications  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.342   2009 International Forum on Information Technology and Applications  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2009.342     In Fig. 1, all nodes compose the WSN through ZigBee technology, the data gathering node store the tower information. When the data gathering node receive the information from other sensor nodes, it pack the tower information with these information and wait for sending the packet to handheld device through WiFi.

B. Handheld Device Handheld device has three parts, WiFi communication  module, PDA and PDA client software. WiFi module is responsible for connecting to the data gathering node and downloading information from data gathering node. The system of PDA is Windows CE. The function of client software running in PDA is downloading task information, including tower information and power device information from central MIS at the beginning of power line inspection, positioning the tower through the tower information and analyzing the power device information which is downloaded from data gathering node. At last, the position information and device information was stored in PDA and some information which could not be collected by information collection system is recorded artificially.

C. Central Station MIS Central station MIS is the management and control core  of power line inspection system. It is a GIS-based power line inspection MIS.

There are three main functions in GIS-based MIS as follow:  ? Power line and tower management.

? Power line inspection task management.

? Defects management.

Through the GIS-based MIS, the deployment of tower  and power line could be shown visually and the inspection task could be arranged dynamically. It is easily supervise staff and position the tower/power line which has potential safety risk through analysis the tower information.



III. COMMUNICATION MODULE OF SYSTEM There are two main communication ways in power line  inspection system, one is between tower/power line collection system and handheld device, the other is between handheld device and central station MIS. The communication module is shown in Fig. 2. The first one is important in this paper.

Figure 2.  Communication Module of System  WiFi is used in the communication process between tower/power line inspection collection system and handheld device. The effective communication distance of WiFi is about 100 meters. When the handheld device accesses into the range, it could detect the signal of data gathering node.

After Authentication, the communication channel is established between handheld device and data gathering node. The handheld device could download the information from data gathering node. The communication between handheld and central station MIS could use wired or wireless communication. At the beginning of inspection, the task information could be downloaded from GIS-based MIS.

It could use GPRS in the communication between handheld device and central station MIS. The real-time attribute is enhanced, but the cost also increases.



IV. DESIGN OF IMPORTANT SYSTEM MODULE  A. Design of Data Gathering Node in Tower/Power Line Information Collection System Because ZigBee is the protocol between sensor nodes  and WiFi is the protocol between data gathering node and handheld device. The data gathering node collects information from each sensor node and then sends this information to handheld device. It is necessary to design the protocol transform function in data gathering node. In this paper, as it is shown in Fig. 3, double protocol stack model is used in the protocol transformation.

Figure 3.  Double Protocol Stack in Data Gathering Node     The ZigBee protocol deals with the data packets come from sensor nodes. At the application layer, there is a data buffer which is used to store data. When the amount of data reaches a certain number, the data in data buffer is send through WiFi protocol stack.

B. Design of Handheld Device Client Software At present, the operation system running in PDA is  Windows CE. The VC++ language is used for the client software development.

The main function of client software is downloading information from data gathering node, storing data and sending data to central MIS, searching the task information,  position and recording other information artificially. The design of software module is shown in Fig. 4.

C. Design of Central MIS The C#.net language is used as the central MIS  development language. And MapInfo is used to develop the visual power line map. Taking examples from advantages of other power line inspection, the system could dynamically generate and modify the inspection task. The defects and potential safety risk could be shown in map directly. This system could also generate report forms. The modules of software are shown in Fig. 4.

Figure 4.  Function Module of Client Software And Central MIS Software

V. PROSPECTS AND DIFFICULTY By virtue of establishing network conveniently and  efficiently, without infrastructure support, self-organized and large-scale, wireless network has been the focus of the study in power system automation [6-8]. In the practical application of the power system, the wired communication is the main communication means, especially in the field where is closely related to the safety production. In power line inspection field, some inspection systems using the wireless network as their communication means, but the high cost of development, deployment and running is the main disadvantage in these system. With the development of wireless network, the prospect of using wireless network in power line inspection system is bright.

In view of the present development of wireless, the application of wireless network in power line inspection should overcome the difficulties as follow:  ? The maintenance issues of wireless sensor node. As the wireless sensor nodes is battery powered, the life of battery must be taken into account. If the battery life is too short, the node maintenance will be frequency, and the whole system maintenance cost will be very high. How to improve the battery lifetime is one of the key points.

? The stability of wireless network. Environment is the main influence factor of the wireless network.

How to improve the stability of wireless is important in this issue.

? Avoid the interference of electromagnetic. The inspection system is mainly detects high-voltage power line. Around the power devices, the electromagnetic interference is very strong. How to avoid electromagnetic interference is one of the important issues which must be taken into account.



VI. CONCLUSIONS By using WSN and WiFi technology to power lines  inspection, this paper proposes a new power line inspection solutions, which is divided into information collection system, handheld devices and central station MIS. At last, we discuss the difficulties which must be overcome, which could provide experience for the further research on wireless network-based power line inspection system.

