Analyze Large-scale Communication Network Behavior Through Mining TCP Control Segment Information

Abstract- One difficult task when managing large-scale net- work traffic flows is that the network operators must deal ~ith a very large number of flow records. In this paper, we Introduce a new defined TCP flags information analysis method, proportion-based analysis, which is a better way to narrow the analyzable flow records. We compute the percentage of different type of TCP flags among total traffic flows and consider these as multivariate time series over a duration of time. Furthermore, we may obtain frequent pattern of different type of TCP flags using multivariate time series association rule mining method.

Experimental results with backbone network (Internet2) data confirmed our method.



I. INTRODUCTION  Today,millions of users across the globe communication with each other via an complex infrastructure, composed of thousands of networks, which together constitute the Internet. These networks carry,exchange and deliver traffic among each other. Network operators try to ensure that customer traffic is delivered correctly and efficiently. The popular way of monitoring traffic has been to measure the amount of traffic exchange between two parties,or passing over a special network link. In this sense, one typically consider traffic as a time series of the number of bytes or the number of packets over a duration of time, and at certain specified time scale. Monitoring traffic in this manner gives operators a summary of the traffic load in their network. As more advanced monitoring technologies become feasible, operators have more data to process. Except for traffic volume, operators can also analyze traffic features in the form of packet headers or packet content. These comprehensive views of traffic give additional information about how the communication network is being used, for example, which applications are dominative, who is talking to whom, and so on. But, such traffic measurements also translate to massive datasets, which become obstacle to manage and analyze. Thus a great challenge is to know how to effectively process network traffic and propose new approach to understand network behavior. Let take vehicle traffic of trunk road for example, if we want to perceive whether the suspicious car exists or not among the huge vehicular traffic without checking every car in detail, we may compute proportion of each type of cars among total vehicles, construct proportion value multivariate time series.

. Weis?ng J:Ie is with School of Communication and Information Engineer- mg, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, SC 610054, P.R.China weisonghe@ueste. edu. en  Guangmin Hu is professor with School of Communication and Infor- ma~ion Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, SC 610054, P.R.China hgm@ueste. edu. en  By analyzing proportion value multivariate time series, we can monitor vehicle traffic situation.

In this paper, different from volume-based and entropy- based traffic analysis method [7][8], we analyze large- scale network behavior by mining TCP flags informa- tion (accumulation from all packets in the flow) with proportion-based analysis method. Our contributions are as follows. Firstly, aiming at analyzing large-scale com- munication network behavior and compress information, we propose a new approach, proportion-based analysis, to comprehend large-scale network situation by comput- ing the percentage of four types of TCP control segment flags(SYN,ACK,ACK+FIN,ACK+PSH). Secondly, with pro- portion information of TCP flags, we may identify the abnor- mities which appear intangible amongst the immense amount of legitimate traffic more effectively and accurately. Finally, in order to determine the pattern of abnormal behavior,we apply multivariate time series association rule mining method to obtain association rules of four types of TCP flags.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces TCP control segment and proportion-based analysis method.

Section 3 introduces Apriori algorithm and multivariate time series association rule mining method. Section 4 discusses the concrete experiments. Section 5 concludes the paper.



II. NETFLOW AND TCP CONTROL SEGMENT  A. Netflow  As is shown in Fig. 1, the Netflow which is passive monitoring tool include: Statistics about groups of related packets (e.g., same TCP/IP headers and close in time); Records header information, counts, and time. As can be seen from Table I, the flow record contents can be divided into two parts: One is the basic information about the flow; The other one is information related to routing. The basic information about the flow are as follows: the first information is source and destination, IP address and port; the second one is packet and byte counts; the third one is start and end times; the fourth one is ToS and TCP flags. The information related to routing are listed as follows: the first Next-hop IP address; Source and destination AS; Input and output.

B. tcr Control Segment The Internet Protocol (IP) provides unreliable datagram  service between hosts.The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) provides reliable data delivery:It uses IP for datagram delivery; Compensates for loss, delay, duplication and similar problems in Internet components. The TCP control segment structure is shown in Fig.2.

established  opening  servereclient  opening~N  s~  . : ':-:: NetworkPlanning  NetworkData Analyzer : ? DataPresentation ? Row Control and Configuration  PartnerApplications  . ...-JmiiimJJ~~j----"1 RMON Application  NetFlow FlowColiector: ? DataCollection ? Data Filtering ? Data Aggregation ? DataStorage  iii-- - ....~~~----- ' - ....f.

NetFlowData Export: ? DataSwitching ? DataAggregation  ? DataExport  Fig . I . Cisco lOS NetFlow Infrastructure( Image From NetFlow PPT by Michael Lin, Cisco Systems)  32 bits  Binary Bit Set   TABLE I  N ETFLOW T CP F LAGS  TC P Flags State Description  FIN  SY N  RST  PSH  ACK  URG  ACK+FIN  AC K+PSH  Fig. 3. Th ree Way Hand shake  Value  I         # bytes rcvr willing to accept  application data  (variable length)  Fig. 2. TCP Segment Structure  Internet checksum  (as in UDP)  RST, SYN, FIN: connecti on estab (set up, teardown  commands)  URG: urgent data (generallynot used) "'-1-- - ----'-- - --1-- - -'----- - -1'  ACK: ACK# valid  PSH: push data now (generally not used)  amount of legitimate traffic that is typically found in a large-scale commun ication network . In order to identify the abnormities more effectively and accurately, a better way to narrow the analyzable flow records is required. Fortunately, for most types of TCP-based worms and other abnorm ities, there is another useful field in flow records: analysis based on the TCP flags. In this paper, we propose a new approach that compute the percentage of four types of TCP control segment f1ags(SYN,ACK,ACK+FIN,ACK+PSH), construct proportion multivariate time series. Proportion-based Analy- sis algorithm is shown in Algorithm I.

J) Features of Tep: The features of TCP are as fol- lows: connection oriented(an application requests a "con- nection" to destination and uses connection to transfer data); point-to-point/a TCP connection has two endpoints,no broadcast/multicast);reliability(TCP guarantees that data will be delivered without loss, duplication or transmission cr- rors) ;full duplex(endpoints can exchange data in both di- rections simultaneously );reliable connection startup(TCP guarantees reliable, synchronized startup between endpoints using "three-way handshake") ;gracefully connection shut- down(TCP guarantees delivery of all data after endpoint shutdown) .

2) Three Way Handshake: Three way handshake is shown in Fig. 3. Detail steps can be described as follows:  Step J: Client (active open) sends TCP SYN segment to server; Step 2: Server (passive open) host receives SYN, replies with SYNACK segment; Step 3: Client receives SYNACK, replies with ACK segment, which may contain data .

3) Proportion-based Analysis Method: We've seen many times there are moderately intensive worms and other abnor- mal activities which appear intangible amongst the immense   1 Search through the Netflow data, count the occurrence of every TCP flags ;  2 Compute proportion of each type of TCP flags among total traffic flows within each time bin ;  3 Construct multivariate time series ;  Algorithm 1: Proportion -based Analysis Algorithm    Algorithm 2: MTSARM Algorithm  Input : multivariate time series ~.

Output: frequent itemsets in ~.

Method:  1 SymbolicTS ~ SymbolicRepresentation (~);  2 AssociationRules ~ Apriori (SymbolicTS)  process is repeated until no more large itemsets are found.

Apriori is more efficient during the candidate generation pro- cess [2]. Apriori uses pruning techniques to avoid measuring certain itemsets, while guaranteeing completeness.These are the itemsets that the algorithm can prove will not turn out to be large. However there are two bottlenecks of the Apriori algorithm. One is the complex candidate generation process that uses most of the time, space and memory. Another bottleneck is the multiple scan of the database.

2) Multivariate TIme Series Association Rules Mining: Unlike general association rules mining, the time of data point should be focused on when we using multivariate time series association rules mining. Each feature elements have different value at each time, so we apply association rule mining to different values of different network feature within the same time interval. We can regard the change of different proportion value with time as a multivariate time series. It is necessary for us to find out the frequent pattern of such multivariate time series. The anomalous changes which are resulted from one time series may affect the changes of other time series simultaneously. This rule lays the foundation for us to analyze the complex network behavior. Multivariate time series association rules mining(MTSARM)algorithm is shown in Algorithm2.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  A. Data Sets  The sampled flow data collected from the backbone networks: Abilene [1]. Abilene is the Internet2 backbone network, connecting over 200 US universities and peering with research networks in Europe and Asia. It consists of 11 Points of Presence (PoPs), spanning the continental US which is shown in Fig.4. Sampling is periodic, at a rate of 1 out of 100 packets.

B. Experimental Results  We collect Netflow data of IPLSng router from 08:05 a.m. on January 14th, 2007 to 08:00 a.m. on January 15th, 2007. We firstly compute proportion of each type of TCP flags within each time bin.

We analyze four time series of proportion value S(SYN),S(ACK),S(ACK+FIN),S(ACK+PSH) by multivariate time series association rules mining method. We apply PAA and SAX to the proportion value time series to obtain symbolic series. Let S(SYN)=I,S(ACK)=2,S(ACK+FIN)=3,S(ACK+PSH)=4,'A' to 'D' denotes entropy value that change from low to high.

(1) N Ni  Pi==- L Pi n i=N(i-1)+1  n is the length of sequence, N is the number of PAA segments. Pi is the average value of the ith segment.

The basic idea of Symbolic Aggregate approxima- tion(SAX) [3][5]is that it converts the time series into an discrete symbolic sequence. Having transformed a time series data into the PAA, we can apply SAX to obtain a discrete symbolic representation. Since normalized time series have a Gaussian distribution, we can determine the breakpoints that will produce c equal-sized areas under Gaussian distribution curve [6]. Breakpoints are a sorted list of numbers B == /31 ,/32, ... ,/3c-1, such that the area under a N (0, 1) Gaussian distribution curving from /3i to /3i+1== ~ ( /30 and /3c are defined as -00 and 00, respectively).

B. Symbolic Representation of TIme Series  The basic idea of Piecewise Aggregate Approxima- tion(PAA) [3][5]is that it represents the time series as a sequence of rectangle basis functions. It is a dimensionality- reduction representation method in essential as in Eq.(I):

III. MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ASSOCIATION RULES MINING  S (X) == a (X) (2) up ITI  where a(X) == l{tilX ~ ti.t, E T}I.Given an itemset X, we find all the rules X --+ Y with minimum support and confidence. Support is a probability that a transaction con- tains , denoted as Sup (X U Y).Confidence is a conditional probability that a transaction contains X as well as Y, denoted as Sup(XU Y)jSup(X).Frequent Itemsets is used to generate all frequent itemsets in a given database T.

Generally, an association rules mining algorithm contains the following steps: The set of candidate k - itemsets is generated by l-extensions of the large (k - 1) - itemsets generated in the previous iteration. Supports for the candidate k - itemsets are generated by a pass over the database.

Itemsets that do not have the minimum support are discarded and the remaining itemsets are called large k- itemsets. This  A. Preliminaries  Consider a time series X == X1X2?? ?XT, which is an ordered sequence of measurements taken for a real-valued variable X at timestamps 1,2,??? ,T. A multivariate time series ~ == {Xi}~ 1 is a collection of time series that corresponds to measurements for m real-valued variables spanning the same time interval.

C. Multivariate TIme Series Association Rules Mining  1) Apriori Algorithm: I == {iI, i2, ... , ik} is a set of items.

X is an itemset if it is a subset of I. T == {ti, ti+1,... , tn } is a set of transaction. A transaction t contains itemset X iff, for all items, where i E X, i is a t - itemset. All itemset X in a transaction database has a support, denoted Sup(X) [2] [4], see as in Eq.(2).

LineUti li zatiOl1  Fig. 4. Intemet2 Backbone Network  We define rmrurnum support as 0.05(14 instances) and minimum confidence as 0.9, and we apply association rules mining to alphabet sequence to get association rules of the feature pattern in the backbone IPLSng router. Generated sets of frequent itemsets :  Size of set of frequent itemsets L(l): 16 Size of set of frequent itemsets L(2): 57 Size of set of frequent itemsets L(3) : 22 Size of set of frequent itemsets L(4) : 1 The best rules is shown as follows: Rule 1 : 3A,4B ==* 1D,supp = 14,conf = 100% Rule 2 : 3D,4A ==* 2A,supp = 14,conf = 93% Rule 3 : 2D,3C,4C ==* 1A,supp = 25,conf = 93% Rule 4 : 2B,3A ==* ID ,supp = 19,conf = 90% Rule 5 : lC,4A ==* 2A,supp = 19,conf = 90% With these rules obtained above, we may comprehend current network behavior.



V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS  A. Conclusions  In this paper, we put forward new approach for large-scale network behavior using TCP flags information . We firstly calculate percentage of four types of TCP flags among total traffic flows and consider these as multivariate time series over a duration of time. And then we apply PAA and SAX to multiple time series to obtain discrete symbolic sequence.

Finally,we apply multivariate time series associat ion rules mining to discrete symbolic sequence to obtain association rules. From experimental results, we can conclude that our approach is feasible .

meet our need. We will inspect traffic across layers in the future .



VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  The authors gratefully acknowledge the provision of Net- flow data by Abilene network and the contribution of re- viewers ' comments. This research is supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of China under grant 60872033 and Major National Basic Research Development Program of China (973 Program, No. 2007CB307100).

R EF ER ENCES  [I) Abilene Netflow Data, http://abilene.internet2.edu.

[2) R.Agrawal;T.Imielinski;A.Swami. "Mining association rules between  sets of items in large databases," in Proceedings of the 1993 ACM SIGMOD international confere nce on Management ofdata, Jun. 1993.

[3) E.Keogh;K.Chakrabarti;M.Pazzani;S.Mehrotra, "Locally adaptive di- mensionality reduction for indexing large time series databases", in Management of data, May. 2001.

[4) C.Zhang; S.Zhang, Association rule mining:models and algorithms, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag Berlin" 2002.

[5) J. Lin, E. Keogh, P. Patel, S. Lonardi. "Finding motifs in time series,"in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Temporal Data Mining, at the 8th ACM SIGKDD International Confere nce on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, July. 2002.

[6) R. Larsen; M. Marx, An introduction to mathematical statistics and its applications, Englewood,Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1986.

[7) A.Lakhina, M.Crovella, and C.Diot, "Mining anomalies using traffic feature distributions," in Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCOMM coriference on Applications, technologies, architectures, and protocols fo r computer communications, Aug. 2005.

[8) G. Nychis, V. Sekar, D. G. Andersen, H. Kim, H. Zhang, "An empirical evaluation of entropy-based traffic anomaly detection," in Proceedings of the Internet Measurement Confe rence archive Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGCOMM confere nce on Internet measurement,2008  B. Future Works  We evaluate our method on four types of TCP flags of one day from IPLSng PoPs(Points of Present) , which are specific instance of long trace data from Abilene Network .

