A market survey and prediction of lottery industry of Taiwan

Abstract  On the January 12 the 98th year Taiwan is  pass the bill allowing Kinmen, Matsu and  Penghu to legalize casinos passed. The law is  about we can set up the gambling house in the  subsidiary island. In the subsidiary island of  Taiwan, Penghu has abundant tourism resources  and has experience of tourism resources in ten  years. There has complete infrastructure and  industry's foundation. The local government is  enthusiastic about the tourism resources and  Improves Penghu fame. There are more and  more visitors to Penghu in ten years. But tourism  people have not increased in two years. This  shows that the development faced with test and  big bottleneck. Therefore the government of  Penghu is actively to set up gambling house. The  project to expect promote tourism, opportunity  for work, promote life and economic growth of  Taiwan.

The government of Penghu is enthusiastic to  participate in setting up gambling house. It can  be make the positive effect, but also bring  negative influence. The topical subject of  research is about the attitude of Taiwan?s and  subsidiary island ?s resident .we use the data  mining and questionnaires to analyze by  research about literature, economic indicator,  market scope and national budget. afterward we  can be to forecast the gambling house expanded  in Penghu, the economic and the society  influence in Taiwan.

The Main expected result:  Because the bill allowing Kinmen, Matsu and  Penghu to legalize casinos passed, appealing  many related businesses invest gambling, the  global financial crisis result in the flagging  economy, including the unique cultural and  social problem of Taiwan, whether the gambling  bring about economy rapidly raise that  government and people expectation, and one of a  great deal of uncertainty exist, therefore in this  paper use data mining to analysis, then using  statistic software prove data mining outcome. By  confer about development of gambling in  Penghu, evaluating risk prediction of the  gambling in Penghu, and providing reference the  government with reduce implement gambling of  risk.

1. Introduction  1.1 Research Motivation and Purpose  On the January 12 the 98th year Taiwan is  pass the bill allowing Kinmen, Matsu and  Penghu to legalize casinos passed. In the  subsidiary island of Taiwan, Penghu has  abundant tourism resources and has experience  of tourism resources in ten years. There has  complete infrastructure and industry's foundation.

The local government is enthusiastic about the  tourism resources and Improves Penghu fame.

DOI 10.1109/NISS.2009.235    DOI 10.1109/NISS.2009.235    DOI 10.1109/NISS.2009.235    DOI 10.1109/NISS.2009.235     There are more and more visitors to Penghu in  ten years. But tourism people have not increased  in two years. This shows that the development  faced with test and big bottleneck. Therefore the  government of Penghu is actively to set up  gambling house. The project to expect promote  tourism, opportunity for work, promote life and  economic growth of Taiwan.

Can it create the employment opportunity  and initiate the positive economic during the  great depression ? It will be believe that it can  cause the underground gambling house to  overflow, cause moral concept to be confused,  the public security question, reducing the  knowledge level, too much expenditure on  facilities. (Including airport, port, highway, water,  electricity, sewage, and rubbish) And ecological  environment will be destroyed. The paper wants  to investigate the influence of economy in  Taiwan to setting up gambling house in Penghu.

By investigation on this island and the subsidiary  island people?s cognition of Taiwan. And we also  calculate the risk of setting up gambling house in  Penghu. We expect the result of study can be  offer favorable information for relevant units or  government organ.

1.2 Research Purpose  The positive influenced of economy and  society.

The economy aspect it can increase the  income, create about 10,000 employment  opportunities and increase tax revenue. The  Social aspect it can attract and outflow people  come back, will promote the Local construction.

The negative influenced of economy and  society.

The economy aspect it can make shortage of  money and always blind competition. The Social  aspect it can make public security question and  underground gambling house to overflow. The  environment aspect it can damage ecology, air  pollution, noise pollution, trash pollution and  water pollution.

2. Literature review  In 2005 the populations of Sightseeing have  12 million people and 6 million people after  Hong Kong and Macao open the sightseeing.

The rate of economical growth to grow up time  of much compare with Preceding year. There are  37,500,000 persons to travel in the Las Vegas.

(National Policy foundation 2006)  It is difficult to develop local economy. So,  the government is striving to develop Special  Tourist Zone has more than 20 years. The policy  has a lot of positive and negative impacts. The  majority were on The Positive views of Setting  up gambling house. (National Policy foundation  2006)  The government has not yet set up regulatory  agencies, relevant laws (Including the rate of Tex,  the ratio of Distribution and the special rule.) It  must be should not lose sight of the original  tourism resources and enhance the game  industry.

3. Research Design and Methods  3.1 Research Methodology  In this paper involves analyzing and  predicting of economy and social that  development of casinos is built in Penghu. The     focus of adaptive artificial neural network,  logistic regression, decision tree, data mining,  and use literature , collecting the economic  indicators in previous years , investment scale,  and national budget data to analysis, by confer  with residents of the Taiwan island and residents  of the offshore islands about gambling cognition  and opinions in Penghu, which carry out a  survey, then predict the development of  gambling in further, as well as the outlying  islands of Taiwan develop gambling which have  suffered a hammering in economy and social.

Artificial Neural Network  Artificial neural network is similar to human  neural structure of a parallel computing,  based on brain and nervous system research,  and inspired by information processing  technology. , it usually called parallel  distributed processing model or connectionist  model. Artificial neural network can be used one  of group samples, that is, systems composed of  input and output data and building system model  relations between input and output . This  system model can estimator, prediction, decision,  diagnosis and regression analysis of common  statistical techniques can be used an example,  therefore artificial neural network regard as a  special statistic techniques.

Logistic Regression  Logistic regression is analysis the binary data  or the ordinal data which relations between  dependent variable and independent variable. In  logistic regression model, using the dependent  variable predict independent variable given  value (such as 1or 0) probability. The  independent variable usually showed two  categories of a value or there is the smallest  order of a value. When independent variable  given different values, e.g. the interval sale data  or the ratio scale data, The general use simple  linear regression model rather than logistic  regression model.

Decision Tree  Decision tree is a single or many independent  variable which focus on level of independent  variable, prediction case or relation object. Not  only decision tree is aimed at several types of  categories independent variable but also  prediction or explain the outcome. The decision  tree fit for user to analysis data. According to  different variable generate the results of the  analysis, therefore the user almost no need for  users to have any statistical analysis of  knowledge, by decision tree analysis customers  or consumers of the characteristics and  similarities and different. Decision tree is  intention to bring the information to be classified  according to their characteristics, the user may  use the decision tree of the different variables to  determine and forecast the possible results.

4. Expect  Because the bill allowing Kinmen, Matsu  and Penghu to legalize casinos passed, appealing  many related businesses invest gambling, the  global financial crisis result in the flagging  economy, including the unique cultural and  social problem of Taiwan, whether the gambling  bring about economy rapidly raise that  government and people expectation, and one of a  great deal of uncertainty exist, therefore in this  paper use data mining to analysis, then using     statistic software prove data mining outcome. By  confer about development of gambling in  Penghu, evaluating risk prediction of the  gambling in Penghu, and providing reference the  government with reduce implement gambling of  risk.

5. Reference  [1]  Yo-chu Wu (2008) An economical and social  influence analysis the lottery industry in Penghu.

(2008)  [2] Rei Wei, Yu-ting Cheng, Cha-chu Teng, Hong-bo  Kuan, Ben-chang Hsieh (2003) A summary of DATA  MINING, Chunghwa Data mining Society.

(2003) DATA  MINING  [3] National Policy Foundation (2006) The analysis of lottery and amusement industry in Penghu.

(2006)  [4] National Policy Foundation (2006), The lecture of striving tourism zone and mini-three link in  Penghu.  (2006)  [5] Chi-ting Chen, Cheng-hsiung Chen, Ben-chang  Hsieh (2002), Research of the factories which effect  consuming behavior of countrymen in new year and  festivals.8(2), 193-203  (2002)  8(2) 193-203  [6] Ben-chang Hsieh, Chic-hsiung Su, Liang-fen Kuo  (2007) The commercial intelligence application of  Microsoft SQL Server in data mining. Taipei.

Chunghwa Data mining Society.

(2007) Microsoft SQL Server  6. Advice  1. Basic knowledge of statistics and  statistics software  Have to possess the basic statistical concepts  to analyze data, and use SPSS14.0, SQL Server  2005, EXCEL 2007, SAS, etc. analysis data.

2. Data mining learning methods  Data mining use various analysis method and  technical in data base, accumulated by the past  history of a large number of complex data, doing  analysis, summarized and integration, by finding  useful information .e.g. linear regression, time  series, decision tree, logistic regression,  discriminant, time discriminant, Bayes  probability analysis, artificial neural network  and association analysis etc.. In this study  depend on the information status of the selection  method.

3. The gambling of market positioning  business intelligence analysis  In this study focus on gambling, therefore, on  the betting industry have to have a deeper  understanding of the field, to make sure market  positioning in gambling, for business  intelligence analysis, knowledge and application  of this combination to be teacher guidance.

