A Disaster-Recovery IT Framework Based on Disaster Indexing Measurement  Mechanism in E-Government

Abstract? Recently, the frequency of natural disasters is increasing sharply, especially the seismic activities which have been reached to a new peak, such as WenChuan earthquake in China, L?Aquila earthquake in Italy. The disasters not only cause immeasurable casualties and infrastructures damage, but information and data losses, which will bring big troubles to the post-disaster reconstruction projects, since the re-collect work will be time-consuming and need unpredictable efforts.

In this paper, a new disaster-recovery IT framework is proposed. The framework is combined with P2M (point to multi-points) and P2P (point to point) to form a hierarchical IT infrastructure distributed in different geographic location. It ensures the high availability for the data through the DIMM (Disaster Indexing Measurement Mechanism), which uses a scheduling model for the data backup and synchronization locally and remotely, based on the hierarchical infrastructure.

Once the disaster happens, the framework can quickly regain the lost data in the area from its hierarchical structure, meanwhile the DIMM guarantees to maintain the data with high availability and avoid data losses.

Keywords: E-Government, Disaster Recovery, Hierrarchical Framwork, Disaster Index Measurement

I. BACKGROUND E-Government, short for electronic government, is also  known as E-Gov, digital government, online government or transformational government. It mainly refers to the delivery of national or local government information and services via the Internet or other digital means to citizens or businesses or other governmental agencies [1]. E-government facilitates provision of relevant government information in electronic form to the citizens in a timely manner; better service delivery to citizens; empowerment of the people through access to information without the bureaucracy; improved productivity and cost savings in doing business with suppliers and customers of government; participation in public policy decision-making and other government stuffs.

As one of the most important role in E-Government, disaster processing has been highlighted for special attention.

Especially the seismic activities have been reached to a new peak recently, such as WenChuan earthquake in China, L?Aquila earthquake in Italy. Many countries have already established processes for post-disaster reconstruction and recovery, such as New Zealand [2].

However, the disasters not only cause immeasurable casualties and infrastructures damage, but information and data losses, which will bring big troubles to the post-disaster reconstruction projects, since the re-collect work will be time-consuming and need unpredictable efforts. Take WenChuan earthquake for example, the data losses in the earthquake makes the reconstruction and recovery work in slow progress. Many people?s basic ID information have been lost since the data center was destroyed by the earthquake.

In this paper, a disaster-recovery IT framework based on Disaster Indexing Measurement Mechanism (DDIM) is proposed. The framework covers 2 parts, one part is the hierarchical IT infrastructure, and the other part is using DIMM to determine proper periods for data backup and synchronization. The aim of this framework is to maintain the data with high availability and lower the risk of data loss when a disaster happens in an area. The data in the disaster area will be properly backed before the disaster happens, and can be recovered fully and quickly after it.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in section II, we will give an introduction to the proposed Area Disaster Index (ADI) and DIMM. In section III, the disaster-recovery IT framework base on DIMM is proposed. And finally, a conclusion is provided in section IV.



II. INTRODUCTION OF ADI AND DDIM Indices are become more widely applied in measuring  social capital and capacities, such as quality of life (QOL), human development, and social vulnerability. The indices can summarize a considerable amount of technical information in a way that is easy for people to understand.

For example, the United Nations Human Development Index (HDI), do not provide the entire picture, but they are more beneficial then just examining one indicator such as income because they will incorporate into the index other variables, such as education and health[3].

Different risk, hazards, and disasters indices are also introduced into the society measurement. There have been some efforts in this area, such as the understanding of Natural Hazards, people?s vulnerability, and disasters [4], the assessment of Risk Management [5], the Improvements of measuring in the Disaster Resilience of Communities [6], and the determination of Indicators of Disaster Risk and Risk Management [7].

DOI 10.1109/ICMeCG.2009.110    DOI 10.1109/ICMeCG.2009.110    DOI 10.1109/ICMeCG.2009.110     However, the indices mentioned above are mainly focused on the indices itself or the disaster measurements.

They are seldom used for evaluating the data availability and data losses. Especially in an area with high disaster frequency, the disaster indices should not only be used for society measurement, but also it can and should be used for future disaster precaution actions. They are the perfect parameters for calculating the probability of future disaster losses within the area. In this section, a disaster indexing measurement mechanism (DIMM) is proposed. The proposed DIMM use ADI to determine data backup and synchronization periods, which are the key parameters for data protection.

A. Area Disaster Index (ADI) The Area Disaster Index (ADI) is a composite result of  the relationship between the derivation of Area Society Index (ASI) and Area Stability Score (ASS).  The ASI measures the comprehensive situation of a given area, including community assists, location, infrastructure quality and so on.

And the ASS takes the impacts of disaster into consideration, such as the types of disaster, the probability of disaster and etc.

The following equation shows the relationship between ADI, ASI and ASS.

*(1 )i i iADI ASI ASS? ?? ?                   (1) Where ? is the weight parameter.

The suffix ?i? in each index means area i.

The above equation means in area i, the ADI depends on  ASI and ASS, also the impacts of each part can be adjusted by using weight? .

Let us look at ASI deeply first. As an overall measure of area capacity, the derivation of an ASI in the above given equation will use the following:  1 2 3i i i iASI w CA w L w IQ? ? ? ? ? ?  4 5i iw PD w ES? ? ? ? (2)  Where  1w , 2w , 3w , 4w , 5w  --- weight, and  1 2 3 4 5 1w w w w w? ? ? ? ?  iCA  --- Community Assets in area i iL  --- Location of area i  iIQ  --- Infrastructure Quality of area i iPD  --- Population Demographics of area i  iES  --- Emergency Service of area i The equation (4) measures the comprehensive situation  of a given area from different angles separately, including community assets, location, infrastructure quality, population demographics and emergency service. The calculation of  these parameters can show us a comprehensive picture of the area, and determine the area priority.

Secondly, ASS is to determine the vulnerability of a given area, by deriving a vulnerability score that measures hazards--including frequency and probability?as well as additional vulnerability measures (average previous disaster level).

? ?? ?1i a a a aiASS D P F Max L?? ? ? ?? ?2 b b b biD P F Max L?? ?  ? ?? ?... n n n n niD P F Max L?? ?        (3) Where  1? , 2? ,?, n?  --- weight , ,...,a b nD  --- Disaster Agent (earthquake, hurricane?.)  aP , bP ,?, nP  --- Probability of disaster  aF , bF ,?, nF --- Frequency of disaster  aiL , biL ,?, niL  --- Level of disaster in area i The ADI take full consideration of the impacts of disaster,  from the disaster agent (disaster types), to the level of disaster. Those parameters will reflect the impacts of disaster into ASS, and consequently reflect into ADI.

The ADI evaluates the impact of a given area i from 2 aspects. On one hand, ASI stands for the social capacity, not only focus on the area of community assets, but also considering the other aspects of the society, such as location, infrastructure quality, population demographics and emergency service. Those parameters can comprehensively evaluate the importance of the area. The area with high value of ASI also means the data in this area has higher importance and priority than other areas, and should pay more attention to it. On the other hand, the ASS is used for evaluation the vulnerability of a given area. The area with high probability of disaster will have a high value of ASS, which means the data in this area are also need more consideration.

Once the ADIs of all areas in a region are correctly collected and calculated, the indices can be use in DIMM.

B. Disaster Indexing Measurement Mechanism (DIMM) As well known, the best way to maintain the data with  high availability and avoid data losses is to backup data in different databases and synchronizes data between different systems with a proper period. However, what is the proper period and how to determine it? Those are the mainly difficulties in front of us. If the period is too large, that will cause high probability of data losses if something goes wrong during the period. And it will waste resources if the period is too short.

The proposed DIMM mainly focuses on Data Backup and Synchronization Period (DBSP) computing to determine backup and synchronization periods. In DIMM, 2 kinds of periods are defined, the period of data backup between parent-node and child-nodes, and the period of data synchronization between child-nodes with the same node level. The definition of them is as following.

The period of data backup, BiT , is the time used between parent-node and child-nodes. It is calculated by the parent- node, by collecting the ADIs of its child-nodes. It is depends on the values of child-nodes ADIs and CBP (constant backup  period). Assume the CBP is set to BT , which is the empirical value concluded from previous work over a long period of time.

By considering the ADI of a given area i, we can get  ( / ) / n  Bi j i B j  T ADI n ADI T? ?? (4)  Where  / j  j n  ADI n? --- Average ADI of child-nodes, n is the  number of child-nodes  iADI  --- ADI of area i The higher value of ADI means the shorter backup period  is needed.

Once we got the value the BT , the second period, the period of data synchronization between child-nodes with the same node level can be calculated. According to the equation (4), we can get the following equation, which is used for calculating the period of data synchronization between child- nodes with the same node level.

? ?min / * ijS j i Bi  T ADI ADI T? (5)  Where  jADI  --- ADI of neighbor area j iADI  --- ADI of area i  BiT  --- The period of data backup between parent-node and child-nodes.

The equation (5) is aim to find out the minimum period of data synchronization between child-nodes with the same node level.

The proposed DIMM mainly uses equation (4) and (5) to determine the proper periods for parent-child nodes data backup and child-child nodes data synchronization. The calculated periods will be used in the proposed Disaster- Recovery IT Framework, which is combined with hierarchical tree-structure and DIMM to ensure data integrity and avoid data losses. The Framework will be introduced in the next section.



III. DISASTER-RECOVERY IT FRAMEWORK BASED ON DISASTER INDEXING MEASUREMENT MECHANISM  The proposed framework is combined with P2M (point to multi-points) and P2P (point to point) to form a hierarchical IT infrastructure distributed in different geographic location.

It also includes the DIMM proposed above, which uses a scheduling model for calculating the data backup and synchronization period. On one hand, the parent-node will  demand its child-nodes to backup their data into the parent  database system during the period BiT . On the other hand, each child-node will synchronize its own data with its  neighbors during the period ijS T  . The topology of disaster- recovery IT framework based on DIMM is demonstrated in Figure 1.

Figure 1.  The tree topology of DIMM based disaster-recovery IT framework  For simplicity, in the figure, we use shape of cloud to stand for an area, which also can be referred as a node in the topology tree.

In each cloud, there exist 2 kinds of systems, a database system and a file system. The database system is used for backup local data within the cloud, including the backup data of its child-clouds. Meanwhile, considering the frequent data synchronization between child-nodes, a file system is used for synchronizing neighbor clouds? data, which can fully take the advantages of easy storage and quick transmission.

The whole procedure of disaster-recovery IT framework is shown in Figure 2.

1) Firstly, the bottom clouds (for example, cloud i, j and k in the Figure 1) collect their own reliable metrics to calculate the ADI, and submit its ADI to its parent cloud (cloud p).

2) Secondly, The parent cloud collects all the ADIs in its region, and calculates the average ADI value.

3) After comparison it with ADI of each cloud, the parent  cloud can determine the backup period BiT , and request its child-cloud i to backup data according the BiT . The calculation of BiT  can be referred to Equation (4).

For maintaining the data availability, the parent-child backup procedure only uses database system in the cloud.

Different technologies, such as adapters or web service, can be used for connecting different database systems.

At Level i, child-node calculates and submits ADI to its parent-node.

Child-nodes synchronize data within the period  Parent-node collect ADIs and calculate backup period TBi  Data in child-node are backed into parent-node in period TBi  Does all the node backup and synchronize? No  Entrance  Exit  Yes  Child-nodes calculate synchronization period  Does the backup procedure complete?

Does the Synchronized  procedure complete?

Yes  Yes  No  No  i = i + 1   Figure 2.  the flowchart of DIMM based disaster-recovery IT framework   4) Besides the parent-child backup procedure, each child  cloud will compare their own ADI with its neighbors. These child clouds will use the DIMM to calculate its  synchronization period ijS T  , and actively synchronize data  with its neighbors during ijS T  . The calculation of  ijS T  can be referred to Equation (5).

To ensure the quickly synchronization and recovery, the file system in each cloud will be used. The data will be transformed into unique format, and store in neighbors? file system. Similar to the database system, the transformation and storage procedure can also use adapters or web service to achieve it.

5) Once the backup and synchronization procedures in the bottom level are done, the above process will repeat in the parent node level (between cloud p level and its parent), and the data in parent level will be backup and synchronized.

6) Go on with the above backup and synchronization procedures until all the clouds in the topology tree are done.

The above proposed framework, combining the DIMM and hierarchical infrastructure, guarantees to maintain the data with high availability and avoids data losses from central and distributed aspects. If a disaster happens in an area, the central backup procedure can make sure the majority of data can be regained, meanwhile the distributed synchronization procedure can ensure the rest data can be quickly and fully recovered.

Future more, we also have to admit that, the parameters in the framework are hard to collect, especially for some parameters related to public facilities. The inaccurate information will cause the usage of the framework less efficiency. However, considering right now, there is no other recovery framework take ADI into consideration, the proposed framework can give us a better choice to avoid data loss. And its dynamic backup period calculation (DIMM) will give us a proper period than using constant period. The indices accuracy and framework optimization is our research aim in the future.



IV. CONCLUSION In order to alleviate the impacts of disasters and avoid  data losses in the disaster area, in this paper, we propose a disaster-recovery IT framework based on DIMM. The framework is combined with P2M and P2P structure, and using DIMM to backup and synchronized data between different databases and different systems locally and remotely. Once the disaster happens, the framework can quickly regain the loss data in the area from its hierarchical structure, meanwhile the DIMM guarantees to maintain the data with high availability and avoid data losses.

