Mapping Surface Cover Using EO-1 Hyperion Data:

Abstract? The utility of Hyperion images in the discrimination of  surface classes is currently being tested at two study areas:  1) eastern Melville Island, Nunavut, Canada; and 2) Big Bend  National Park, Texas.  Hyperion unmixing results for the Melville  Island study area effectively depict fractional surface cover,  although the abundance images of several classes contain  background values that locally overestimate surface exposure.  At  Big Bend National Park, separation of classes through Hyperion  unmixing has been hindered by the relatively indistinct  weathering characteristics of several key sedimentary units.

Ongoing research efforts include experimentation with  hyperspectral classification approaches that entail reduction of  Hyperion data dimensionality through the combination of  spectral bands.

Keywords- geology; desert regions; spectroscopy

I.  INTRODUCTION  In the discrimination of surface cover classes, hyperspectral data offer improved potential for class separation relative to broad-band multispectral data. Though EO-1 Hyperion data do not have optimal signal-to-noise characteristics, the data are notable in providing spectral coverage across almost 200 functional bands that collectively span the visible, near- infrared, and short-wave infrared ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum.  The effectiveness of Hyperion images in the discrimination of lithological and other surface cover classes is currently being tested at Melville Island, Canada, and Big Bend National Park, Texas (Fig.1).



II. HYPERION IMAGES  The Hyperion sensor [1] is one of several instruments mounted on the EO-1 spacecraft, which was launched in 2000 and is now operating on an extended mission in partnership between the United States Geological Survey and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.  Hyperion collects optical data in 242 spectral bands in the visible, near-infrared, and short-wave infrared.  Of these channels, 198 are unique and characterized by sufficient signal-to-noise to be used as a basis for surface mapping.  Spectral coverage spans the range of  ~0.4-2.4 ?m, with spectral resolutions of individual bands of ~10 nm.  The Hyperion sensor operates with a swath width of 7.6 km and a pixel size of 30 x 30 m.  Hyperion is characterized by inferior signal-to-noise relative to AVIRIS  and other sensors with comparable spectral resolution [2-4], but nevertheless represents an important landmark in the development of spaceborne remote-sensing technologies.

Hyperion data have been successfully used to support a diverse range of activities including the mapping of rock and mineral classes [3,5], and the discrimination of vegetation classes [6-8].



III. STUDY AREAS  A. Melville Island, Nunavut, Canada  The Melville Island study area is located in the Canadian territory of Nunavut.  Bedrock units in the study area consist mainly of late-Paleozoic clastic and carbonate formations of the     Figure 1.  Melville Island is part of the Queen Elizabeth Islands, an archipelago that comprises the landmass of the Canadian High Arctic.  The  western side of this archipelago is classified as a polar desert.  Big Bend  National Park is located in Brewster County, southwest Texas, and forms part  of the Chihauhuan Desert.

Sverdrup Basin [9].  Also present are Silurian carbonates of the shelf province of the Franklinian Mobile Belt, and a near- vertical Cretaceous gabbro dike.  Elevations in the region mainly range from 0 to ~200 m above sea level, and north- dipping cuesta landforms dominate the terrain.  Ridge-forming sedimentary units include the Bjorne Formation, the Degerb?ls Formation, and the Great Bear Cape Formation.  The most common surface material in the study area consists of weathered and frost-shattered felsenmeer, which mantles parent bedrock units [10].  Melville Island is located within the zone of continuous permafrost, and the low annual precipitation of the region (~10 cm) has led to its classification as a polar desert [11].  Vegetation cover is less than 10% over much of the study area and mainly consists of barrens communities comprised of varieties including Saxifraga oppositifolia (purple saxifrage), Salix arctica (arctic willow), and grasses [12].  Dense tundra communities also exist in the study area, but are of relatively restricted extent.

B. Big Bend National Park, Texas  Big Bend National Park is located in Brewster County,  southwest Texas.  The park forms part of the Chihuahuan  Desert, which extends across parts of Texas, New Mexico,  Arizona, and northern Mexico.  An experimental transect has  been defined across the western part of the park on the basis of  the wide diversity of geological and botanical classes  contained within its boundaries [13].  This transect extends  northward from the Rio Grande, across Rattlesnake, Bee, and  Tule mountains, to Maverick and Dogie mountains in the  northwestern part of the park.  Elevations within the transect  span a range of ~300 m (with peak absolute elevations of  ~1150 m), though relief in the nearby Chisos Mountains  exceeds 1000 m.  A wide range of material types is exposed  across the transect, including those related to sedimentary  units of the Aguja, Pen, Javelina, and Black Peaks formations,  sedimentary and volcanic units of the Chisos and Canoe  formations, Tertiary volcanic units, and alluvium.  The extent  of vegetation cover within the transect varies widely, ranging  from full cover to virtually no cover.  Especially common  varieties of vegetation in the study area include creosote,  mesquite, willow, sotol, agave, rosaceae, cacti, yuccas, and a  diverse range of grasses.



IV. SPECTRAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFACE MATERIALS  The spectral characteristics of lithological classes exposed  within the two study areas were generalized from materials  collected in situ (Figs.2-3) [13,14].  The spectra of  representative whole-rock samples were measured in a  laboratory setting using an Analytical Spectral Devices (ASD)  FieldSpec? 3 spectrometer equipped with a contact probe.

For each class, reflectance values were determined at ~10 nm  intervals between 350 and 2500 nm.

The spectral properties of some sedimentary units in the  Melville Island study area are comparable (e.g., the Great Bear  Cape limestone and the Tingmisut Inlier dolostone) (Fig.2).

The most spectrally distinct classes of the region include the  dark-red-weathering materials of the Assistance Formation  mudstone, the red-weathering materials of the Canyon Fiord  Formation sandstone, and the low-reflectance materials that  comprise the gabbro dike [14].  Among the most distinct  absorption features associated with materials in the Melville  Island study area are those at ~1000 nm and less than 600 nm,  related to the presence of ferric iron.  Water-related absorption  features are located at 1400 and 1900 nm.  Carbonate  absorption features at ~2300 nm characterize the limestone  and dolostone classes, as well as clastic rocks with carbonate  cements.  Absorption features at ~2200 nm, related to the  presence of clay minerals such as kaolinite or smectite, are  also present in the spectra of several rock classes.

Figure 2.  Reflectance characteristics of representative whole-rock samples of lithological units in the Melville Island study area [14].  Individual spectra are  labelled as follows: 1 ? Degerb?ls Fm limestone; 2 ? Great Bear Cape Fm  limestone; 3 ? Tingmisut Inlier dolostone; 4 ? Canyon Fiord Fm sandstone; 5  ? Sabine Bay Fm sandstone; 6 ? Bjorn Fm sandstone; 7 ? Trold Fiord Fm  sandstone; 8 ? Assistance Fm mudstone; 9 ? gabbro intrusion.

Figure 3.  Reflectance characteristics of representative whole-rock samples of lithological units in the Big Bend National Park study area [13].  Individual  spectra are labeled as follows: 1 ? evaporite crust; 2 ? Javelina Fm tan-  weathering sandstone; 3 ? Pen Fm tan-weathering shale; 4 ? Aguja Fm tan-  weathering sandstone; 5 ? Chisos Fm ash; 6 ? Chisos Fm dark mafic unit; 7 ?  Chisos Fm tan-weathering basalt; 8 ?Tertiary syenodiorite.

As with the surface materials of eastern Melville Island, the  materials of the Big Bend National Park study area are  characterized by spectral troughs indicative of the presence of  ferric iron, carbonate minerals, and clay minerals (Fig.3).  The  spectral properties of several sedimentary end members of  interest in the study area (Pen Formation shale, Aguja  Formation sandstone, Javelina Formation sandstone) are  variable across the park and substantially overlap within the  study transect.  Some end members, including evaporite  deposits and mafic igneous units, instead have relatively  distinct spectral properties.

The presence of non-geological classes including snow and  vegetation cover complicate discrimination of lithological classes on Melville Island and in Big Bend National Park.  The state of surface materials is depicted for several field sites in Figs.4-6.



V. UNMIXING AND CLASSIFICATION RESULTS  Hyperion unmixing images for the Melville Island study  area effectively depict the complexity of the fractional cover  of key end members, and complement the simplified  depictions provided by geological maps (Fig.7) [14].

However, Hyperion abundance images overestimate surface  exposure for classes including limestone, sandstone, and snow.

Such overestimations are likely related both to overlap in the  spectral properties of classes (caused by similarities in the  mineralogical and weathering characteristics of geological  classes) and the relatively low signal-to-noise characteristics  of the Hyperion sensor.  Classes most clearly distinguished in  the Melville Island fraction images include snow, green  vegetation, and sedimentary classes with distinct weathering  characteristics (sandstones of the Canyon Fiord Formation and  mudstones of the Assistance Formation).  The utility of  Hyperion unmixing results is superior to that of results  generated through the unmixing of Landsat Thematic Mapper  datasets [14].  However, the information content of separate  neural network classifications generated from Thematic  Mapper imagery is comparable to that of the Hyperion-derived  fraction images.

At the Big Bend National Park study area, a wide range of  surface cover classes can be distinguished through unmixing  of Hyperion data.  Classes most clearly distinguished in  generated fraction images include green vegetation and  igneous units of mafic composition [13].  Discrimination of  several sedimentary units of interest is hindered by the  relatively indistinct weathering characteristics of associated  materials (Fig.3).  Improved characterization of the reflectance  properties of these materials, and of vegetation classes  distributed across the imaged transect, may ultimately allow  for improved separation of sedimentary units in the study area.

Though the Hyperion unmixing images generated for both  the Melville Island and Big Bend National Park study areas provide useful information regarding the nature of fractional surface cover (e.g., allowing for quantitative separation between the spectral contributions of lithological classes and discontinuous vegetation cover), the overall information content of these images is not in all cases superior to that of images generated using simpler methods involving per-pixel classification of Landsat Thematic Mapper data.  Refinement of the techniques and inputs used in unmixing exercises may allow for improvement in the utility of unmixing results.



VI. ONGOING WORK  Ongoing research efforts include investigation of the utility  of fraction images for the quantitative characterization of the  lithological compositions of alluvial fans in Big Bend National  Park.  Efforts also include experimentation with hyperspectral  classification approaches that entail reduction of Hyperion  data dimensionality through the combination of spectral bands.

Such approaches offer the potential to reduce noise in  Hyperion data while providing an improved basis for per-pixel  classifications relative to established broadband multispectral  image types such as Landsat Thematic Mapper.

Figure 4.  Exposure of geological materials is generally excellent across much of the Melville Island study area.  The most common surface materials consist of thin veneers of felsenmeer, the lithologies of which generally correspond to those of underlying bedrock units.  Visible in the above image are the red-weathering  Carboniferous and Permian sandstones of the Canyon Fiord Formation.  Low snow-mantled cliffs formed by limestones of the Great Bear Cape Formation are  visible at right.  A Hyperion image was acquired across this area on July 21, 2002.

Figure 5.  Exposed Permian sandstones of the Sabine Bay Formation, Melville Island.  Felsenmeer extends across much of this area, with extensive bedrock exposures mainly confined to the scarps of cuestas (as depicted here at center-left).  The extent of vegetation cover on Sabine Bay Formation materials is typically  minimal.

Figure 6.  Cretaceous clastic and carbonate units of the Rattlesnake Mountains region, Big Bend National Park.  Unconsolidated weathering products mantle much of the area, with bedrock exposures most common along steep slopes.  Vegetation cover is generally greatest along the floors of large arroyos.  A Hyperion  image was acquired across this area on July 23, 2007.

Figure 7.  Left: generalized bedrock geology [9] and a Hyperion color-infrared image of part of the Melville Island study area.  Right: corresponding unmixing results produced from Hyperion-derived reflectance data for six end members [14] (several of the end members described in Fig.2 are not exposed in this part of  the study area).  The numeric values of fractional-component images range from 0.0 (black) to 1.0 (white).  Unmixing results in the immediate vicinity of  Tingmisut Lake were rendered invalid by clouds present at the time of imaging.

