Notice of Retraction

Abstract?Efficient Store Management is one important strategy of Category Management, how to get the character of the store and how to classify the stores is the aims of this study. Using the Association to find the goods selling knowledge, building the similarity matrix, and applying the Fuzzy Cluster to classify the stores, so the special promotion to different type of store. The Precision Marketing is realized by the FCBA model.

Keywords- CM, ESM, Association, Fuzzy Cluster

I. EFFICIENT STORE MANAGEMENT AND CATEGORY MANAGEMENT  According to the Ministry of Commerce Division and the commercial reform and development of China Chain Management Association survey [1], "China's top 100 chain operations," sales reached 855.2 billion Yuan in 2006, an increase of 25 percent, much higher than the total retail sales of social consumer goods 13.7% ; the stores increase total to 69,100, an increase of 57 percent, chain store Retailing has become an important part in China's economic development.

Category management(abr. CM)[2,3,4] is that the distributor and the supplier divide those goods into different categories, and take each type of merchandise as a strategic business unit of the basic activities to do a series of related activities, it stresses that provide consumers with overvalue of products and services, enhance the effectiveness of business operations. Category management includes three strategies: efficient store management (abr. ESM), efficient product promotions, and efficient product introduction.

Efficient store management mainly refers to customers face directly to the store and at this level the important thing is to optimize the management of stock and shelves.

Efficient product promotions are to maximize customer satisfaction and increase the number of transactions by more promotions to achieve this objective, such as the payment for satisfaction or low prices every day.

Efficient product introduction is to maximize new products of development and introduction.

How to achieve cost-effective management of stores, optimizing the goods management of the store is one efficient  ways. After the actual research, shop due to their respective regional characteristics and the different characteristics of consumers, operations of goods and scale of the stores is a slightly different, so the different promotional activities and management of goods to the stores is in the research.



II. STORE CLASSIFICATION PROBLEMS Let the chain enterprises as the S, one store as Si,  then },,{ 21 nsssS ???= , and the goods as the P = {p1, p2, p3 ? pm}, a chain store goods as siP , siP = {sp1, sp2 ? spk}, here obviously PPsi ? .

Headquarters to do two important managements in the category management: inventory management and promotional management. After actual research to find, each chain due to geographical and population factors such as different goods sold and the price level of high and low, so the chain can be classified management of goods.

According to index of store: such as store area, sales, gross profit, the chain store can be divided into certain types of store, for example, according to the area of store, chain stores can be divided into: size, more than the standard size, smaller than standard size, etc. In accordance with the above can also combine several index, a word is to scientific management shops, to address consumer goods Distribution and marketing purposes.



III. THE MERCHANDISE ASSOCIATION RULES OF SINGLE- STORE  A      Association [5, 6, 7] Let I = (i1, i2... im) is a set of items (a supermarket mall  may have 10,000 kinds of the goods), D is a set of transactions (called transaction database). Each T is a group of articles in the D, apparently to meet T ? I, which is named transaction T support X., if X T. Association Rules is a form contains the following: XY, which X ? I, Y ? I, and X ? Y =?.

(1)Items sets X have the support of s, if the s% transactions in the D support items set X;     (2)The association rules X?Y has a support of ?s? in the database D, if an items set X ? Y has a support of s;  (3) Said rules X?Y has the credibility degree of c in the database of D, if the transaction which support items set X have c%  of X  which support the set Y.

The general association rules algorithm used Aprio algorithm, except that also the Fp Tree, DIC algorithm.

B  Store Sales Rules  Fig.1 Snack Foods Category Tree Through the association (In the SAS software, for support of  0.5 percent, 10 percent confidence), the following rules:  TABLE I.  ASSOCIATION RULES  Association Rules  Chen Pi Mei ==> squid wire  More flavor peanut+ tomato==> Matchmaker fish  Mango chips ==> Drunk Love Peanut  Pistachio ==> Hickory  potato chips ==> banana chips  Pistachio ==> small yellow croaker  Through the above rules, be able to tell, pistachios and Pecan close relationship between the sales and promotional products can pay attention to, the purchase of one product in the circumstances, the purchase of the other products. Passed, also presented Fried Fruit category and Pecan type of relationship, if we take quantitative analysis, as shown below:  TABLE II.  CATEGORY RULES  Category Rules Ratio of Sales Ratio of  quantity Candied fruit ==> seafood 5% 0.7% Fried Fruit ==> Fried Fruit 10% 36% Fried Fruit ==> Candied fruit 3% 5% Fried Fruit ==> seafood 7% 3% Through the commodities category analysis can see that in  the sales category Fried fruit occupy an important role, mainly sales, but the main sales price is not the highest, high-priced goods are walnut and seafood category, which is targeted for the high gross profit enterprises.

C   Problems The above analysis is for single-store analysis, but as a  chain enterprise, how to grasp the overall situation, how to learn all the features of chain store and how to extract the sales knowledge aren?t satisfied. Below the fuzzy cluster model to classified the chain stores based on single-store association rules is to be designed, next how to use this mode realize the different management according to the different store is discussed.



IV. THE CHAIN STORE FUZZY CLUSTER MODEL BASED ON THE GOODS ASSOCIATION RULES  A. Fuzzy cluster and FCBA Fuzzy Cluster [8, 9]: from a number of the various needs  characters of users, find the statistics which can measure the similar features among the users or among the needs characters, constitute a matrix of symmetry similarity.

According to the similarity degree, classify the users or needs characters one by one. The little clusters include some close user or needs characters and the large clusters include some far users or needs characters. Until the entire user needs or completed variables are gathered to form a hierarchical relationship for a more natural and intuitive user to show Category the difference and contacts are showed among the users or the needs characteristics.

Distributed Store management models combine association rules and fuzzy clustering to do a series data mining and the whole process is called FCBA model. The FCBA firstly gets the sales of different store and extract the association rules, and compare the strong rules of every store to build a similarity matrix, which is calculated by the same degree of association rules, and then use fuzzy clustering method to get the stores category [10, 11, and 12].

Fig.2: Distributed Store Management Model  B.  Similarity Factor Firstly, get the sales of different store and extract the  association rules of separate store, Secondly, compare the strong rules of every store to build a similarity matrix, which is calculated by the same degree of association rules.

The definition of similar factors as ijr : If the two store i and j  have the same rules, 1=ijr , if two stores have not exactly the same rules, then  )( )(  AllRulesSum SameRulesSumrij = , 10 ?? ijr .

For example, All rules is 8? 6 rules are same in the table so 75.0=ijr .

Snack foods  Candied fruit Seafood Fried fruit Walnut  C he  n Pi  M ei    To m  at o  M at  ch m  ak er  fi sh    Sm al  l Y el  lo w  C ro  ak er    Sq ui  d w  ir e  M an  go S  te m    Pi st  ac hi  os   M or  e fla  vo r p  ea nu  t  pe ca  n  Association Fussy Cluster Store Category Promotion Similarity Matrix    TABLE III.  SIMULATED TABLE OF  TWO  SIMULATED STORE  Si Sj BA?  BA?  DCA ?+  DCA ?+ FE ?  FE ?  EDB ?+  FB? C.  Similarity Matrix  According to the stores definition },,{ 21 nsssS ???= , so the similarity matrix R ?  TABLE IV.  STORE SIMILARITY MATRIX  Sto res  1s   2s   3s   ?  ? ns    1s  1 12 r   13r   ?  ? nr1    2s  21 r   1 23r   ?  ? nr2    3s 31r   32r   1 ?  ? nr3   ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  ?  ns 1nr   2nr   3nr   ?  ?  Si: the code of stores.

For example, the real data are used to extract the  association rules and compare 5 stores to get below table.

TABLE V.  STORE SIMILARITY MATRIX  Stores 1s   2s   3s   4s   5s   1s  1 0.

0.

0.

0.

2s 0.

8 1 0.

0.

0.

3s 0.

0.

3 1 0.

0.

4s 0.

0.

0.

7 1 0.

5s 0.

0.

0.

0.

4 1  D.  Equivalence Matrix by Square Method  After this work, can be nn?  matrix R , the degree of similarity of every store. If they meet:  Reflexivity: That is 1, =? iiri .

Symmetry: That is jiij rrji =?? ,,  Transitivity: That is .,...2,1,,, nkjirrr ikjkij =??  The similarity matrix R  is similar matrix, but not necessarily meets the transitivity. Therefore, must to build a new fuzzy equivalence matrix from the similarity matrix.

Fuzzy R  matrix contains the smallest fuzzy equivalent R matrix called the transitive closure, recorded as )(Rt , here using square method to get the )(Rt  Here , )(1  jkik n k rrRRR ??== =o , operator "?" that  a smaller value from two elements, operator "?" that a bigger value from all the elements.

If there is a k, 1212122 ??? == kkkk RRRR o , then  12)( ?= kRRt .

E.  Forming cluster R is for the fuzzy equivalent matrix. Can prove that, if and  only if the R is fuzzy equivalent matrix, for any of the ? ? [0, 1], R ?-cut set of Matrix R is the general equivalence Boolean matrix. In accordance with the ?-cut of R, different cut-off relationship can be a different classification.

And if 21 ?? < , while the separation of each category by 2?R  must be the sub-categories by 1?R , so when ? declines  from 1 to 0, classification gradually merge, forming a dynamic fuzzy clustering.

For example, the similarity of above can be calculated below as:  ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ====  5.01 5.07.01 8.05.05.01 9.05.05.08.01  2248 RRRR o   Then the  4)( RRt = .

If 8.0=?  ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ====   2248 RRRR o   Then the three categories }}{}{,,{ 43521 SSSSS .

If 7.0=? ,    ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ====   2248 RRRR o   Then the two categories: },}{,,{ 43521 SSSSS .

If 5.0=? , all the store are in one category.

The store category is got by the model FCBA, then  different promotion or goods management for different stores, or different stores suitable for the different promotions.



V. CONCLUSION This paper proposes the similarity factor based on the  association rules according to the stores classified management issues, and a fuzzy analysis on the basis of similarity matrix, so the stores classification model FCBA is designed, which be helpful to the promotion management and Commodity Management to the different stores, and which is conducive to chain enterprises to develop category management. Through practical application, the model is feasible. Next, how the marketing tests on the basis of classification will be studied further.

