

Plenary invited paper at 16th NPSS Real Time Conference 2009, 10-15 May 2009, Beijing, China 1  ITER CODAC Status and Implementation Plan N. Utzel1, WD. Klotz1, A. Wallander1,  H. Dave1, F. Di Maio1, H. K. Gulati1, C. Hansalia1, D. Joonekindt2, JY. Journeaux1, K. Mahajan1, P. Makijarvi1, L. Scibile1,  D. Stepanov1, I. Yonekawa1   1ITER Organization, CS 90 046, 13067 St. Paul-lez-Durance Cedex, France 2Atos Origin, 36 Chemin du Vieux-Ch?ne, BP 104, 38243 Meylan Cedex, France   CODAC (Control, Data Access and Communication) is the central control system responsible for operating the ITER device.

CODAC interfaces to more than 160 plant systems containing actuators, sensors and local control. CODAC is responsible for coordinating and orchestrating the operation of these plant systems including plasma feedback control. CODAC is developed by ITER Organization, while plant systems are developed by the seven ITER parties (China, Europe, India, Japan, Korea, Russia and United States). This procurement model poses enormous challenges, has a big impact on architecture design and requires a strong standardization for better integration and future maintenance. In this paper we briefly describe the CODAC conceptual design, elaborate on the actions taken by the CODAC team to move from conceptual to engineering design during the last year and outline the plans ahead.

Index Terms ? centralized control, command and control systems, measurement, SCADA systems

I. INTRODUCTION TER is a joint international research and development project that aims to demonstrate the scientific and technical  feasibility of fusion power. The partners in the project - the ITER Parties - are China, the European Union, India, Japan, Korea, the Russian Federation and the USA. ITER will be constructed in Europe, at Cadarache in the South of France.

With the completion of negotiations at the end of 2005, a provisional agreement on how to share the ITER hardware procurements among the future ITER Parties was reached.

This envisages that 89% of the items will be provided "in kind? by the seven parties, with the remainder being purchased through a joint fund under the control of the ITER Organization (IO). This international collaborative framework would allow participants to share costs and pool scientific and technological expertise towards a common goal.

During normal operation, ITER device will be controlled and monitored by CODAC - the control, data access, and communication system. CODAC consists of a central supervisory control system, which coordinates the activity of local control systems in each plant system. CODAC controls transitions of the entire ITER plant state, and provides high level commands to plant systems, achieving integrated control of the entire plant. CODAC also monitors the operational state of each plant system to ensure it is operating within its proper condition limits. CODAC interfaces to more than 160 plant systems and local controls.

ITER ?in-kind? procurement poses enormous challenges.

On one side, CODAC - the central control system - is developed by IO. On the other side, the local control in the plant systems is developed by the seven ITER parties.

The impact of this procurement model on CODAC  architecture design will be detailed firstly, as well as the necessary strong standardization effort required for better integration and future maintenance. Then, we briefly elaborate on the actions taken by the CODAC team to move from conceptual to engineering design during the last year and outline the plans ahead.



II. CODAC CHALLENGES  A. ITER Seen by CODAC To achieve integrated hierarchical control of the ITER  plant, CODAC provides general software functions for the benefit of the individual plant systems, a synchronization system, and large bandwidth backbone communication networks with gateways which allow real time participation from remote ITER work sites. In addition, CODAC coordinates data acquisition & processing of data from the plant systems and manages the experimental database.

The interlock and safety systems, in parallel with the CODAC systems, ensure plant-wide investment protection, as well as personnel and environment protection, in case of off- normal events. In addition, the interlock system monitors operation of the plant, and performs preventative and protective actions to maintain the system components in a safe operating condition. Fig. 1 illustrates how ITER is seen by CODAC and the general software functions assumed by the central control systems.

I  ?????????  2009 16th IEEE-NPSS Real Time Conference PL2-2     Plenary invited paper at 16th NPSS Real Time Conference 2009, 10-15 May 2009, Beijing, China 2   Fig. 1 ITER seen by CODAC  B. CODAC Conceptual Design [1], [2] Reliable operation of the ITER plant will be achieved  through an integrated plant control. CODAC has the primary function of maintaining the plant operating condition in normal states. The interlock system tries to avoid or minimize machine damage from operational events with or without availability of the CODAC. The interlock system, separated from the CODAC, is hierarchically structured and has individual plant interlock systems dedicated to each plant system.

Since, the ITER machine is classified by the French safety regulations as a nuclear installation in the subclass of labs and fuel plants due to the expected tritium inventory and the level of materials neutron activation, it has been decided to implement the safety function independently from CODAC.

Hence, there is a net separation between CODAC conventional control system, interlock and safety systems.

C. CODAC Interface with Plant Systems The hierarchical architecture of the ITER plant control  systems spans from the presentation layer with the Remote Control Rooms and ITER Central Control Room to the equipment layer with actuators and sensors for conventional control systems and for interlock and safety control systems.

The central control layer manages the general supervision functions necessary for the orchestration of all plant system local controllers. On the local control layer, local controllers are either industrial controllers such as Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) or fast controllers such as PC or embedded system for fast data acquisition and plasma feedback control.

Local controller directly control and monitor individual plant system and diagnostic.

The limits in the autonomous behavior of a plant system are always determined by CODAC System, allowing the possibility of going from complete autonomy during tests for example, to a total subordination when all parameters of the plant system process are fixed from the central supervisory control system.

Fig. 2 provides an overview of the ITER Instrumentation and Control hierarchical architecture including the CODAC,  interlock and safety systems in three independent vertical tiers.

Fig. 2 ITER Instrumentation and Control architecture  CODAC interfaces to the local control in the plant system ? the plant system Instrumentation and Control (I&C) - via the Plant System Host (PSH) and High Performance Networks (HPN). PSH hardware and software will be provided by IO to ITER parties in charge of the procurement. ITER party will have to configure it to adapt it to its specific requirements.

Fig.3 illustrates the central and local I&C layers and their interfaces.

Fig. 3 Central and local I&C layers  1) Plant System Host (PSH) Plant System Host provides a single point of entry for  asynchronous communication from CODAC system to plant conventional control system and vice versa. The PSH also provides command dispatching, state monitoring, data flow and configuration functions.

On architecture point of view, plant system I&C consists of one and only one PSH and one or many plant system controller(s) interfacing to signal interface(s). Plant system controllers may be organized in a hierarchical manner using one controller supervising the others (Fig. 4).

Plenary invited paper at 16th NPSS Real Time Conference 2009, 10-15 May 2009, Beijing, China 3   Fig. 4 Hierarchy of controllers  Alternatively, the plant system can be broken up in multiple plant system I&C, each with one PSH, delegating the plant system supervising function to CODAC System (Fig. 5).

Fig. 5 Multiple plant system I&C  The former approach is preferred for closely coupled systems, while the latter is preferred for loosely coupled systems. The latter architecture has several advantages in modularity, testing, and integration.

2) Mini-CODAC Mini-CODAC is a system supplied by IO in order to  provide the plant system I&C with a subset of the CODAC system functions before the plant system is integrated into the CODAC system infrastructure on-site. The purpose of Mini- CODAC is twofold: to provide a test tool for Factory Acceptance Test (FAT) and to provide a software environment to prepare the integration of the plant system I&C within CODAC centralized system. The configuration of the Mini- CODAC is under responsibility of the plant system I&C supplier. The primary functions of Mini-CODAC are essential: the development of Human Machine Interfaces to locally monitor and operate the plant system, the management of the plant system alarms and events, the configuration of the plant system, the storage and treatment of engineering and scientific data, and the development of test programs.

3) CODAC High Performance Networks Networks Interface provides the physical interconnection  between plant system I&C and central I&C systems. There are seven networks (I&C Networks) defined for different purposes and with different performances. Each plant system can communicate over one or more networks depending on the required functionality, volume of data, bandwidth and latency.

Networks are centrally managed by IO including assignment of network addresses.

In accordance with the three tiers separation concept, I&C Networks are divided into CODAC Networks, Central Interlock Network, and Central Safety Networks. CODAC Networks, in turn, comprise general purpose Plant Operation Network and a set of specialized networks, named High Performance Networks. High Performance Networks consist of the Synchronous Databus Network (SDN) which provides synchronous interface required for fast plasma feedback (sampling frequencies in the kHz range), the Time Communication Network which supplies project-wide time synchronization with an accuracy of 50-100 ns, the Event Distribution Network with latency less than 10 ?s and the Audio/Video Network for survey and diagnostic audio and video data.

4) Instrumentation and Control Cubicles ITER site integration includes the installation of I&C  cubicles, cubicle cabling, installation of equipments within cubicles, and cubicle powering. The procedures for hardware and software installation shall be provided and executed by the plant system I&C supplier under IO supervision. The cabling including ground and power supply connections shall be handled by IO. Fig. 6 illustrates two types of I&C cubicles ? a signal conditioning cubicle and a plant system local control cubicle.

Fig. 6 I&C cubicles

III. A. I&C INTEGRATED PRODUCT TEAM (IPT) Rather than ITER Organization and the ITER parties acting     Plenary invited paper at 16th NPSS Real Time Conference 2009, 10-15 May 2009, Beijing, China 4  as two bodies - the one responsible for the baseline documentation and the other one for placing the contracts with the manufacturers - the Management Advisory Board to ITER had charged both entities to closer collaborate, join forces and think as one team - think as an Integrated Product Team (IPT).

In March 2009, an I&C IPT has been defined to ensure that all Instrumentation and Control are designed, implemented and integrated such that ITER can be operated as a fully integrated system.

The objectives are to establish links between IO plant system process, ITER parties and I&C suppliers (industry or institutes). I&C IPT provides a significant transverse function to enhance CODAC standards and promote functional and interface coordination between central control system and local control systems.



IV. CODAC STANDARDIZATION EFFORT ITER ?in kind? procurement model has not only a  significant impact on CODAC architecture design or team organization but also requires a strong standardization in order to ease the integration and future maintenance of the plant system I&C.

1) Plant Control Design Handbook ITER Plant Control Design Handbook (PCDH) [3] defines  standards for all ITER plant system I&C. PCDH must be followed by everyone involved in the development of ITER plant systems I&C, i.e. plant system responsible officers, plant system I&C designers and plant system I&C suppliers, regardless of their affiliation (i.e. IO, ITER party, industry or institute).

IO has the responsibility to develop, support, maintain and enforce the standards specified in the PCDH. IO will release the PCDH at regular intervals throughout the lifetime of ITER to take into account eventual standards and specifications extensions and evolutions and to address obsolescence management.

The PCDH comprises deliverables and quality assurance requirements as well as catalogues of standard software and hardware components. Well established industrial standards, commercial off-the-shelf and open source products are promoted, while custom-built solutions are strongly discouraged.

2) PCDH V4 PCDH version 4 has been released end of April 2009. This  major version includes the plant system I&C Life Cycle description and conditions in which the I&C part is designed, manufactured and integrated.

Some hardware and software components are already part of the ITER standard catalogues. The Open Source solution EPICS (Experimental Physics and Industrial Control System) widely used in large experimental physics facilities has been chosen as a result of a SCADA survey. In consequence, the software infrastructure for PSH and Mini-CODAC is EPICS with Channel Access as communication middleware.

Siemens Simatic S7 PLC family has been selected as the industrial solution for slow controllers as an outcome of an  open call for tender.

The Operating System (OS) Linux has been preferred for  PSH and Mini-CODAC. The Linux distribution shall be chosen this year. The Real Time OS decision for the fast controllers is deferred.



V. CODAC CURRENT ACTIONS The ITER design choices and prescribed standards are  based on independent market surveys, prototype activities, benchmarking and evaluations.

A. PSH and Mini-CODAC prototyping in action The scope of the prototyping task defined in September  2008 is to design and implement the PSH and Mini-CODAC, including their technical interfaces with slow and fast controllers, and with CODAC Networks.

Before building a working model of PSH and Mini- CODAC, a detailed requirements analysis and a functional analysis will be performed in order to clarify the functionalities and interfaces of the prototypes. Then, a case study of a plant system shall be ideally based on a real ITER plant system and involve close collaboration with the plant system responsible officer and designers in order to have a better understanding of FAT and the scenarios and environment where PSH and Mini-CODAC will run. Finally, a mock-up of a FAT for the case study plant system shall be delivered.

This prototyping task is now scheduled to start mid-2009 and to last three years.

B. Plant System Simulator and Fast Control Plant System Prototype CODAC Conceptual Design identifies two types of plant  system: slow control plant system based on industrial automation technology, with maximum sampling rates less than 100 Hz and fast control plant system based on embedded technology with higher sampling rates and more stringent real- time requirements. The latter is applicable to diagnostics and plant systems having actuators involved in feedback loops with sampling rates 1 kHz or higher.

One prototyping task aims at designing and implementing a plant system simulator to facilitate a test environment for the PSH and CODAC systems. In a second phase the task aims at prototyping technology for a fast high performance plant system.

One major goal of this task is to explore the suitability of ATCA and ?TCA technologies for ITER CODAC. It is considered urgent to have early feedback on these standards.

In parallel other standard bus systems based on PCI Express (Peripheral Component Interconnect Express or PCIe) shall be explored.

This prototyping task shall start in the second quarter of 2009 for 3 years.

C. Operation Request Gatekeeper prototype A missing element in CODAC conceptual design is a  detailed definition of the required functionality of the     Plenary invited paper at 16th NPSS Real Time Conference 2009, 10-15 May 2009, Beijing, China 5  Operation Request Gatekeeper which is a crucial element to the successful remote operation of ITER and a basic requirement of the ITER project, under the direct responsibility of CODAC.

The prototyping task aims to develop clear structured requirements for the gatekeeper including a description of all transactions to be carried out by the gatekeeper and to provide a working model to demonstrate that these requirements are complete and include all required security for remote exploitation.

D. CODAC Scheduling System prototype The Scheduling System, a subsystem of CODAC, is  responsible for preparing, validating, storing and selecting operation schedules. This includes preparation tools for the end users (physicists), validation functions, queuing database, functions to manipulate the queue and functions to submit schedules for execution. The Scheduling System is partly deployed outside Cadarache site at Remote Experiment Sites and partly on site. Further, the Scheduling System defines the data format and set ability exposed to the end users and therefore generates requirements toward other CODAC systems and plant systems. The prototyping task defined in September 2008 aims to analyze and detail the requirements, to perform a detailed design and a prototype implementation of the Scheduling System.

The ITER device will be operated in an automated way though the scheduling system. A pulse schedule consists of schedule segments. Each schedule segment is unbreakable and has associated parameter data (e.g. set points, algorithm numbers, and waveforms). A schedule segment may have multiple output branches, to take into account standard error, standard abort and user selectable.

Fig. 7 illustrates the data flow from schedule preparation, validation and execution to production, archiving and delivery of data.

Fig. 7 CODAC schedule system data flow The physicist responsible for preparing the pulse schedule  could be located locally at ITER site or remotely. The user selects and links schedule segments from a standard catalogue, specifies parameter data and selectable branching.

The scientific request is translated into an executable format by the Schedule Preparation System and validated by the  Schedule Validation System, before being passed through the Access Gateway System, validated again regarding the operation state and stored in the Schedule Storage.

In operation mode, the operator selects the appropriate schedule from the queue and triggers its execution using the Schedule Queuing System. The Supervisory Control System acts as a single point of contact to CODAC and plant systems, which transform the schedule into scientific data marshaled to the scientific archive and back to the physicist using the Data Access System.

E. CODAC High Performance Networks survey Some functions of CODAC require deterministic, hard real-  time communication and synchronization between distributed nodes. These requirements are addressed by the CODAC High Performance Networks: Synchronous Databus Network, Time Communication Network, Event Distribution Network, and Audio/Video Network.

A task defined in September 2008 aims to investigate potential commercial off-the-shelf technology solutions and to build small prototypes to demonstrate that requirements can be met. The maximum duration of this task is 25 weeks.

F. EPICS for Tokamak control study The task defined in November 2008 aims to leverage the  experience using EPICS for Tokamak control, to capture the lessons learned, to demonstrate the use of EPICS in an existing device and to investigate a case study of integrating a plant system.

The first part is to study the feasibility analysis of EPICS as a middleware and software framework for Tokamak control system based on a comparison of using EPICS in Tokamaks and particle accelerators.

The second objective is to analyze the interface between a plant system, such as Coil Power Supply, and CODAC using EPICS as middleware and software framework. We expect preliminary recommendations on how to integrate the plant system with PSH and HPN.

Finally, the adaptability of EPICS to Tokamak control system will be verified by demonstrating an EPICS-based control system on an operating device especially focusing on faults on plant operation, data exchange and archiving, data retrieval and presentation to operators/scientists.

This study has come into force in the first quarter of 2009 and shall last no longer than 32 weeks.



VI. CODAC PLANS AHEAD After elaborating on the actions taken by the CODAC team  to move from conceptual to engineering design during the last year, it is time to outline plans ahead.

As discussed previously, the operation of the ITER machine involves more than 160 plant systems I&C which are mostly procured in kind by ITER parties. In order to assist the IO in specifying, reviewing and following up the Plant System I&Cs along the I&C life cycle from design to integration, an engineering support contract will be setup. It includes support for technical specifications preparation, standardization     Plenary invited paper at 16th NPSS Real Time Conference 2009, 10-15 May 2009, Beijing, China 6  activity, FAT follow-up, ITER site installation and site acceptance tests  follow-up.

The implementation plan of the integrated hierarchical control of the ITER plant covers the design, implementation, installation, integration and commissioning of CODAC, Central Interlock System and Central Safety System. It also covers the definition, support, maintenance and enforcement of standards and interfaces to Plant Systems I&C. The current version of CODAC implementation plan is based on the latest official Integrated Project Schedule dated on May 16, 2008.

The first major task of CODAC implementation plan concerns CODAC Core Systems which comprise the hardware and software required to interface and test plant systems I&C.

CODAC Core Systems are required early in the project to support the development of Plant Systems I&C. The strategy is to encourage the use of PSH and Mini-CODAC as early as possible in the development process. A key milestone is January 2012 with the beginning of factory test. CODAC Core Systems shall be released on a regular basis adding and improving functionality, performance, reliability and usability.

Backward compatibility and inter version operability shall be guaranteed as part of obsolescence management.

The second main activity of CODAC implementation plan addresses the network infrastructure which comprises site cabling, hutches, switches and other equipments in CODAC hutch cubicles. The network infrastructure is also fundamental to start receiving plant systems on-site such as cooling water and heat rejection systems which start commissioning in Nov 2013. High Performance Network R&D contracts shall be completed by the second half of 2009 and the design of all networks shall commence.

CODAC Servers task of the implementation plan comprises the definition and procurement of all computers installed in the computer and control rooms in the control building. To support plant system commissioning commencing November 2013, a subset of the servers must be installed and connected to the network infrastructure. Due to the short lifetime of mainstream servers and the long development and installation time it is foreseen to upgrade most servers before the completion of the construction phase.

CODAC Application Systems task comprises all software running on the central servers and on the control stations. This includes monitoring, supervising and scheduling functionalities, plant simulators, data acquisition and archiving, cross plant system automation, plasma control system, pulse execution system as well as all tools for configuration, diagnostics and maintenance. Naturally CODAC Application Systems are developed later than the CODAC Core Systems. The strategy is to launch some R&D tasks in critical areas early and develop the production systems later taking advantage of these R&D tasks as well as the development of CODAC Core Systems.



VII. CONCLUSION A major achievement of CODAC current actions is the  release of the Plant Control Design Handbook V4 which  defines standards, specifications and interfaces applicable to all plant systems I&C. This definition of standards, later to be supported, maintained and enforced, is essential in order to integrate, maintain and contain cost of the ITER control system. The PCDH is a living document and will be released at regular intervals throughout the construction of ITER. It will also integrate in the proposed catalogues the results of the prototyping and survey activities leading to technology decisions.

CODAC implementation plan integrates necessary steps to be able to start factory test and the commissioning of the first plant systems. The focus is on the Core Systems to support plant system I&C development, the network design and the basic CODAC servers and applications infrastructure for November 2013.

