2009 2nd Conference on Data Mining and Optimization   27-28 October 2009, Selangor, Malaysia

Abstract? Data sources for outbreak detection nowadays not  only focus on emergency department or hospital-based data but  also grocery data. However, the size of huge data, may consume  higher time and extreme number of discovered pattern.

Unfortunately not all the discovered pattern from the frequent  mining is interesting pattern. Hence frequent pattern mining  algorithms producing numbers of frequent pattern, still  parameter uses in minimum support and which frequent itemset  producing better pattern remains fairly open. It is important to  gains some limitation of minimum support to be applied to the  frequent mining algorithm so that we not end up at compiling  higher patterns including a normal pattern. We propose a  procedure based on quick parameter setting to estimate  minimum support and also frequent itemset. Our empirical  validation shown the procedure will extract ranging minimum  support and frequent itemset to be considered to generate  interesting pattern.

Keywords? frequent pattern mining, minimum support, frequent  itemset.



I. INTRODUCTION  Frequent patterns discovered via data mining processes are interesting and useful for other data analysis and data mining tasks such as association, classification, and clustering just to names few. Data mining involves the semiautomatic discovery of interesting knowledge, such as patterns, associations, changes, anomalies and significance structures from various kinds of database into information repositories.

Analysing a collection of sequenced data over a period of time aims to identify certain patterns or trends in the data. In identifying interesting patterns, a common measurement uses in frequent pattern are support and confidence levels. The interesting patterns often occur at varied level of support.

To determine minimum support to be applied by user in generating interesting frequent patterns is critical part in frequent pattern mining. This initially motivated more research in this field. For instance, in collection of hospital-  based information systems data containing various set of data-sequence may correspond to the symptoms or diseases of a patient, with a transaction corresponding to the symptoms exhibited or medication prescription during a visit to the doctor. The patterns discovered using this data could be used in disease outbreak detection or unusual event or even detecting new diseases attacks.

Pattern?s strength is based on how often it occurs in the given data. If it occurs frequent enough, then the pattern is said to be interesting [1]. In determine the pattern produce are to be interesting, the measurement of which minimum support to be uses very much depending on the data. The existing algorithms in generating the frequent data sequence required supply of for minimum support. Traditionally values for minimum support greater than user supplied then the rules consider as interesting. This hypothesis applied in the rules interestingness measures for association rules. The issues in frequent mining are how the sequence itemset occurrence is counted and how many is enough?



II. BACKGROUND  As one of the application applying mining frequent pattern is to detect pattern in a set of sequence transaction. Data such as in the emergency department data, patient record, in the network logs or other transaction-based data are sequence- like data. Basic methodology of frequent pattern mining is based on apriori concepts. Generalized Sequence Pattern Mining (GSP) is the extension of apriori algorithm that applies concepts hierarchies and temporal constraints. This method guarantees finding all rules that have a user specified minimum support. GSP algorithm applied the horizontal data format [2, 3] and later come Sequential Pattern Discovery using equivalent classes (SPADE) uses vertical data format [4] which can consider as the faster method in apriori-based sequence mining. The improvement to apriori like algorithm that still exhibit the characteristic of apriori ; ?any super-           pattern of non-frequent pattern definitely not frequent ?[3].

Currently many approaches in frequent mining have been developed and efficient algorithms have been implemented.

The apriori approach exploits level-wise search to generate all possible candidate frequent itemsets and then prune them [3, 5, 6]. The methods are based on observation if an itemset is frequent then all of its subsets are frequent. The ideas is to evaluate l- itemsets first, then find frequent singleton itemsets, and evaluate their supersets 2-itemsets, and the process will go on until no more frequent itemset is found. With the user- specified support (min_supp) the process finding frequent pattern can be view as following: Discovering all frequent itemsets:  A subset X of I is called a frequent itemset if its support at least min_supp supplied. The Apriori algorithm to mine association rules was introduced in [6]. Given a dataset that contains sets of items (called instances), a minimal support threshold, and a minimal confidence threshold, Apriori mines all the association rules from the dataset that have support and confidence above the thresholds.

We now summarize itemset methodology formally as follows [6]. Let I = {I1, I2,..., Im} be a set of literals, called items. Let D = {T1, T2, ..., Tn} be a set of n transactions,  where for each transaction T ? D, T ?  I. A set of items X ? I is called an itemset. A transaction T contains an itemset X if  X ? T. Each itemset X is associated with a set of  transactions TX = {T ? D | T ? X} which is the set of transactions which contain the itemset X. The support supp(X) of itemset X equals |TX|/|D|.

Based on the above definition, the main concern is the support(X) of itemset being determined to achieve interpretable, usable and interesting patterns generated.

Identified few recently studies towards finding the ways to determine minimum support.

According to [12] the techniques for addressing the minimum support issues are underdeveloped. There are several identified approach such as general sampling [7], Randomized counting [8], features selection [9], profile- based approach [10] for quick parameter. Han et.al used strategy to mine top-k frequent pattern [13] and Wang et al designed a confidence-driven approach without minimum support [14]. However based on [12], most of the approaches are only attempt to avoid specifying the minimum support.

Checking the minimum support or threshold values to satisfy an output size constraint implies to the count of frequent itemsets. The problems in counting itemset are considered as NP hard problem. The constraint is to evaluate the maximum support and minimum support for the frequent itemsets.

The main shortage in randomized counting is dealing with the calculation; the main problem is repeated counting procedure. Implementing Markov Chain algorithm in randomized counting not depend on the number of frequent set but the size of the dataset. The desired accuracy is based on sample sizes. While in [7] the sampling is not taken from data but from the pattern space sampling. Highlighted in the study [8], the MC are not good bound for general cases.  The  finding indicated for cases in which the cost of frequency counting is dominated by the number of frequent itemsets straightforward randomized counting produces reasonable approximations in a fraction of the time needed for exhaustive enumeration. Space state sampling is focus on the post-processing of the data mining process. Expert or domain expert are needed incorporated during the differential extraction to set the constraint.

Analysing the relationship between pattern frequency and its predictive power require some quality features. Hypothesis if min_supp greater values, value in frequency are higher, this known as overwhelming. While the min_supp lower down medium frequency are discovered. However, if further lowering the state of over fitting will occurs.  It is the other approach in feature selection, to overcome method of enumerating all feature combination. Feature filtering measures are used to determine the minimum support [9].

Yan 2005 [10] summarized a collection of itemsets pattern using k representatives. It solved the interpretability of the number of frequent pattern by monitoring change of the support restoration error. Found that the smaller k is always preferred but may not provided valuable information.

Recently, partial support [11] and polynomial approximation and fuzzy estimation [12] are other a techniques uses to compute interesting itemset in frequent pattern mining. Nevertheless, the techniques are yet to come out with general strategy for setting the minimum support. In the cases of outbreak detection which minimum support to generate frequent items are important due to huge amount of data and multiple sources. The issues of a given set of frequent itemset, with specified support how should we select the high quality for effective detection outbreak is also questionable. The propose procedure are based on sampling techniques. The procedure to determine for setting minimum support and possible frequent itemset are compute based on mean.



III. PROPOSED DESIGN PROCEDURE  The procedure in selecting the possible minimum support and also numbers of frequent itemset to be uses in the outbreak detection are proposed in three main stages. Stage one as the pre-processing stage, follow by frequent itemset algorithm and stage 3 as data re-transformation. The figure 1 show the steps involved in the experiment settings.

Fig 1: Procedure in determine minimum support and itemset count           Pre-processing stage, involved 2 main modules: selection module and transformation module. At the selection module, focused are on determining the potential attribute to be included in the process. The attribute that are selected based on the most frequent occurrences attribute. In this study, we used the WSARE dataset where the attribute needs to be removed and reduced to meet the number of cases reported in the synthetic outbreak release day. In the data transformation module, data need to be prepared for apriori algorithm.

At the second stage, apriori algorithm is applied to generate the frequent itemset. There are two tasks in the second stage needed to complete in this experiment. The first task is to determine the minimum support and the second task is to identify length of the sequence k-length. Series of experiment were carried out by adjusting the minimum support values. The values of minimum support are adjusted in incremental of 10.  A set of frequent itemset with k-length (later refer as itemset) are obtained and recorded. The process was repeated by adjusting the minimum support. Table I showed the recorded the mean for each minimum support applied and table II recorded mean counts for k-length frequent.  The re-transformation stage, were the output of the frequent mining algorithm will be used as an important threshold in the outbreak detection tasks.



IV.EXPERIMENT   The experiment involved 3 dataset, namely as ZOO and  TIC TAC TOE gained from UCI data repositories. The third  dataset are taken from AutoLab for WSARE implementation  of outbreak detection.

A. Dataset Preparation  The WSARE dataset used in identified the possible minimum support to be considered in detecting outbreak using frequent itemset methodology.  The WSARE dataset consist of synthetic data for the outbreak detection. There are 100 datasets that represents a health care record where the person in the simulation city perform the main action (visit the emergency department, purchase medication or absent from school or work). Each dataset consists of one day deliberately anthrax release. The dataset chosen in this experiment are from dataset 0 to dataset no 2 (PT0, PT1 and PT2). Dataset PT0, the anthrax release on weekend. While dataset PT1 and PT2 the anthrax release are on weekdays.

The records were considered 5 days before the anthrax release and 5 days after the anthrax release. The days before anthrax released are captured the normal behaviour patterns, while 5 days after viewed the pattern caused by anthrax release in simulation city datasets. In this experiment we included 9 attributes used in the dataset. The dataset  PT0, PT1 and PT2 consists information on region, age, gender, flu level, day of the week, action, reported symptom, drug and day num.

Data from UCI, Tic Tac Toe was consider because of the predictive class is only 2.The possible combination is always  not more than 2 combination with 9 attributes. While, zoo have 17 attributes to be consider in generating frequent itemsets.

B. Result  The Fig 2 had shown the minimum support applied ranging from 10% toward 100% for each day in each dataset.

The result identified for PT0, PT1 and PT2 that the 10% to 20% support was not given good indication of increasing in frequent itemsets. When reaching 70% to 100% the frequent itemset count becoming stable. The fluctuation only can be visualized through 30% to 40%. In Tic Tac Toe the intersect was indicated at the 20% minimum support. Due to the nature of data prepared for tic tac toe, the graph show that higher count to be consider are only for the 10% to 20%. Minimum support for zoo dataset reached 40% to 50% shown in the fig 2.  Higher count for 10% due to 17 attributes to be considered in generating frequent itemsets. The X is uses to show the intersection of each dataset uses.

Fig 2: Minimum support  Based on the figure 2 results, the percentage of minimum support to be considers in the next experiment. Based on PT0, PT1 and PT2, the result had shown the higher the percentage, the lower count of the itemset and the graph indicate that it is becoming stable toward 80% and above. The results shown by lowering the minimum support, more interesting pattern can be analysed further compared to higher minimum support, where the pattern may be normal pattern.

Based on the result, the possible values of minimum support are ranging from 30% to 50% to minimize the uninteresting frequent pattern and limit the normal pattern produced by the algorithm.

Table I below, shown the mean for the total itemsets generated for each running minimum support and for each datasets.

TABLE I: Minimum support for frequent itemset  % PT0 PT1 PT2 ZOO TICTACTOE  10 30.3 32.3 31.5 186.4 22.5  20 28.0 31.6 30.4 83.3 9.0  30 24.9 38.7 27.6 44.8 9.0  40 21.4 24.7 24.1 16.8 5.0  X           50 16.3 18.4 16.3 8.4 -  60 12.2 13.1 13.0 6.3 -  70 9.1 11.1 9.8 4.7 -  80 7.2 7.7 8.7 1.5 -  90 6.8 7.7 6.9 1.0 -  100 6.5 7.7 6.9 1.0 -   Table II shown the mean frequency for the each frequent  itemset length.

TABLE II: K-length frequent itemset  PT0 PT1 PT2 ZOO TICTACTOE  1-itemset 6.5 6.9 6.8 7.4 3.2  2-itemset 18.5 20.9 20.3 32.8 36.0  3-itemset 29.5 35.5 34.0 93.0 -  4-itemset 28.4 37.3 35.2 135.7 -  5-itemset 18.2 24.6 12.9 143.6 -  6-itemset 9.7 12.4 12.0 72.7 -  7-itemset 3.3 4.5 4.2 20.3 -  8-itemset 1.7 1.6 1.8 3.7 -   As a second task in frequent itemset algorithm stage, the itemset counts for each length were generated.

Fig 3: Frequent Itemset  Based on the mean running for collected output produce by apriori, we can view that for the zoo dataset the higher value are gain at the itemset 5. Tic tac toe is at 2 itemset and for the PT0, PT1 and PT2 the frequent itemset are likely ranging on 3 to 4 itemset. Tic Tac Toe itemset was expected to be only 2 itemset due to the possibilities are only 2 values.

While in zoo datasets the graph shown exponentially increase from one itemset toward 5 itemsets and slowly decrease for 6 and more itemset combinations. Unlikely for the PT0, PT1 and PT2, the graph shown unchanged count for 3 and 4 itemsets.  The count decreases for itemset 5 to 6 and stable toward 9 itemsets.



IV. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK   We have presented an appropriate minimum support 40%  to 50% to generate frequent itemsets. The experiment also successfully identified numbers of itemset to be used for maximum detection rate based on higher frequency count.

We intent to generate hypothesis and identify the potential interesting pattern from the sequence itemsets count to identify any outbreak has occurred. The experiment indicated that the false positive rate of the outbreak detection can be reduced by having appropriate numbers of minimum support and the length of the itemset.  Further work is required to investigate the detection curve.

