Experimental Study about Voice Recognition and  Concept Map to Support the Students with Writing

Abstract?This paper adopts the experiment method to research that the way of composition supported by the information technology could improve the quality of composition written by the writing disable students in Chinese environment. The results shows: (1) Supported by voice recognition technology, the oral composition could enhance the content in their writing, and the quality improves obviously. (2) Concept mapping strategy could also make a big effort in this aspect.  (3) It can be proved that the way of composition making use of both the concept map strategy and the voice recognition are not more effective than using only one of them in improving the composition written to the writing disable students.

Keywords- Concept Map; Voice Recognition;  Writing Disabilities;  Experimental Study

I. Introduction Learning Disability (LD) refers to the students of normal  intelligence, but their learning effects is low-level and can not attain the standard of national curriculum. Most of LD students have the writing disabilities. [1] Compared with the normal students, students with writing disabilities usually have difficulties in composition planning, translation processing and composition modifying. Meanwhile, students with writing disabilities always have fears of writing and lack of the interest of it.

Writing disabilities have difficulties in both low-level and high-level modification. Then how to solve this problem? With the development of multimedia technology since the 1990s, overseas researchers, especially the American, have got great success in supporting the writing disabled children by multimedia technologies. [2][3] Among them, the voice recognition technology and the concept mapping strategy are the quite effective ones. The voice recognition technology supports their writing by oral composition, in order to improve the low-level problem of writing. [4] And the concept mapping makes the visualized conception of children to overcome the high-level problem of writing. [5]  This paper tries to research the effective role of the voice recognition and concept map strategy played to support the writing disable children in Chinese environment. This paper supposes that (1) Supported by voice recognition technology, the oral composition could enhance their writing abilities. (2) Concept mapping strategy could also make a great effort in this aspect. (3) The combination of both the concept map strategy and the voice recognition is more effective than using only one of them for the writing disable students to improve their composition.



II. Method  A.    Experimental Design This experiment adapts one-factor experimental design. It  uses independent variable as assistive technology, which includes voice recognition technology, concept map technology, technology of voice recognition and concept map technology, as well as none- assistive technology, while dependent variable as the score of students? composition.

B.    Subjects The 24 subjects are grade 4 students from a city primary  school in Zhejiang Province. it adapts the method of combining qualitative and quantitative together. [6] (1) The students? Chinese integrated result is among the last 20%. (2) The grade deviation of students? present practical writing level. (3) The IQ of the tested students are normal or above the average level, (CRT TEST, IQ?90).

C.    Experiment materials and Research tools 1)  Combined Raven?s Test [CRT] intelligence scale: It is  used to test the IQ of the students.

2)  Software:The concept map software used in this experiment is the Inspiration 7.5 Chinese-translated software developed by Inspiration Software Company. The Speech Recognition Engine which used in this experiment is IBM ViaVoice9.1 for Windows.

3)  Composition Evaluation Table:The evaluation of the tested compositions includes two aspects, one is a hard  Hu lailin The Teacher Education College  Wenzhou University Wenzhou, China hll@wzu.edu.cn  Zhang Xinli The Teacher Education College  Wenzhou University Wenzhou, China  Zhxl@wzu.edu.cn  Zhao ying The Teacher Education College  Wenzhou University Wenzhou, China  Hotdance@163.com     criterion which consists of total words, sentences and modifier words, the other is the whole quality measure. This research adapts 6 standards including material selection, thought, details, abbreviate, beginning and conclusion, transformation.

4)  Data Analysis and Processing:The software dealing with data analysis and processing is SPSS 11.5.

D.    Experimental Procedure 1)  Preparatory Stage  The preparatory stage of the experiment includes 3 steps: the design of experimental program, discussion with faculty adviser, and connecting with students and interview Chinese teachers. The key step experimental program design: the total experiment time lasts 8 weeks. [7]Except prepare and analyze the materials, actually the intervene time is 6 weeks, intervene twice per week, 12 times in all, 40 minutes every time; carrying out one-to-one individualized instruction teaching style, supplied with 6 faculty advisers; and set the test site in the experimental school.

2)  Process Phase implement  The tested are assigned at random into 4 groups, 6 persons in every group. Group1(G1)uses voice recognition technology to support them to write, Group 2 (G2)uses concept map technology, Group 3 (G3) adopts both voice recognition and concept map technology, Group 4 (G4)as the controlling group.

The experimental process of G1 consists of six segments, with every implement circumstances and chief strategy as following: (1) Use of the basic function of voice recognition engine; (2) Training of improving system identification rate; (3) Rectify the use of program; (4) Outline writing; (5) Oral Training; (6) Oral composition.

The implemental process of G2 consists of four segments, with every implement circumstances and chief strategy as following: (1) The use of Inspiration; (2) Establish the connection between concept map and writing, which is a key procedure of the experience; (3) Make outline with the concept map and finish two compositions according to it; (4) Modifying composition according to outline and concept map.

The experimental process of G3 consists of two crossed parts: one is to finish the outline with the concept map and the other is to practice oral composition by voice recognition according to the outline. The method of each part is similar as that of G1 and G2.

3)  Collection of data  In Experiment of G1, the content that the researcher may write in the report including: (1) the MP3 record of oral composition, (2) the time cost in every process, (3) outline and key words list, (4) difficulties and interests in learning.

The result of their identifying and correcting should be stored into the documents labeled by the student?s name and the times they practice.

In Experiment of G2, the content that the researcher may write in the report including: (1) the time they learn to use the software, (2) the time they spend in making concept map, (3) the time for labeling all the nodes, (4) the primary difficulties and interests in learning. Every concept map should be conserved.

In Experiment of G3, the content to be record is similar as that of G1 and G2.

4)  Evaluation  The total word of the inflexible measure indexes is automatically accounted by computer, while the amount of the sentences and the modifiers is calculated by hand. As to the whole quality measurement of the composition, we adopt the qualitative method. [8]

III. Results and Analysis  A.   Effectiveness analysis for different composition teaching methods affects composition hardness index  Table 1 is the result that average statistical results in hardness index written in four groups of students? two articles, obviously, hardness index value of each group?s composition is more than control group?s. They make nonparametric inspection by using Mann-Whitney U method. The result is showed in Table 2.

As can be seen from Table 2, all the total words and sentences number of voice group?s writing at 0.01 levels achieves significant differences, and the qualifier number doesn?t achieve significant differences. The total words number of Concept Map group?s writing at 0.01 levels  achieves significant differences, and the sentences and qualifier number at 0.05 levels achieve significant differences.

The total words, sentences and qualifier number achieve significant differences at 0.01levels in the writing under the interaction between Voice and concept map.

Table 1: the Quality of Composition Hardness Index Statistical Data  Variables  G1(Voice Group) G2 (Concept Map Group) G3(Interaction Group) G4(Control Group)  Total Words  Sentence Amount  Modifier Amount  Total Words  Sentence Amount  Modifier Amount  Total Words  Sentence Amount  Modifier Amount  Total Words  Sentence Amount  Modifier Amount  M 322 13 7.17 348 11.5 8.5 335 12.67 10.17 186 8.17 4.51  SD 38.12 2.53 1.94 59.08 1.87 2.42 47.9 2.80 2.64 43.3 2.14 2.51      B?  Effect Analysis for Different composition teaching methods affects composition quality index  Table 3 is the quality index value of two whole articles, from which we can see that each group?s quality index value of  composition is more than control group?s. The result of Mann-Whitney U is showed in the Table 4. From Table 4, the students? composition in voice group has significant difference at 0.01 levels in the quality index of thought, details, beginning and ending, arrangement paragraph and transition and linkage except no significant difference in material selection. The students? composition in concept map group respectively achieves significant differences at 0.01 levels except at 0.05 levels achieving significant difference in transition and linkage.

The composition under the interaction between Voice recognition and concept map all achieve significant difference at 0.01 levels in six indexes.

For above Manna-Whitney U is made inspection of hardness and quality index in each group, result of which achieves significant differences.



IV. Problem Discussions The results show that composition level of the students  with writing disabilities under technology supporting obtains significant improvement in most of quality and hardness index, which is similar to the experimental result in English environment made by Levy & Ransdell and Janet M. Sturm, etc. [9][10]  A?  The analysis of quality changes of oral composition under the condition of voice recognition technology  Oral composition styles under the condition of voice recognition make the result that of which composition achieves significant difference in hardness index. It is because that under the support of Chinese voice recognition system, the  result dictated by writer is directly showed on the screen, which help students both overcome disabilities brought by the request of writing machinery and have no losing of advantage of external representation of written composition, thus make the students avoid the overload of recognition loading and whose thought be more free, imagination be more plentiful, words and expressions be more abundant ,which is the result of advantage tactics by borrowing mutually between oral and written language, synchronously, the oral rehearsal tactics in the process of voice recognition enable students to have the increasingly ability of  aiming to a certain subject ,which is one reason of causing the increasing length of composition. The plan under the condition of voice recognition and oral composition style make the details, beginning and ending, transition and linkage and thought in the composition of students with writing disabilities achieve significant difference.

It is because that writing outline produced by brains storm enable students to write more systematical composition and pay more attention to the beginning and ending of writing and the problem of transition and linkage. On the other hand, oral language requests boundary diction, boundary expression, short process that  thought is converted into language and disconnected ?mood paragraph of oral composition under the condition of voice recognition?, which resulted in that modifier and material selection of oral composition under the condition of voice recognition have no significant difference.

B?  The analysis of quality changes of composition under the condition of concept map technology  The key function of Concept map as a tactics supporting the students with writing disabilities is to support writing  Table 4: Mann-Whitney U  Variables Voice Group W             P  Concept Map Group  W                   P  Interaction Group W                P  Material Selection 27 0.60 21 0.003 21 0.003  Thought 23.5 0.01 21 0.003 21 0.004  Details 23 0.009 21 0.004 21 0.004  Beginning & Ending 22 0.006 21 0.004 21 0.003  Arrangement Paragraph 27 0.005 21 0.004 21 0.004  Transition 21 0 003 23 5 0 011 21 0 003  Table 3: Score Table of Composition Quality Index  Variables G1(Voice Group) G2 (Concept Map Group)  Material Selection Thought Details  Beginning & Ending  Arrangement Paragraph  Transition &Linkage  Material Selection Thought Details  Beginning & Ending  Arrangement Paragraph  Transition &Linkage  M 3.42 3.64 3.33 3.67 3.46 3.63 3.75 3.79 3.63 3.75 3.79 3.63 SD 0.38 0.25 0.39 0.30 0.40 0.21 0.32 0.25 0.31 0.22 0.25 0.38  Variables G3(Interaction Group) G4(Control Group)  Material Selection Thought Details  Beginning & Ending  Arrangement Paragraph  Transition &Linkage  Material Selection Thought Details  Beginning & Ending  Arrangement Paragraph  Transition &Linkage  M 3.79 3.75 3.67 3.71 3.75 3.67 3.04 2.92 2.67 3.00 2.96 2.96 SD 0.25 0.22 0.20 0.25 0.22 0.20 0.19 0.26 0.30 0.22 0.29 0.19  Table 2  Mann-Whitney U  Variables Voice Group   W      P  Concept Map Group W        P  Interaction Group W        P  Total Words 21 0.004 21 0.004 21 0.004  Sentences Amount 23 0.010 25 0.029 23 0.010  Modifier Amount 29 0.104 26 0.035 21 0.004    conception procedures. Composition style under the support of concept map, enable students with writing disabilities to consciously distinguish simultaneity between high level and low level machining. The other is visual characterization of writing plan, which enable students with writing disabilities to reduce deficiency of information machining tactics in the working memory. It is enough to explain the reason that hardness index of composition under the support of concept map achieves significant improvement.

Concept map make people with writing disabilities visualize knowledge structure of special subject construction, stimulating previous knowledge to writing by assisting writer to see words, concept and relation, be a scaffold of students? memory in each stage in writing process. Concept map allows students through the mouse moving idea to increase or delete easily concept or thought and to colorize concept relation. The writing environment made up of picture node and concept relation in the concept map, has obviously decreased recognition resource consumption of students with writing disabilities, making their association be more plentiful, description be more concrete, whole length of composition be obviously enhancive, application of modifier words and conjunction be obviously increasing, sentence be much longer, which is the main reason that using writing style under the support of concept map leads to the change of writing hardness index.

C?  The Analysis on the quality of compositions under both the interaction of concept map and voice recognition  Theoretically, voice recognition can avoid the low-level difficulties of writing disable students, while the concept map can erase the high-level difficulties of them. If voice recognition and concept map can be combined to support writing disable students, the level of their writing could be further improved. But the result of the research shows that, although the quality of compositions can be improved when using these two technologies at the same time, further analysis reveals that composition under the  support of two technologies has little differences from that under the support of single technology. The reasons are as the following: In respect that the voice recognition not only can avoid the low-level difficulties, but also has the support of visual text, and concept map strategy owns the multimedia environment, therefore, either of the two technologies can effectively support the writing disable students with their composition.



V. Conclusion After the experimental investigation, we have come to a  conclusion that: (1) Supported by voice recognition technology, the oral composition could enhance the content of the composition and improves its quality obviously in Chinese Environment. (2) Concept map strategy could also make a big effort in these aspects. (3) The way of composition combined by the voice recognition and concept map strategy has no more effective than using one of them separately to improve the composition of the writing disable students. Consequently, there?s no need to put these two technologies into use at the same time.

