Application Research on Positive and Negative Association Rules Oriented Software  Defects

Abstract?Software defects are the key factors to evaluate the dependable software. This paper analyzes the attributes of software defects, and applies positive and negative association rules method to the research of software defects. This method can not only overcome the weak point of the traditional association rules method that can only mine the explicit rules, but also output some more meaningful rules of relationship of attributes. We extract the exterior relationship among the attributes of software defects, and fully mine the rules of inter- attributes. Through the application of the "Design and Implementation of Mining Linkage Management System of Coal Mine", the experimental results demonstrate that our mined rules have the advantages of less quantity, higher quality, fewer errors and conflicts.

Keywords-software defects; data mining; association rules; positive and negative association rules; correlation

I.  INTRODUCTION In the process of software development, the accumulation  of software defects is the main reason of dependable software target. At present, the analysis of defects data is relatively weak in general, it generally provides some simple statistical function of the defect attributes, and users have to use some other analytical methods to analyze the defect data.

These methods mainly include regression analysis, Bayesian network, and neural network etc. However, these methods can not fully mine the defects data that contain valuable information, and can even induce misleading analysis results.

What's more, as a result of analytical methods, management technique and application fields are different; defects quantity and the relationship among attributes are different.

Therefore, choosing different methods maybe lead very different analysis results.

In view of the above issues, the paper studies thoroughly the analytical method and technology of software defects? attributes based on the positive and negative association rules. This method can make up deficiencies in the study of the relation of defects? attributes. Positive and negative association rules could mine a lot of associated realizations and derivative realizations of data item sets. It could find the relationship of the defects? attribute though association rules method [1]. However, the increasing in the number of defects will certainly result in a sharp rise of the search space  of data mining algorithm and the possibility of blind discoveries. So we must attempt to use domain knowledge to mine relationship and rules of non-frequent defects? attribute sets, design the more efficient mining method in order to improve the efficiency of mining rules. Therefore, the study of positive and negative association rules method is very significant.



II. POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE ASSOCIATION RULES  A. Algorithm of Positive and Negative Association Rules Traditional association rule algorithm is only used to  discover positive association rules, that is, it only can discover the explicit model with high frequency and strong correlation, such as A?B. In fact in the database, there are still a lot of implicit model which can not be found by current mining techniques, such as A??B, ?A?B, ?A? ?B[4], these important implicit models are negative association rules which having the properties of low frequency and strong correlation. These implicit rules tell us data items which rarely occur together, but they have very strong correlation, including valuable information.

Compared to positive association rules, negative association rules can expand the state of the affair item sets; they can not only mine the relationship between explicit attributes, but also be able to mine the relationship between explicit and implicit attributes  B.  The Calculation of Correlation of Positive and Negative Association Rules Negative association rules can find the problems which  the positive association rules can't, but the contradictory association rules might be induced in the process of mining.

The reason is the existence of the negative correlation contained between the item sets [2], the other possibility is independent between item sets, but the application of statistical correlation can effectively solve this problem. The positive and negative association rules is defined in the literature [3], in which the correlation of item sets A and B was expressed as follows: corrA,B=s(A?B)/s(A)s(B).

Three possible measurements of corrA,B are as the follows:  If corrA,B>1, Then A and B are positive correlation;     If corrA,B=1, Then A and B are independent of each other;  If corrA,B<1, Then A and B are negative correlation; It is easy to show that the correlation of the four  association rules between A and B have such relationship as follows: If corrA,B>1, then corrA,?B<1, corr?A,B<1,corr?A, ?B>1, the reverse is also true. Therefore, when mining the positive and negative association rules, the appearance of contradiction rules will be avoided as long as the correlation of item sets is judged. That is, When corrA,B>1,it is  just need to mine the rules of A ? B and ?A ? ?B; when corrA,B<1, it is  just need mine the rules of ?A?B and A? ?B; when corrA,B=1, no rules need to mine.

After judging the correlation of item sets, all kinds of rules between item sets will be mined according to the formula of the support and confidence of positive and negative association rules.

C. The Calculation of Support and Confidence of Positive and Negative Association Rule Support and confidence are two important measurable  indicators in the positive and negative association rules. The definition is as follows:  Let I={ 1 2, , mi i i }be a set of items, let D be a transaction data set, where each transaction T is a set of items with T?I, A transaction T is said to contain A, a set of items in I, if A?T. An association rule is an implication of the form "A?B" where A?I, B?I and A?B=F. The rule A? B has a support supp in the transaction set D if s% of the transactions in D contains A?B.  The support of the rule is the probability that A and B hold together among all the possible presented cases. It shows that:  supp(A?B)=s.count(A?B)/|D|=|{T|A?B?T,T?D}|/|D| That s.count (A?B) contains the number of A?B, |D| the  panel said that the number of  D.

It is said that the rule A?B holds in the transaction set D  with confidence c if c% of transactions in D that contain A also contain B. The confidence of the rule is the conditional probability that the consequent B is true under the condition of the antecedent A.

conf(A ? B)=supp(A ? B)/supp(A)=s.count(A ? B)/s.count(A)= | {T|A?B?T, T?D} |/| {T|A?T, T?D} ||  Given D, The concourse of item sets satisfy minsupport which are given by users is frequent item sets. The problems of association rules are finding the association rules which satisfy the minconf that are given by users form frequent item sets.

Negative association rules contains item sets does not exist (non-existing-items, for example ?A, ?B), Calculating their support and confidence directly is more difficult.

Theorem 1: if A, B?I, A?B=F, then ? supp(A)=1-supp(?A) ? supp(A??B)= supp(A)- supp(A?B) ? supp(?A?B) = supp(B)- supp(A?B) ? supp(?A??B) 1-supp(A) -supp(B)+ supp(A?B) Corollary 1: if A, B, T, A?B=F, then  ? conf(A ? ?B)=(supp(A)-supp(A? B))/ supp(A)=1- conf(A?B)  ? conf(?A?B) =(supp(B)-supp(A?B))/ (1-supp(A)) ? conf(?A ? ?B)=(1-supp(A)-supp(B)+supp(A ?  B))/(1- supp(A))=1- conf(?A?B) Corollary 1 is used to calculate the confidence of  negative association rules [4].



III. THE APPLICATION OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE ASSOCIATION RULES IN THE SOFTWARE DEFECTS ANALYSIS  A. Unary Data and Multiple Data Unary data analysis is analyzing one defect attributes.

Multiple data analysis is analyzing two or more defects? attributes.

Unary data analysis is only to get one attribute distribution of software defects, but the gotten information is limited, and it is generally expressed with histogram, pie chart and other visualization tools. But the distribution of multiple-defect attribute values is usually better reflect the software process and technical problems than the distribution of a single defect attribute values in the analysis of software defects [5]. Therefore, the distribution of multiple-defect attribute values and the association relationship among the attributes are often revealed by the analysis of multiple data.

B. The Application of Positive and Negative Association Rules in Multiple Data Analysis Characteristics of software defects include the following  eight attributes: activities of defects finding, defects consequence, defects trigger, defects target, defects lifecycle, defects origin, defects type and defects determiner [6]. Here we use data mining method to analyze the defects in "Design and Implementation of Mining Linkage Management System of Coal Mine" which been developed  by ourselves; we have chosen three attributes form the characteristics of software defects ,that is," activities of defects finding (Activity)", " defects origin (Origin)" and "defects type (Type)". Their meaning and value are shown in table I [7].

We obtain part database D of defects as shown in table II.

Let minimum support minsupport = 20%, the smallest confidence minconf = 40%, we mine rules to database D respectively through Apriori algorithm and positive and negative association rules method.

1) Mining rules from database D  through Apriori We can obtain candidate item sets from database D of  defects through Apiori algorithm. Item sets is shown in table III and table IV. The steps are as follows: Firstly, we simply statistic analyze the frequency of each element in item sets and identify item sets whose minimum support is not less than 20%, here we get item sets D1. Secondly, we repeat the first step and obtain the second candidate item sets D2.

As shown in table IV, these rules are mined by the algorithm of positive association rules, such as the third rule indicates that large numbers of activities of defects finding originate from the encoding phase. The twenty-fourth rule indicates that more algorithm defects are introduced in the encoding stage, etc.

TABLE I.  DEFECTS ATTRIBUTE  Attribute name  Meaning Value Symbol  Activity The activities in which defects have been detected  Requirement Inspection Design Review Testing User Operation  A B C D  Origin  The causes of defects, which can be traced back to the earliest of the problem of development activities  Requirement-Analysis Design Code Maintenance  E F G H  Type The type of defects of software  Function Interface Assign/Init Arithmetic Data Structure Timing UI  I J K L M N O  TABLE II.  THE DATABASE D OF DEFECTS  Defects Service Serial Number Item sets    CGL CGJL CG CGIJ IJL CFG FIL FJ FGJ CFGJL  TABLE III.  THE CANDIDATE SETS D1  Serial number Item sets Support  C F G I J L  0.6 0.5 0.7 0.3 0.6 0.5  2) Further extracting rules from item sets L2 through positive and negative association rules  On the basis of the item sets D2 in table IV, we use the formula of the correlation of positive and negative association rules to calculate as follows:  ? For the item sets GL, corrG,L=s(G?L)/s(G)s(L)=0.3/0.6*0.3=0.86<1.

This indicates GL is a negative correlation, so mining rules only have G??L and ?G?L, Then the confidence of positive and negative association rules can be calculated as: conf(G??L)=1>minconf, conf(?G?L)= 0.67>minconf, Therefore G??L and ?G?L are all effective negative association rules.

? For the item sets CG, corrC,G=s(C?G)/s(C)s(G)=0.2/0.6*0.7=1.43>1.

This indicates CG is a positive correlation, so mining rules only have C?G and ?C??G. Then the confidence of positive and negative association rules can be calculated as: conf(C?G)=1>minconf,  conf(?C??G)=0.75> minconf, Therefore, C?G. is an effective positive association rules and ?C??G is an effective negative association rules.

? For the item sets JI, corrJ,I=s(J?I)/s(J)s(I)=0.6/0.6*0.7=1.11>1.This indicates JI is a positive correlation, so mining rules only have J?I and ?J??I ,  Then the confidence of positive and negative association rules can be calculated:conf(J?I)=0.33<minconf,conf(?J??I)= 0.75>minconf. Therefore, J?I is invalid association rules and ?J??I is an effective negative association rules.

? For the item sets JL, corrJ,L=s(J?L)/s(J)s(L) =1.Therefore, JL notes independent of each other, no rules.

Other item sets can be discussed in the same way.

TABLE IV.  THE CANDIDATE SETS D2  Serial number Item sets Support Confidence   CF CG CJ CL FC FG FJ FL GC GF GJ GL IJ IL JC JF JG JI JL LC LF LJ LI LG  0.2 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.3  0.33 1.00 0.50 0.50 0.40 0.60 0.60 0.40 0.88 0.43 0.58 0.43 0.67 0.67 0.50 0.50 0.67 0.33 0.60 0.60 0.40 0.60 0.40 0.60  3) The experimental results ? From the above analysis we can see that the defects  rules sets which been mined through Apiori association rules have fraudulence to some extent, such as for item sets JL, support (H3A2)=30%>minsupport=20%,confidence(H3A2)=6 0%>minconf=40%. Here the minsupport and minconf are all meeting. However, if we calculate through positive and negative association rules, we will find the JL item sets are independent of each other, do not have rule, that is, the type of interface defects and the type of algorithm defects are independent of each other.

? Table V shows the number sets of defects rules that calculated through the Apiori and positive and negative association rules. We can see that the number of positive association rules calculated through positive and negative association rules    algorithm is less than Apiori algorithm, it shows that a number of conflicting rules are removed, but also mined a lot of negative association rules, which indicates the effectiveness of positive and negative association rules.

TABLE V.  COMPARISON THE NUMBER OF SOFTWARE DEFECTS RULES  Algorithm Positive  association rules  Negative association  rules  Independent attributes Total  Apiori 24 - - 24 Positive  and negative  association rules  11 39 6 56

IV. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we have discussed positive and negative  association rules method based on positive association rules, and it has been applied innovatively in analyzing the relationship between the attributes of software defects.

Compared with positive association rules, positive and negative association rules can expand the affairs item sets.

This method can enhance the credibility of the software because it can mine not only the relationship of frequent defects? attributes sets, but also mine the rules and data which contain valuable information of non-frequent defects?  attributes sets. Through the analysis of test results in "Design and Implementation of Mining Linkage Management System of Coal Mine ", we have extracted the exterior relationship among the attributes of software defects, and fully mined the rules of inter-attributes. Compared with the general association rules, this method has the advantage of excluding some conflicting rules of defects and improving the accuracy.

