Interesting knowledge exploring for product  component selection

Abstract?During the product configuration design stage, it is important to find useful knowledge to reduce the dedicated efforts of engineers. To fulfill this task, the quality and interestingness of knowledge plays the decisive part. This paper utilizes Apriori algorithm to mine rules from historical data base.

In addition the traditional criterions - support and confidence, the criterion - interestingness is also applied to filter rules that might misguide design engineers. The validity of the proposed model is illustrated by a case of electrical bicycles.

Keywords- Apriori algorithm; customer needs; product component; product configuration design

I. INTRODUCTION Product configuration design is a form of design that maps  a set of functional requirements into an assembly of selected pre-defined components while satisfying a set of constraints [1]. To meat the increasing and time-varying marking niches, companies have to accomplish this stage within less time and expense. Discover product configuration knowledge from existing design cases is an efficient way to handle this situation [2]. However, configuration knowledge that embodied in historical database is implicit and difficult to interpret. Then, it becomes imperative for engineers to find useful information to meet various functional requirements.

Past researches on product configuration design explore multiple solutions to learn knowledge from historical design cases. Romanowski and Nagi proposed a novel, systematic, data mining-based methodology to generate generic bills of materials from historical databases [3]. Based on a set of product data comprising product requirements specification and configuration information, Huang et al. adopted an association rule mining algorithm to discover useful patterns between requirement specification and product components, including the correlation among product components [4].

Similarly, Shao et al. combines data mining and rough set to tackle the relationship between customer needs, product specifications and configuration alternatives [5].

It can be seen that mining association rules from the existing design cases is an effective method to reduce the dedicated efforts of engineers. To guarantee the quality of the association rules, most researches use support and confidence criterion to select valuable rules. However, rules with high support and confidence still could be useless or even misleading [6]. Against this deficiency, our paper introduced a new criterion - interestingness to maintain the correctness and interestingness of configuration knowledge. This criterion can be used to filter uninteresting rules out of the rule base. The remainder can then help engineers educe suitable product components, i.e. design alternatives, for different functional requirements.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, the framework of the work is discussed. In section 3, the association rule extraction with three criterions is illustrated. In section 4, a case study of association rule extraction in a electrical bicycle company is presented. Finally in section 5, the main contribution of this paper is summarized and the future work is discussed.



II. PROBLEM FORMULATION Product configuration refers to the process through which  the customer?s needs are translated into the product information needed for tendering and manufacturing (typically product cost, bill of materials (BOM), production cycle, etc.) [7]. And product configuration design is a process that resources and relative quantities must be carefully selected or developed through an iterative process for each feasible configuration [8]. To improve the working efficiency and reduce the developing expense of product configuration design, design engineers should make full use of the knowledge of existing products or historical product [4]. Data mining is considered as an effective method to extract knowledge from the past design data. This paper utilize Apriori algorithm to mine association rules for supporting  This research is supported by the Shanghai key scientific and technological project (Grant No. 08DZ1120500)     configuration design. The framework of the method can be seen in Fig. 1.

Figure 1. Problem formulation  In our method, association rule mining based product configuration design can be divided into four steps.

(1) At the beginning stage of product design, design engineers develop new components for different functional requirements based on their experience and design principles.

(2) The successful design cases are stored in the historical database as references. Each case is composed of functional requirements (FRs) and corresponding configuration alternatives (DPs).

(3) Configuration rules are extracted from existing design database using Apriori algorithm. In accordance with the three criterions: confidence, support and interestingness, good association rules are selected and stored in knowledge base.

(4) When a new functional requirement emerges, designers can quickly derive suitable alternatives with the help of configuration rules.

This paper focus on the third step of the whole process, i.e., association rule extraction from existing configuration cases with Apriori algorithm, which will be discussed in detail at the next section. Here, each configuration case contains several functional requirements and configuration alternatives.

The functional requirements of a case can be described as a vector: pFV = 1 2( , ,..., )Ifr fr fr ,  },...,2,1{ Pp? where P  is the total number of function requirement vector and I  is the number of functional features or attributes. Each functional requirement attribute,  [1,2,..., ]ifr i I? ? , may take on one out of a finite set of  options, 1 2{ , ,..., }iJi i i ifr fr fr fr? , where iJ  denotes the option number of the thi  feature. Thus the requirement information of a particular case, pFV , can be depicted by a vector of certain options of these features. For example,  2 1 3 1 2( , ,..., )p Ifr fr fr=FV , where  1fr  refers to the second  option of feature 1fr  that is chosen by the thp  case, 2fr  the  first option of feature 2fr , and Ifr  the third option of feature  Ifr .

Similarly, the configuration alternatives of a case can be described as a vector qDV = 1 2( , ,..., )IIdp dp dp ,  {1, 2,..., }q Q? where Q  is the total number of configuration alternative vector and II  is the number of alternatives. Each configuration alternative,  [1, 2,..., ]idp i II? ? , may take on one out of a finite set of  options, 1 2{ , ,..., }iLi i i idp dp dp dp? , where iL  denotes the option number of the thi  alternative. Thus the requirement information of a particular case, pDV , can be depicted by a vector of certain options of these alternatives.

Therefore, based on the design cases and product documentation, each configuration records T is depicted as follows: {( , ) 1, 2,..., }h h h H=FV DV , where H  is the number of historical configuration records. These coupled vectors that reflect the mapping relationship among functional requirements and configuration alternatives are used for association rule mining. It does help design engineers fulfill the configuration design task with less time and expense.



III. RULE EXTRACTION WITH APRIORI ALGORITHM Apriori algorithm is an association rule mining  technology used to discover useful patterns in historical database [9]. It is widely used in many fields such as market analysis, financial management, manufacturing, geographic information analysis, etc.

Traditional Apriori algorithm uses support and confidence to select rules. However, it is inadequate as those rules with high support and confidence still could be useless or even misleading [6]. To ensure the quality and interestingness of the extracted rules, this article uses three criterions while mining association rules. As illustrated in Fig. 2, association rules are obtained against support, confidence and interestingness.

Figure 2. Association rule mining  Firstly, use Apriori algorithm to generate association rules with high support and confidence. Assume that T = {( , ) 1, 2,..., }h h h H=FV DV  is a database of configuration cases. Then, an association rule can be expressed as IF A THEN C, where A and C are specific attribute values of functional requirements and configuration alternatives separately. The support and confidence value of a association rule can be calculated as following equations:    ( & )sup(A C)= T A C T  ?                (1)  ( & )con( ) ( )  T A CA C T A  ? =               (2)  where T(A) is the number of cases in database T satisfying all the conditions in the antecedent A, T(A&C) is the number of samples in database T satisfying all the conditions in both antecedent A and consequent C, T  is the number of transactions. The support and confidence values fall between zero and one.

To guarantee the quality of rules, minimal support and confidence threshold is set. The rules with high support and confidence are preserved. That is, only the rule that covers most of the configuration cases in database and has few negative cases will be selected to the association rule base.

Secondly, interestingness is utilized to filter rules. To show the effect of interestingness, let us assume that a rule ?IF A THEN C ( A C? )? whose support is 0.5 and confidence is 0.6, i.e., ( & )sup(A C)= 0.5T A C  T ? = ,  ( & )con( ) 0.6 ( )  T A CA C T A  ? = = . Although the rule shows high  support and confidence, it is not a good rule if the support of  the consequent part C is 0.65, i.e., ( )sup( ) 0.65T CC T  = = .

Denote the negative form of the above rule as IF A  THEN C.

Its confidence is:  ( & ) ( ) ( & )con( ) 0.9 con( ) ( )( )  T A C T C T A CA C A C T T AT A  ?? = = = > ? ?  That is to say, A and C are in fact negative associated. This negative dependence leads to not considering A C?  as a good rule, otherwise engineers might make wrong decisions.

Hence, the criterion of interestingness is applied to eliminate such rules. This paper uses a data-driven and domain-independent method to calculate the interestingness of a rule [6]:  sup( )I( ) 1 sup( ) sup( )  A CA C A C  ?? = ? ?  .     (3)  This measure gives an indication of the dependence of A and C. If A and C are dependent, the function I( )A C?  is bigger than 0. If A and C are independent, the function I( )A C?  tends to be 0. If the relationship between A and C are weaker than independent, the function I( )A C?  is smaller than 0. In our research, rules with I( ) 0A C? >  are considered as interesting rules, whereas rules with I( ) 0A C? ?  are considered to be uninteresting and eliminated from the rule base.



IV. CASE STUDY In this section, the actual data obtained from a company  is used to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.

This company is one of the producers of electrical bicycles.

Electrically powered bicycle (EPB) is a bicycle that generally operates by electric motor propulsion with the ability to use human power assistance if needed. Without generating pollution, it is easy to ride even against strong winds or riding up hills. Nowadays in china, more and more people prefer riding an electrical bicycle for recreation or commuting. Faced with the challenge that accomplishes configuration design within short lead time and low cost, design engineers need to effectively interact with useful knowledge of existing design database. Hence, this research tries to extract association rules between functional requirements and configuration alternatives. These rules can help design engineers understand the internal logic of configuration design and develop proper products.

The existing configuration cases of the EBP company are used as the database. For illustrative simplicity, each case contains two functional requirements and nine configuration alternatives. The two functional requirements of EBP and its options can be seen in Table I. Table II shows the nine configuration alternatives of EBP. Twelve configuration cases are used for rule extraction. As illustrated in Table III, the first column is the configuration case ID and the following columns represent its functional requirements and configuration alternatives. For more details about these data, readers might refer to the literature of Shao et al [5].

Table I Functional requirements of EBP Functional requirements Options  Maximum Speed ( 1fr ) 16 (  1fr ) 18 (  1fr ) 20 (  1fr ) Driving range ( 2fr ) 40 (  2fr ) 50 (  2fr ) 60 (  2fr )  Table II Configuration alternatives of EBP Configuration  alternatives Options  Battery( 1dp ) 12amp.H lead-acid (  1dp ), 15amps.H nickel-hydrogen  ( 1dp )  Charger ( 2dp ) Slow-charging ( 2dp ), Quick-charging (  2dp )  Controller ( 3dp ) Basic ( 3dp ), Intelligent (  3dp )  Ele-Engine ( 4dp ) Without brush and teeth(  4dp ), Having brush without  teeth ( 4dp ), Having teeth without Brush (  4dp )  Framework ( 5dp ) Motor-like with absorber (  5dp ), Common without  absorber( 5dp )  Seat ( 6dp ) Common ( 6dp ), Luxury (  6dp )  Lamps & Lanterns  ( 7dp ) Common ( 7dp ), Luxury (  7dp )    Instruments ( 8dp ) Common ( 8dp ), Luxury (  8dp )  Type & spoke  ( 9dp ) Steel wire spoke ( 9dp ), Aluminum spoke (  9dp )  Table III The existing configuration cases  ID  Functional requirements  Configuration Alternatives  1fr 2fr 1dp 2dp 3dp 4dp 5dp 6dp 7dp 8dp 9dp 01 11fr  2fr  1dp  2dp  3dp  4dp  5dp  6dp  7dp - -  02 11fr  2fr 1dp  2dp  3dp  4dp - -  7dp - -  03 11fr  2fr 1dp  2dp -  4dp  5dp -  7dp -  9dp  12 31fr  2fr 1dp  2dp  3dp  4dp - -  7dp  8dp -  Then, Apriori algorithm is used to mine association rules from the twelve configuration cases. The algorithm is implemented in Matlab 7.0 on the Pentium 4 3.06 GHz PC with the following parameters: Support = 0.25, Confidence = 0.5. As a result, 39 association rules are extracted as listed in Table IV. Each row of the table can be translated into an association rule. Take rule No.3 as an example, it can be expressed as: IF (Maximum Speed=16) THEN (Controller=intelligent) with Support = 0.25 and Confidence = 0.75.

Table IV Association rules against support and confidence No. Antecedent Consequent Support Confidence  1 31fr 2dp 0.25 1  1fr  2dp 0.25 0.6  1fr  3dp 0.25 0.75  39 12fr 2dp 0.25 0.6  Although the rules in Table IV have high support and confidence values, they still could be useless for design engineers. For example, the rule No.2: IF (Maximum Speed=18) THEN (Charger=quick-charging) has support value 0.25 and confidence value 0.6. And the support of its antecedent part is 0.42 and the support of its consequent part is 0.67. Then, the negative form of rule No.2 is IF (Maximum Spee 18) THEN (Charger=quick-charging). The negative rule?s confidence is 0.71. It is bigger than the origin rule?s confidence 0.6, which means that the antecedent part and the consequent part of rule No.2 are in fact negatively associated.

Therefore, interestingness criterion is utilized to filter such rules. For instance, the interestingness value of rule No.2 is  0.25I 1 -0.11 0 0.42*0.67  = ? = < . So the rule No.2 should be  eliminated from the rule base. After the calculation of each rule?s interestingness value, 36 rules are remained as listed in Table V. These rules can help design engineers understand the mapping relationship between EBP functional requirements and EBP configuration alternatives.

Table V Remaining association rules No. Antecedent Consequent Support Confidence Interestingness  1 31fr 2dp 0.25 1 >0  1fr  3dp 0.25 0.75 >0  >0  36 22fr 1dp 0.33 1 >0

V. CONCLUSION This work proposes a method to mine association rules  from historical case base for improving the working efficiency of configuration design. To ensure the quality and interestingness of knowledge, three criterions are used to select association rules: support, confidence and interestingness. Apriori algorithm is utilized for rule mining against those criterions. To demonstrate the effect of the proposed method, a case study of electrical bicycles is investigated. The results show that our method can generate rules with good performance.

Future work can be: develop an integrated methodology of how to use the extracted knowledge, apply the method in a more sophisticated product, etc.

