Optimal Projection Space Method for SAR Target Recognition

Abstract  Automatic target recognition technique, based on the projections in the samples range space, can be availably used in SAR target recognition. It requires that the relativity between the range spaces of different targets should be minimal. However, the relativity between the corresponding range spaces is very big if the different targets have similar appearance and structure, which will considerably reduce the recognition performance. So, it is essential to construct new projection spaces from the range spaces of similar targets, so as to enlarge projection difference. In this paper, an efficient method for constructing the optimal projection space is proposed. The proposed method can effectively enlarge the difference between similar targets by the projections in the optimal projection space. Experimental results show that the optimal projection space can greatly increase the separability between different similar targets, and is superior to other classical methods in both recognition performance and efficiency.

Keywords: Automatic Target Recognition; Synthetic Aperture Radar; Projection Space  1. Introduction  For its all-weather, all-time working capability and high resolution, synthetic aperture radar (SAR) has been widely used in military reconnaissance, as well as civilian remote sensing of the Earth and many other areas of exploration.

SAR-based automatic target recognition (ATR) is an important technology to improve the utilization of SAR image.

Its particular application in battlefield sensing has become a hot research topic[1][2].

SAR-based ATR technology is mainly divided into template matching methods and model reconstruction methods[3][4][5]. In template matching methods, standard templates are formed based on the training samples, and used to classify the test ones. In order to obtain higher recognition performance, large number of templates is required, and pre- and-post-processing is complicated[6]. In model reconstruct- ion methods, SAR image features are extracted in order to remove the redundant information and reduce the dimension- ality[7]. In such methods, range space is usually used for feature extraction[7][8]. The distinction between the feature templates will be high if there is big difference between different targets, which will be conducive to the target  recognition. However, if the relationship of the range subspaces is large, the performance of recognition will be poor.

In this paper, an effective method of projection space construction  is  proposed  for  the  classification  of  different targets with similar range spaces. With the reasonable constructed projection space, the distinction between different targets is increased, which is helpful to the classification and recognition. The experimental results show that this method has good performance on the recognition with small number of training samples and multi-type of similar targets.

2. Problem Formulation  Considering K types of SAR targets, the number of training samples of k -th target is kN ( 1,2,..., )k K= . Each SAR image of the k -th target is expanded to column vector  ( 1,2,..., )ik ki N=s , and matrix 1 2[ , , , ]kNk k k k=S s s s?  is formed.

Usually, the pixel number M  of SAR images is much larger than the number kN  of SAR training images. So, the rank of kS  meets ( )k krank N M?S ? .

The eigenvalue decomposition is done to the covariance matrix of kS , and the k -th target? s range space ? kS  is constructed with non-zero eigenvalue eigenvector[3][9]. If there is little or no relativity between different targets? range space, the samples projection in the range space can be directly used as their features for the classification and recognition.

However, there is often strong similarity in the appearance and structure of the targets. Their range spaces are not orthogonal, even have strong relativity. So, the difference of different target?s projection in range space is weaken, which will make it difficult for target recognition. Therefore, it is necessary to transform the range spaces of similar targets to new projection spaces, so as to enlarge projection difference.

The optimal projection space ? optkP  of the k -th target should meet:  (1) Being most similar with k -th range space; (2) Being strictly orthogonal with other range space.

This paper is to construct the optimal projection space  ? opt kP  from strong correlative range spaces of different targets.

With projection in ? optkP , the projection-value of k -th target will be maximized, while other targets be minimized.

_____________________________    3. Projection Space Construction  Define ? kG  as the range space of all the targets except for the k -th one, thus  1 2 1 1 ? ? ? ? ? ?[ , , , , , , ]k k k K? +=G S S S S S? ?  (1)  According to the conditions to be met for the optimal projection spaces, the solution of ? optkP  can be expressed as follow:  ? ? ?? ?min . .

k  H H k k k kF  s t? = P  S P I G P O  (2)  where, F  ? stands for the Frobenius norm of a matrix, and the column of the matrix is pN p kN N? ; I is a matrix with dimension k pN N?  with the main diagonal elements being ones and others zeros.

Considering the whole range space S?  of all the targets, 1 2  ? ? ? ?[ , , , ]K=S S S S?  (3) The rank of space S?  still meets ( )rank N M?S ? , where,  1 KN N N= + +?  the column number of matrix S? . Obviously, S?  is a subspace of Euclid space ? MR .

According to equation (1), ? kG is a subspace of S? .

Let ? ??k k?=P G S? , subspace ?kP  is orthogonal with ? kG , and  ? ?? k k =P G S?  (4)  According to matrix theory, ?kP  is composed by the eigenvectors corresponding to non-zero eigenvalues of the matrix:  1 1? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?( ) ( )H H H Hk k k k ? ??S S S S G G G G  (5)  However, because S?  is a subspace of Euclid space ? MR , the computing complexity of direct eigen-decomposition method is about 4( )O M , which will fairly lower the processing efficiency. So, in this paper, a fast algorithm based on orthogonal complement space is proposed.

According to equation (4), S?  and ? ?[ , ]k kG P  stand for a same space, so there must be a unitary matrix Ns ?Q R meeting  ? ? ?[ , ]k k=SQ G P  (6) Let 1 2[ , ]s =Q Q Q , in which 1Q  and 2Q  are orthogonal  complement space to each other, meeting  ? ? k =G SQ  (7)  ??  k =P SQ  (8) According to equation (7),   ? ? ? ?( )H H k ?=Q S S S G  (9)  For 1Q  and 2Q  are orthogonal complement space to each other, thus,  2 2 1 1 H H= ?Q Q I Q Q  (10)  Therefore, 2Q  is composed of the eigenvectors corresponding to non-zero eigenvalues of 1 1H?I Q Q . So, incorporating 2Q  into equation (8), we can get ?kP .

Assume pQ  is a unitary matrix and 1? ?k k p=P P Q , thus 1 1? ? ? ? ? ?( )( )H H Hk k k p k p k k= =P P P Q P Q P P  (11)  So, 1?kP  and ?kP  stands for a same space[9]. Considering  1? ?? ?( )H Hk k k k p= =G P G P Q O  (12) 1? kP  also meets constraints of equation (2). So, the matrix form  of ? kG ?s orthogonal subspace is not unique. It is expressed in geometry format shown in Fig (1). We need to get the optimal.

? opt kP  ? kP  ? kS  ? kG  optQ  Fig 1 Diagram of Optimal Projection Space Construction  Obviously, the optimal projection space ? optkP  meets ? ?opt k k opt=P P Q  (13)  That is to say, the problem solving optimal projection space ? optkP  in equation (2) is transformed to the problem solving optimal rotation space optQ  in equation (14)  ? ?arg min p  H opt k k p F = ?  Q Q S P Q I  (14)  So, 1? ? ?? ? ?[( ) ( )] ( )H H H H Hopt k k k k k k ?=Q S P S P S P I  (15)  Therefore, the optimal projection space ? optkP  for k -th target can be solved by incorporating optQ  into equation (13).

4. Experimental Results  In this paper, the SAR image database of U.S. MSTAR plan is employed. Three main types of the targets, BMP, BTR, T72 with full-orientation SAR image data, are selected for the research. The data collected on the perspective 17?  and 15?  are respectively used as training samples and test ones. All the images are in 128 128?  pixel size.

First, with MSTAR data, we study on the separability of projection data, which is generated by the proposed method.

In the range of 60?  window, the range space ? BMPS , ? BTRS , 72? TS are calculated, and the optimal projection space ? optBMPP , ? optBTRP ,  ? opt TP  are constructed. The training and testing samples of  BMP and BTR are separately projected to ? BMPS . The results are shown in Fig 2. Where, horizontal axis stands for the eigenvectors of projection space, sorted by corresponding eigenvalues; vertical axis stands for samples? projection length on each eigenvector of projection space.

Comparing each sub-figure in Fig 2, we can find that the projection of BMP and BTR are difficult to distinguish.

Correspondingly, the same data are projected to ? optBMPP , shown    in Fig 3. We can find that there is prodigious difference between the projection of BMP and BTR. Therefore, the  projection space constructed in this paper can greatly enlarge the distinction of different targets.

10 20 30 40  0.5   Pr oj  ec tio  n  10 20 30 40  0.5   Pr oj  ec tio  n  (a) BMP Training Samples                                                                 (b) BMP Test Samples  10 20 30 40  0.5   Pr oj  ec tio  n  10 20 30 40  0.5   Pr oj  ec tio  n (c) BTR Training Samples                                                                 (d) BTR Test Samples  Fig 2 Projection of BMP and BTR Samples in BMP?s Range Space ? BMPS  10 20 30 40  0.5   Pr oj  ec tio  n  10 20 30 40  0.5   Pr oj  ec tio  n  (a) BMP Training Samples                                                               (b) BMP Testing Samples  10 20 30 40  0.5   Pr oj  ec tio  n  10 20 30 40  0.5   Pr oj  ec tio  n  (c) BTR Training Samples                                                               (d) BTR Testing Samples Fig 3 Projection of BMP and BTR Samples in BMP?s Optimal Projection Space ? optBMPP  Then, we study the influence of different-size orientation window on the recognition performance. For each orientation division with width 30? , 60? , 90? , 180?  and 360? , the optimal projection space is constructed with training samples in current window. Projection matrix ? LkP ( 1,..., )k K=  is composed with the first 5L  vector of the optimal projection space ?kP . Thus, the simplest classifier is defined: sample lx is classified to the type of the projection matrix in which it has the largest projection norm. The projection norm of sample lx  in matrix ? LkP  is defined as:  , ? , 1,2,...,H Ll k l kp x k K= =P  (16)  Based on the above method, the recognition rate of the three main types is shown in Fig 4. We can find that, this method has good recognition performance for all the three targets, especially for BTR and T72 being better than 95%.

Further, the recognition performance of the proposed method is compared with other outstanding algorithms. With the same experimental conditions, the recognition performance of four methods in different orientation window is plotted in Fig 5. We can find that, this method is superior to    other recognition methods in the overall performance.

Although it has a slight decrease for the window width 360? , it?s still equal to KPCA+SVM method.

30 60 90 180 360      ?(?)  R ec  og ni  tio n  R at  e( %  )  BMP BTR T72 Average  Fig 4 Recognition Performance in Different Window Width  30 60 90 180 360      ?(?)  R ec  og ni  tio n  R at  e( %  )  SVM PCA+SVM KPCA+SVM Proposed  Fig 5 Performance Comparison of Different Recognition Methods  Finally, this method is compared with other algorithms on the training and recognition efficiency, which is defined as the processed sample number per second. The efficiency comparison between the above four methods is shown in Fig 6. We can find that, the proposed method is 20% more than the best SVM method in training efficiency, and 50% in recognition efficiency. Therefore, the proposed method is far superior to other recognition methods in processing efficiency.

Fig 6 Efficiency Comparison of Different Recognition Methods  5. Conclusions  In this paper, a SAR-based ATR method of projection space construction is proposed. Keeping the strict orthogonal with other types of space, the constructed optimal projection space can get the largest approaching with target space. The space similarity between different targets is greatly eliminated.

Therefore, this method is more applicable to recognize the targets with similar pattern and structure. The experimental results show that this method is superior to other recognition methods in both recognition performance and processing efficiency.

6 Acknowledgements  This work is supported in part by National Natural Science Foundations of China under grant 60736009 and 60872110.

