The Study on the Gray Neural Network Model   and Its Application in the Prediction

Abstract?The study on the bearing capacity and settlement is important to a project. It is useful and concrete to develop a model with some intelligent methods in artificial intelligence area for the prediction of some big structure projects. The validity of the models has been proved by some civil engineering practices.

Therefore, the research of bearing capacity and settlement characteristics of rigid pile composite foundation has been the focus of the basic engineering research area in foundations. This paper established a model based on the Gray RBF neutral network which is a combination of gray model and RBF neutral network model and realized the model with Matlab7.0.

Keywords : Gray neutral network,  pile capacity ,  Prediction model

I. INTRODUCTION Typically, many measures have also been proposed and  studied to quantify various aspects of rules, such as confidence, uncertainty, applicability, quality, accuracy, usefulness and interestingness. As the association rules data mining model has extensive applications, which mainly process the concept formation and concept relation identification. The association rules mining has played an important role in data mining technologies. However, the association rules mining can?t satisfy the massive or little data mining problems today. Gray neutral network is a natural mixture of gray model and neural network model, which contains the gray system that using small sample to model and neural network?s advantages in self-adaption to nonlinear and inaccurate regulations. [1] The GA method is adopted to find the best fit of weights for each software effort driver in the similarity measures. Experimental results show that the software effort estimation using an integration of the grey relational analysis with GA method presents more precise estimates over the results using the case based reasoning, classification and regression trees and artificial neural networks methods. The grey system theory is a useful method that is applicable to unascertained problems with too little data or information. Therefore, this paper is based on consulting massive related literature material, a study of artificial intelligent simulation identification research is carried on the Bearing Capacity of Pile Foundation.



II. GRAY RBF NEUTRAL NETWORK MODEL Gray RBF neutral network is a combination of gray  model and RBF neutral network model. Many experiment results had proved that the performance of this combination predicting model is better than the single ones. It has the advantage of gray system that using small samples to modeling and that of neural network in self-adaption to nonlinear and inaccurate regulations.

A.  Gray theory model As we know, AGO GM (1,1) model is usually applied to  one dimension grey problem. The model is a time series forecasting models, encompassing a group of differential equations adapted for parameter variance, rather than differential equation.  In this paper, we just have applied the AGO theory into Gary RBF neutral network[2-3]. Denote system feature data sequence (n measured values) as original sequence:  ))(),...,2(),1(( )0()0()0()0( nxxxX =     (1) Its 1-AGO (accumulated generating operation) sequence as  follow:  { } )2()(),...,2(),1( )1()1()1()1( nxxxX Where nkixx  k  i  k ,...,2,1))(( )0(  ))(1( == ? =    B. RBF neutral network RBF neutral network is a three-layer forwards network. The  input layer transmits the input signals to the hidden layer, which considers RBF functions as the transfer functions, and the output layer equals the linear weighted sum of these functions. Therefore, the i  input of RBF neutral network can be expressed as:   bcXGwy i  n  i ii  c  +?=? =  )(* 1 ,   Ni ,....,2,1=  (3)  2009 Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Software Engineering  DOI 10.1109/KESE.2009.15     In equation (3),   nT  n RxxxX ?= ),,,( 21 ?  is input vector;  iy  is the output of the output unit i;  iw  is output weight;   ?  is Eculidean norm.

)(?G  is RBF function;   )1( c  n j njRC ???  is the center of RBF;  cn  equals the number of centers;  b  is output deviation.

Using Gaussian kernel function as the RBF function in  this paper. Its formula is shown as follow: ( )  ? ? ?  ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ?= 2   exp)( j  j j  cx x  ? ?  q,...,2,1j = (4)  In the equation,  j ?  is the output of hidden layer j , ( )TnxxxX ,, 21=  is the input vector,  jc  and  j?  respectively represent the central value and the width of Gaussian kernel j , q  equals the number of hidden nodes.

From equation (3) and (4), it can be known that to establish a RBF neutral network the following parameters are needed: 1) the number of hidden nodes q ; 2) the number of centers of  the kernel function cn ; 3)the central value of kernel function jc ,scale factor j?  and output weight iw [4]. After definite the  parameters of a network, the output weight can be derived by the algorithm of Least Squares.

C. Gray RBF neutral network model The process of Gray RBF neutral network modeling[5-6] is  discussed in the follow:  1) Using GM (1,1) model to predict the roughly original small samples according to equation (2) to (7).

Nothing that all data should be normalized before the generation of once accumulates sequence  (1-AGO): )}(),...,2(),1({ )1()1()1()1( nXXXX =  2) Using the AGO sequence as input data to training RBF neutral network. Then reduce the training results to get the final predictive values.



III. BEARING CAPACITY OF PILE FOUNDATION  A. The pile capacity With the rapid development of the large bridge ? Super  High-Rise Building and so on, Pile Foundation is applied more and more extensively. In civil engineering, it is general considered that there are 2 main factors of  the Pile Capacity, one is the Pile Parameter, the other one is the Geological Environment.

The Pile Capacity is the complicated composition, including the sectional area, the pile length?  the elastic modulus of material and the material density. According to the division of the Geological Environment into different soil layers, a single of pile may run though more than ten kind of soil layers.     Every soil layer contains the void ratio, the liquid limit, the plastic limit, the compression modulus, the blow count of standard penetration and other kinds of parameters.

However, the influence of Bearing Capacity of Pile Foundation is much more factors, and among these factors also have complex relationship. So it is difficulty to summarize the accurate calculation formation of the Pile capacity. Nowadays in engineering design , it is used the semi- empirical theories which based on many experimental foundation. But out of safety considerations, it is always given the conservative design division, causing a certain waste. So there is an important problem ?how to reasonably determine the Bearing Capacity of Pile Foundation during the pile engineering designing??  B. Structure strength There are so many factors which influence the structure  strength of the bridge, that can come down to 3 aspects, such as the Environmental Factors, the load factors, and the material factors. According the above factors, it is certain to built the strength attenuation model [7-8]as  ]),([)( icisp tfRKKtR ?=  pK  is the uncertain stochastic variable.

sK  is the teamwork coefficient of steel and concrete.

R ?? ?  is the stochastic process which calculated the  standard value of the lumped parameter and the material parameter.

The change of the structure strength can be divided to 2 stages in the general environment condition. At one stage  which came from the built structure?s time to ct , the carbonation of concrete never reach the surface of steel so that the structure strength can not decrease. At the other stage  which came from ct  to T , the steel rusted so the structure strength continuously decreases. According the above research of the time-varied factors, it is easy to get the time-variant strength expression:     )2(  )](1[)( )(    ? ? ?  ?? ??  ??= Ttt tt  ttwRRt R  tR c  c  c?   0R  is the structure initial strength w  is the structure strength damping decrement.



IV.  APPLICATION The application of the Gary RBF neutral network is used to  predict and analyze the Bearing Capacity of Pile Foundation during the pile engineering designing.  The experiment predicted the practical data which are from the hangzhouwan bridge , jintang bridge and xiangshan bridge with the model.

TABLE 1     SAMPLE  DATA  Pile Name pile length  sectional area pile-side friction pile tip resistance pile capacity (m)          (m2)         (KN)         (KN)    (KN)  T1 74.5 1.6 13104.7 1895.3 15000 T2 74.5 1.6 12309.9 1940.1 14250 GT1 85.7 1.5 10415 2385 12800 GT2 77.7 1.5 9650 2350 12000 GT3 76.7 1.5 9779 2821 12600 GT4 64.7 1.5 9980 2370 12350 GT5 64.7 1.5 10765 2735 13500    From Table 1, we can see that the practical data of the Pile Parameter and the Geological Environment, and in this experiment  using the ANN toolbox of Matlab 7.0 to obtain the Gary RBF neutral network prediction model which is based on the RBF function.

TABLE 2  PREDICTION DATA  Pile Name    pile length sectional area pile-side friction pile tip resistance pile capacity G-RBF capacity (m)             (m2)      (KN)       (KN)    (KN)     (KN)  1 78.9 1.5 9779 2821 12600 12370 2 89.6 1.6 14892.6 974.9 18900 17952 3 64.7 1.5 10765 2735 13500 13275    So it is obviously to see that the prediction result has better accuracy than traditional ones. Furthermore, it is easy and feasible to establish the model in the engineering  project. The accuracy prediction result will be helping for the capacity prediction and determination of the bridge project or some other structure projects.



V. CONCLUTION The precision of the model bases on the pile capacity which  has average error is 6.215%   , and it is less than the  other result of the neural network model. This paper proposed the Gray neural network prediction model for the pile capacity application. The prediction data of this intelligent method has showed the better accuracy , so it is easy to get the precision of the Bearing Capacity of Pile Foundation in the project.

