Simulation and analysis of Self-Similar Network traffic using WBFGN

Abstract-- In this paper we implemented the method wavelet based fractional Gaussian noise WBFGN for the generation of Self-Similar Network Traffic, which is an increment process of fractional Brownian motion [1]. A large collection of Self- Similar sequences were generated and a big Bank of data SSTDB was created and uploaded for the reference of communication scientists and other IT experts. We concentrated over two aspects firstly how accurately a self- similar signal can be generated, secondly how quickly the method can simulate the network traffic signal. A comparative analysis was also done between different types of wavelet transforms for the different values of Hurst parameter. The statistical inaccuracy and time required to produce sequences of a given length are experimentally studied, analyzed and compared.

Key words-- FGN; Wavelet; Self-Similar; LRD; Hurst Parameter

I. INTRODUCTION  Recent researches showed that the high speed network traffic are characterized by long range dependence LRD processes which are self-similar in nature [2], [3]. Hence, an important requirement for conducting simulation studies of communication networks is the ability to generate long synthetic stochastic self-similar sequences. In this paper we implemented and analyzed a fast and accurate pseudo- random self-similar traffic generator, called WBFGN (wavelet based fractional Gaussian noise). We generated large database of self-similar network traffic of different length varying from 210 to 222 using different wavelet families, and their speed and accuracy was analyzed and compared. This large database is called SSTDB (Self- Similar Network Traffic Database) which is available on the internet as freeware [4].

The remaining structure of paper is organized as Section II describes the long range dependent processes; Section III contains the description of discrete wavelet transform for synthesizing approximate fractional Gaussian noise.

WBFGN method is presented in section IV. Section V contains the numerical results and their comparisons. The paper is concluded in Section VI.



II. LONG RANGE DEPENDENT  Long-range dependence is also known as long memory or strong dependence. A good introduction to the topic of long-range dependence is provided by [5]. The term Joseph  effect was used by Mandelbrot to describe the phenomenon.

