APPLICATION OF ASSOCIATION RULES MINING IN INVENTORY CLASSIFICATION

Abstract: Effective evaluation to the significance of the items is an important basis to process inventory management In this context we not only consider item?s own attribute such as item?s profit and item?s cost, but also the effect of item association to process inventory classification. Using association rules related theories we build a new evaluation criterion based weighted dollar-usage and propose a new model for inventory classification based weighted association rule. We apply an improved item set-enumeration expanded tree to search every candidate frequent itemset based on matrix structure of dataset, which not only realize the significance sort of  inter-itemset but also improve the search efficiency Then a calculation example is presented to test the feasibility of the model  Keywords: Inventory Classification; Item Weight; Weighted Association Rules; Weighted dollar-usage

I. INTRODUCTION In general, there are more than one species, usually as  many as hundreds of varieties, need to be managed in an inventory system. If each kind of goods is fine managed, there will be not only a very large workload, but also a high management costs. Obviously it is not economic. In fact, the contribution of every goods on the system is different, so managers could sort these goods based on the size of contribution and use different ways to manage.

At present, ABC classification is commonly used by many enterprises for inventory classification. The key point of using ABC method lies in how to determine "important minorities and secondary majorities", which is the basis for the adoption of qualitative and quantitative analysis to sort the inventory management object. In accordance with the classification index, all the objects are divided into A, B, C three types, and then take the corresponding control strategies. The commonly used classification index of ABC method is the product cost [1]. Of course, this classification index is not the sole criterion for the importance of products.

In addition, there are other criteria, such as product?s profit, availability, lead time, out-of-stock cost and rate of end-of-life [2]. There are also some documents think that the inventory classification management can not rely on only one index, while a variety of factors should be considered integrated[3] [4]. However, these methods only consider the product's own characteristics. In fact, the contribution of the product depends not only on the evaluation of the product itself, but also on the association impact between products.

In this article, in order to carry out more effective management, we take into account the product cost and  profit of product?s own characteristics and the associated impact between the items to weight the size of contribution of each product to the inventory classification. Combing the profit, cost and the relationship between items, we propose an inventory classification model based on the weighted association rules. In the process of modeling, we give different weights for each item according to its profit, and then use weighted dollar-usage of itemset to sort the inventory, which provides a viable new method for scientific and objective inventory management.



II. INVENTORY CLASSIFICATION CRITERION BASED ON WEIGHTED ASSOCIATION RULE  The usual method for inventory classification only consider their own dollar-usage or profit of products, while different perspective which decision maker concerned about will have different criteria on the importance of inventory items. obviously one index is not enough to management needs, so in this article we use profit and dollar-usage at the same time for classification. However, in addition to these own characteristics of products, the interrelated relationship between items will also affect the actual sales of product.

The sales of certain products may promote or inhibit the sale of other products, so some out-of-stock products may lead to greater related losses. The purpose of this paper is to identify these potential associations, while considering the product?s own characteristics to support inventory management decision making.

The main objective of association rule mining is to find the association relationship between items in the transaction database. If two or more data items? values happen repeatedly and the repeated probability is high, then there is a link between them and you can set up the association rules between them.

A. Association rule problem description The problem of mining association rules can be  formally described as follows: Let  miiiI ,,, 21  be a set of products called items.

Let  be a database of transactions, which is related to customer?s purchase behavior, where each transation  D t  contains a set of items such that . Every transaction is associated with an identifier, called . An itemset is a set of items and a -itemset is an itemset that contains exactly  items. For a given itemset  and a given transaction  It TID  k k A t , t  contains  if and only if An association rule is an A tA  2009 Second International Workshop on Computer Science and Engineering  DOI 10.1109/WCSE.2009.257   2009 Second International Workshop on Computer Science and Engineering  DOI 10.1109/WCSE.2009.257   2009 Second International Workshop on Computer Science and Engineering  DOI 10.1109/WCSE.2009.884     implication of form ,whereBA IA , IB D  and The rule  holds in the database  with  support degree BA BA  s  and confidence degree , which means that the percentage of transaction records containing  c BA  in  is D s  and the percentage of transaction records containing B  in  which contains  is . That is, D  (A A c  )B() APsups Bport )() PB( ABAconfidencec  Rules satisfy both a minimum s  threshold and a minimum  threshold are called strong rules [5] If the support degree of an itemset is greater than a minimum threshold, the itemset satisfy the mimimum threshold. Then the itemset is called frequent itemset. All the frequent  -itemset is denoted as .

c  k kL Traditional association rules algorithm treats the  various items in the database in an equal and consistent manner. That is, it assumes the importance of every item is uniform. But in practice inventory management it is not the case. the importance of every item to inventory management is different. In order to solve this problem, we give different weights to different item and itemset according to the relative profit of them. Then we use the weighted association rule mining algorithm to mine association items, and define a "weighted dollar-usage" evaluation index to evaluate the importance of inventory items.

B. Definition to the related concept For a given item set mi,  ji  i ,, 2iI 1  m,  w  , we give different weights  for every item to distinguish the significance of each item in inventory classification.

corresponds to the relative profit of each item , and , .

)j(iw  )( jiw  1)(0 jiw ji  j ,2,1 Definition-1 item weight :)( ji  m  i 1  )j  jiw )(  (profit  j  j  i(  )  profit  profit i  )  (  i denotes profit of each item.

Definition-2 Itemset weight: Given an itemset X , and , the itemset weight is  denoted as .

IX  )X(w  X  iw j( Xw )( X  ) i j  X  is the amount of items in itemset . When X =1, is a specific item?s weight. )(XX w  Definition-3 Transaction weight Given a transaction , and , the transaction  weight is denoted as .

kt  ) Dtk  ( ktw  k  ti j  k t  iw tw j  )( )(  kt  is the amount of items in transaction .

Transaction weight is one type itemset weight in nature, which stand for the significance of transaction in database.

The greater the transaction weight is, the greater the contribution of transaction to the final mining results.

kt  Definition-4 Weighted support Given an itemset and , weighted support of  is denoted as : X  ) IX  X (Xwsp  Dt k  tXDt k  k  kk  tw  tw Xwsp  )(  )( )( &  The itemset is then validated as significant if its weighted support is above the pre-defined minimum weighted support, which is also called weighted frequent itemset. Given an itemset ,X IX ,for any itemset Y ,  IY (Xwsp  X  , if , then it must be true that . The proof will not be detailed here which  can be find in literature [6] for interested reader. That is, if is not a weighted frequent itemset, then any superset of it  can not be a weighted frequent itemset. This property is very important for the later work in part 4 using Apriori method to generate candidate itemset to narrow the search space and improve the mining efficiency.

YX )(Y) wsp  Definition-5 weighted dollar-usage Given an itemset and , weighted dollar-usage  of is denoted as .

X )X  IX X (p  Xi j  j  itXwspXp )(cos)()(  )(cos jit is the cost or dollar-usage of item .ji Definition-6 Let  miiiI ,,, 21 be a set of items, and be a database containing  transactions. Then the  matrix structure of  could be written as: D n  D ),,,( 21 nVVVD  And ,Tmkkkk aaaV ),,,( 21  nkmj ti ti  a kj  kj jk ,,2,1,,2,10  1 .

Every row vector stands for an item, and every column vector stands for a transaction.

While our method must re-sort item continuously according to item weighted dollar-usage, matrix structure is adopted to facilitate database scanning without the need to consider the problems brought by the order of the item in transaction. The specific process can be seen in section 3.

Inference-1 According to definition-4 and definition-6, it is obviously that the weighted support of item and itemset can be transformed into the follows:     mj tw  twa iwsp  Dt k  n  k kjk  j  k  ,,2,1, )(  )( )( 1  Dt k  k  n  k  j  r rk  j  k  tw  twa iiiwsp  )(  )]()[( ),,,( 1 121

III. INVENTORY CLASSIFICATION BASED ON WEIGHTED ASSOCIATION RULE  Our algorithms use breadth-first search of the set enumeration tree with bottom-up generate-intial-item seeding the search (e.g.figure1). The itemset representing an entire level of the tree are processed together in one pass over the database. Then we can calculate the weighted support of each node using inference-1 and weighted dollar-usage using definition-5. In order to realize the inter-itemset sort, we need to sort the frequent itemset in the same level which have been generated from the same root node in descending order by the weighted dollar-usage. Each node of the tree consists of four parts, i.e. <ID,items,wsp,P>.

ID is the node identifier. items is itemset represented by the node. wsp is weighted support of the node. P is weighted dollar-usage of the node.

Inventory classification algorithm Input: Minimum weighted support minwsp, profit of  each item , cost of each item .)( jiprofit )(cos jit Output: Sorted items First step: Scanning the database and computing weight  of each item and transaction by definition-1 and definition-3 separately. For example, the weight of item  and transaction  in table-1 can be formulated as:  A  1t  )()( )()(  EprofitAprofit AprofitAw  = 2/)2471215(  2/15  =0.375  )()()( 1  CwBwtw =0.24  Second step: Scanning the database, creating the matrix structure of database and initializing the matrix according to the definition-6.  For a instance, In table-1, B  is one of the items in , that is 1t 1tB , so . While 121a 1tA , then  011a .Therefore,  each element of the matrix is either 1 or 0.

Third step: Building a set-enumeration tree like figure-1. We will calculate the weighted support of each 1-item by inference-1 after building the first level of the tree.

Then frequent 1-item is generated from the 1-item, and infrequent 1-item is deleted. For example, weighted support of item  in table-2 can be formulated as:  A  )()( )(*)(*)(    twtw twatwaAwsp  = )()(  )(*0)(*1)(*0   twtw twtwtw  =0.282 Fourth step: Calculating the weighted dollar-usage of  each weighted frequent 1-item by definition-5, and re-sorting the 1-item with the same root node in descending order. Such as, the weighted dollar-usage of item A  can be formulated as:  )(cos*)()( AtAwspAP =0.282*15=4.237 Fifth step: Generating candidate k -itemset  with  Apriori algorithm. But in the joint step of Apriori, we have to join itemset with the same order just in the tree. Then we should calculate the weighted support of each -itemset, and generate weighted frequent -itemset .

kC  k k kL  Sixth step: calculating weighted dollar-usage of each weighted frequent -itemset by definition-5, and re-sorting the -itemset with the same root node in descending order.

Repeat steps5 and 6, until the weighted frequent  -itemset  k k  k kL .

Seventh step: we will use the mixed sort method [7] to  sort all the frequent itemsets by weighted dollar-usage. Then we need to replace all the frequent itemsets with their members and hold the same rank of ordering. As a result, the list will be formed by single item.  Then we have to remove all repeated items by the scan of the list from head to tail in order to form a sort for each item.

Last step: Set the division ratio of the product for inventory classification according to the actual situation.

Root  A B C D  AB AC AD BC BD CD  ABC ABD ACD BCD  ABCD  Figure1 A completely expanded set-enumeration tree over{ABCD} with items ordered lexically

IV. CALCULATION EXAMPLE Here, transaction dataset in table-1 is used to illustrate  the process and prove the validation of the algorithm for inventory classification.

Let },,,,{ EDCBAI ,15)(cos At 12)(cos Bt , 7)(cos Ct , ,4 cos)(cos Dt 2)(Et  and  }6,5,4,3,2,1{D  showed in table-1. Let profit of each item     equal to half of its cost for simplicity. In tradition method, the dollar-usage of every itemis ,30)(AP 48)(BP ,  ,  and  which only takes cost into account, so the sort of inventory item is  .

14)(CP  ,,,,{ DCAB  12)(DP  }  4)(EP  E In our algorithm, first let minimum weighted support  minwsp=0.2.

According to the above step1 of our algorithm, we get  the weight of each transaction showed in the third column of table-1.

Table 1 Data transactions TID Items w(t)  1 B C 0.24 2 ABE 0.24 3 B D 0.20 4 A D E 0.18 5 B C D 0.29  The matrix structure showed in table-2 by step2.

Table 2 Matrix of data transactions  1 2 3 4 5  A 0 1 0 1 0 B 1 1 1 0 1 C 1 0 0 0 1 D 0 0 1 1 1 E 0 1 0 1 0  Using step3 we can build set-enumeration tree like figure-1 and calculate weighted support of 1-item showed in table-3. Comparing with the minimum weighted support we can remove the infrequent itemset whose weighted support is less than minwsp. Then we will calculate the weighted dollar-usage of weighted frequent itemset, and re-sort the item-node in first level of the tree by the weighted dollar-usage see figure-2. Subsequently, we will get table-4 and the second level of the tree according to step5 and step6.

Table 3 1-item weighted value 1-item A B C D E weighted support 0.282 0.655 0.356 0.449 0.282  >minwsp? yes yes yes yes yes Weighted dollar-usage 4.237 7.864 2.492 1.797 0.565  Combing the joint step of Apriori and order of itemset of the tree in figure-2, we can only get candidate 3-itemset  and 0.194 which is less than mimwsp, so the iterative process is finished.

BCD )(BCDwsp  Table-4 2-itemset weighted value 2-item BA BC BD BE AC AD AE CD CEDE  weighted support 0.1640.3560.3310.1350 0.1190.2820.1940 0.119  >minwsp? no yes yes no no no yes no no no weighted dollar-usage 6.7635.288 4.802  In the light of step7, we get the finally sort order of the items:  which is different from the result got from the tradition method. That is, the item?s significance in inventory management is really affected by the weighted association between items. The degree depends on the  relative profit of items and distribution of items in specific transaction dataset. Of course, this kind of product? significance measure can not be the sole criterion for inventory classification management, but it can provide valuable information for decision-making and improve the level of scientific management.

EADCB ,,,,  Root

V. CONCLUSION The key issue of inventory management is the problem  of inventory control. Since there are many items in storage, we need to focus management on important items to improve efficiency. There are many criteria used to identify the importance of items, such as unit cost of product, availability of product, lead time, out-of- stock cost and rate of end-of-life. However, these criteria only consider the product?s own characteristics. In our algorithm, we not only take product?s own characteristics into account, but also the association between products. Then we propose a new inventory classification criteria based on weighted association rule which can provide valuable information for decision-making, and prove the validity of the algorithm through a calculation example.

