Research of Word Sense Disambiguation Based on Mining Association Rules

Abstract?Word sense disambiguation (WSD) is always an important and difficult problem that requires to be solved in Nature Language Processing. This paper presents a new WSD method which is based on the mining association rules. The method can mine the association rules between the sense of the ambiguous word and its context, to construct an association rules - based database. At last the sense of the ambiguous word is marked by choosing the sense which the most association rules define. The experiment result shows that the method has high precision.

Keywords-natural language processing;word sense disambiguation; mining assosiation rules

I. INTRODUCTION Word sense disambiguation is very important in  many fields of Natural Language Processing, such as information retrieval, the example-based machine translating system, semantic analysis, syntax analysis, speech recognition, text-to-speech and so on[1]. As an important research field, many research institutes and colleges have devoted much energy to do related research. Word sense disambiguation is to define the sense of the ambiguous word according to its context.

Given the word W with N senses, in the specific context C the word W has a confined sense 'S . The task of WSD is to choose the determined sense from the N senses. The whole process can be defined by the follow formula [2]:  )|(maxarg' CSRS k=     (1)  Some methods have already been used to disambiguate the ambiguous word sense. Quan Changqin[3] presented a method of word sense disambiguation based on multi-classifier decision, the method trained the committee classifiers by learning a smallest of labeled examples and then these classifiers were updated dynamically by unlabeled examples, the sense of ambiguous words were determined by combining the decision of the final committee classifiers. Yang Erhong[4] described a Chinese word sense disambiguation method based on primitive co- occurrence data, which overcome the problem of data  sparseness using the property of the HowNet[5]. Using the word definition in the HowNet, the primitive co- occurrence data matrix was obtained, which were collected from a corpus of about 100000 characters without any manual tagging.

Based on all of the previous research, this paper proposes a new WSD method based on the mining association rules, which can mine the association rules between the sense of the ambiguous word and its context, to construct an association rules - based database. At last the sense of the ambiguous word is determined by choosing the sense which the most association rules deduced.



II. WORD SENSE DISAMBIGUATION BASED ON MINING ASSOCIATION RULES  A.  Description of the Association Rules To mine the association rules is to discover the  important relevance between the items in a transaction database. In the association rules, the item sets I={i1,i2,?,in} is the set which includes n different items.

Given a transaction database D, each transaction record in it is a subset of the sets I. The association rule is described as YX , here IX ? , IY ? and ??YX . Its support degree and confidence degree are separately defined as follow formulas.

{ } DTYT,XDT)YX(support ???=         (2)  )X(support)YX(support)YX(confidence =    (3)  The task of mining association rules is to discover all of the strong association rules. The support degree of the rules is no less than the threshold of support degree and the confidence degree is no less than the threshold of the confidence degree.

From formula (2), the support degree reflects the frequency of the relation YX occurring in the transaction database D. The item set, which frequency is more than the threshold, is a frequent item sets. So we think the production of the frequent item sets is  2009 Third International Symposium on Intelligent Information Technology Application Workshops  DOI 10.1109/IITAW.2009.85     because there is some correlation between the corresponding items.

B.  Basic Idea of the WSD Algorithm Based on Mining Association Rules In the paper, the context of an ambiguous word is  regarded as a transaction record, the words in the context and the senses of the ambiguous word are regarded as items. If some items frequently occur together in some transactions (the context of the ambiguous word), then there must be some correlation between the items. The paper redefines the meanings of the formula (2) and formula (3). Given an ambiguous word, Y presents the set of the senses of the word, X means the set of its context words. The item sets I includes all senses of the ambiguous word and all words of its context. The database D is the context document sets of the word, each record T is a context of the word. The association rule YX means that the sense of the word can be determined by its context.

The basic idea of the WSD algorithm based on mining association rules is: to discover the frequent item sets composed of the sense of the ambiguous word and its context by scanning its context database, which support degree is no less than the threshold of support degree; to produce the association rules YX  which confidence degree is no less than the threshold of the confidence degree from maximum frequent item sets; at last to determine the sense of the ambiguous word by choosing the sense which the most association rules deduced.

In the producing process of the frequent item sets, there are too many words in the item sets which leads to produce too many N-frequent item sets (here, N is a large number). According to Martin?s research [6], 5 words in each pre and post of the core word may provide 95% semantic collocated information, so in this paper N is no more than 10. In the research, there are more items in the frequent item sets, theirs frequency occurring in the context database is less, theirs support degree is less. But these frequent item sets are helpful to the WSD. In order to avoid to loss these frequent item sets, the paper gives different min-support degree according to different N-frequent item sets. N is larger, the min-support degree is smaller. N is smaller, the degree is larger. The association rule YX , which confidence degree is no less than the threshold of the confidence degree, is produced.

C.  WSD Algorithm Based on Mining Association Rules Given an ambiguous word, firstly choose the  association rules from the association rules database according to its context words, the selected rules may be more than one; they are all used in WSD. At last the sense of the ambiguous word is determined by the rules committee voting, the sense which is decided by the  most rules is selected as the sense of the ambiguous word in its context. The algorithm is as follows:  ? Step1: Produce the frequent item sets.

? Step1.1:  Generate the 1-candidate sets  according to the context database, scan the database to obtain their support degree, select the candidate sets which support degree is no less than the threshold of support degree to formulate the 1-frenquent item sets;  ? Step1.2: Use N-frequent item sets to generate N+1-candidate sets, set a smaller threshold of support degree, rescan the database to obtain their support degree, select the candidate sets which degree is no less than the threshold to formulate the N+1-frenquent item sets;  ? Step1.3: Try the step1.2 again and again, until no N+1 candidate sets generates or N is more than 10. Get all frequent item sets which satisfy the condition.

? Step2: Produce the association rules YX from maximum frequent item sets according to the threshold of the confidence degree.

? Step3: Given an ambiguous word, choose the association rules according to its context words.

At last the sense of the ambiguous word is determined by the rules committee voting. The sense, which is decided by the most rules, is selected as the sense of the ambiguous word in its context.

? Step4: Output the sense.

? Step5: End the program.



III. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS There aren?t standard data sources for Chinese  WSD. So we download the free sentences including ambiguous words ? ? (?material?, ?information?, ?quality?), ? ?(?alter?, ?amend?), ? ?(?behavior?, ?information?, ?show off?, ?show?), ? ? (?healthy?, ?advantageous?, ?health?, ?normal?)from the Center for Chinese Linguistics PKU to construct our test data. The sentence is extracted as the units of the context of the ambiguous words. If the length of the sentence is less than 5, the sentence is deleted. In the experiments, the senses of the ambiguous word come from HowNet2008. The term of precision is conducted to evaluate the system, the formula is as follows.

all  corr  num num  precision =       (4)  The result shows as in table 1. The results in table 2 come from document [7].

TABLE I.   THE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS IN THE PAPER  Word Senses Precision (%)  sl/s2/s3 84.6  sl/s2 80.2  sl/s2/s3/s4 76.1  sl/s2/s3/s4 67.8  TABLE II.  THE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS BASED ON LI?S METHOD  Word Senses Precision (%)  dk17/ba06/a103 81.7  ih02/hgl8/hj66 70.6  jd06/di20/hj59 68.9  ed43/eb37 70.1  In table 2, the senses of the ambiguous word come from TONGYICICILIN. Because the two methods use different semantic dictionary, to the same ambiguous word, there are different sense definition and different sense number. This method can not compare directly with Li?s method. In the whole, the precision with this paper method is higher than the precision with Li?s method.



IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, we propose a new WSD method based  on the mining association rules, which can mine the association rules between the sense of the ambiguous word and its context, and the sense of the ambiguous word is determined by choosing the sense which the most association rules deduced. The experimental results show that the precision obtained by our algorithm is higher than other algorithms. However, our  algorithm still has some small drawbacks. More research will be done to improve our algorithm performance in the future, which is to improve the method of mining association rules.

