Research of Outlier Mining Based Adaptive Intrusion Detection Techniques

Abstract?The traditional IDS can not effectively manage the new continuously changing intrusion detection attacks. To deal with the problem, data mining based intrusion detection methods have been the hot fields in intrusion detection research. An outlier mining based adaptive intrusion detection framework is proposed in this paper. In the proposed framework, the outliers are firstly detected by similarity coefficient. And then, the clusters are built on the detected outlier data set and the improved association rule algorithm is employed on the clusters. Finally, the rules generated by association rule algorithm will be adaptively added into the current intrusion detection rule base. The experiments performed on simulated data and KDD99 from UCI data set have shown the effectiveness of proposed methods.

Keywords-Artificial intelligence; Intrusion detection; Outlier mining; Anomaly detection; Self -Adaptive

I. INTRODUCTION  Existing intrusion detection systems are two main categories: Signature-based misusing detection or rule-based detection such as Snort; the other is anomaly-based detection, or behaviour-based such as MADAM ID, LERAD. However, they both have limited usefulness. The misusing detection has good efficient and low false positives, but there exist the problem of signature update, intrusion varieties and high missing rate; Anomaly based detection have better generality, especially it can detection unknown intrusion, yet this method have high false alarm rate, it?s difficulty to analysis whether the anomaly come from the intrusion, furthermore, is the problems of concept drifting and pseudo attack.

The anomaly detection mines the intrusion pattern by detecting the system abnormal behaviours. Although there exists much limitation in practical application, it will play important role in the intrusion detection if we have broken through in efficiency and accuracy. Also, as Julish decrypted in [1], the anomaly detection based on data mining has an unpractical assumption: the availability and  quality of the train set. Because the environment of the IDS changes dynamically with the time, it?s an absolute essential that the IDS model is self adaptive, and then the IDS would have a good performance for long time.

This paper builds an intelligent IDS model by using the sophisticated algorithms in machine learning.

Furthermore, the self-adaptive intrusion detection framework first make the anomaly detection in intrusion behaviour, and then, introducing the outlier mining, clustering and association analysis to efficiently detect unknown attraction behaviour.



II. OUTLIER MINING IN INTRUSION DETECTION  Outlier mining is an important research branch in data mining; its task is to find small groups of data objects that are exceptional when compared with rest large amount of data. Outlier Mining can be decrypted two steps: (1) given a dataset, how to define the exceptional conception and what?s it; (2) how to dig the outliers efficiently.

In this paper, an algorithm for outlier detection based on similar coefficient sum is applied [2]. The algorithm is decrypted as follow.

Given the domain 1 2{ , ,..., }nX x x x , for any element 1 2{ , ,..., }, (1,2,..., n)i i i imx x x x i , with the matrix representation as shown in formula (1), Our goal is to find the n outliers set in X.

11 12 1  21 22 2  1 2  ...

...

...

...

m  m  n n nm  x x x x x x  X  x x x  (1)  In order to find the dispersion of every object of X, we calculate the similar coefficients between all objects and obtain the similar coefficients matrix R .

DOI 10.1109/WKDD.2010.51    DOI 10.1109/WKDD.2010.51         11 12 1  21 22 2  1 2  ...

...

...

...

n  n  n n nn  r r r r r r  R  r r r  (2)    11 ( ) m  ij ik jk k  r x x n  (3)   n  i ij j  p r                        (4)  Where, ip is the i-th row sum of the matrix, the less sum value, the longer distance from object i to others, i.e.

object i maybe the candidate of the outlier set.

max  max  i i  p p p  (5)  Where,  is the threshold, the object which meets the condition i >= can be outlier.

The efficiency and accuracy is the primitive requirement of the outlier mining algorithm in intrusion detection, therefore, the above algorithm uses O (n2) time, if applied in the real-time IDS directly, and it can have impact on the real-time process of detection. Beyond that, the web data is continual and changing dynamically. And so, an improved algorithm based on width fixed moving window method is proposed in this paper. The window width is the fixed data packet number w, the moving unit i, when new i packets reach, the window slide a unit packets.

Two points are worth noting. One is the data pre-process with standardization and normalization methods. The other is that the  will directly affect the quality of the outlier detection. The small will result in a high false detection rate; in contrast, the high will give a high false negative rate. The higher is set in actual use, and so, system will initially have a higher false negative rate, however, with following self-adaptive algorithm, the system can learn the potential association from the detected outliers, and by applying the association, the false negative rate will reduce gradually.



III. SELF-ADAPTIVE IDS FRAMEWORK  When the outliers of the network activity are found by outlier mining, if applying association analysis to these detected irregular outliers, not only do the threshold of association analysis algorithm set difficultly, but also this  algorithm has little effect in the detection of the abnormal network data packets. Therefore cluster algorithm are applied to the detected outliers firstly, and then, the improved association analysis is employed on the clusters and extract the potential association to generate the rule set[3], furthermore, convert the rules into specific rules which the IDS can use directly, and so the system has the advantages of self adaptability finally.

A. Improved Apriori algorithm  The improved association rule AprioriTid [5] is used in this paper. The whole association analysis consists of three steps: data preprocess, association rules generating and rules conversion.

1) Data Pre-process: The input data maybe are log records or network data packets generated by IDS, in general they contain many attribute fields, however not all fields are suit to association analysis.

2) Association Rules Generating: AprioriTid is used to find all the frequent item set and the association rules, and there are two parameters (support and confidence) in AprioriTid. Normally, the higher support, the more frequent items generated; the higher confidence, the more accurate the association rules.

3) Rules Conversion: Generally speaking, the above association rules can?t be applied directly into specific IDS before rules conversion because of their inconsistent rule syntax. Take for example, Snort, its detection rules consist of rule head and rule option. The rule head contains process type, protocol type, source IP address, source port etc, and the rule option contains data content and data packet option, and so on. When rules conversion, the fields in association rules which are relevant to the Snort rule head and rule option are put together and form new rules Snort can use.

B. Self-adaptive IDS Framework based on outlier mining  In this work, self-adaptive IDS framework based on outlier mining is built according to the AMG (Adaptive model generation) proposed by Eskin[4]. And the whole framework is shown in Figure-1.

At first, the Sniffer captures data packet of network and supplies to the intrusion detection engine which detect whether the invasion of the activities of the packets according to the rule set. If it is intrusion, then tags the data label and adds the labelled data into the outlier mining dataset; if not, put the data into the dataset directly. Here,         the label is to indicate whether the packet is anomaly and will be used in the later cluster. And the DBSCAN [6] is used to cluster the outlier set. Then, AprioriTid is employed for each cluster to discover the potential association rules in all attributes of abnormal network data packets. Finally, the discovered association rule will be converted into the rule IDS can use directly.

Data captured by  Sniffer  Standardizatio n and  normalization  Anomaly detection with outlier mining  Is Outlier  IDS  Is Abnormal Data  No, unlabelled data  Alert Yes  No Over  Association analysis with  AprioriTid  Yes  Rule conversion  Add the rule into Snort  ruleset  Intrusion Detection Ruleset  Outlier detection data set  Labelled data  Outlier set  Clustering the outliers with  DBSCAN  Is Outlier number over the threshold  Yes  No   Figure 1. Self-adaptive IDS Framework based on outlier mining

IV. EVALUATION  The experiment consists of two parts. The first is used to show the validity of the proposed outlier mining algorithm based on KDD99 of UCI dataset; in the other experiment, the platform was based on IDS Snort and IDS Informer was employed to simulate the attack and test.

A. Experiment of outlier mining  In the KDD cup99 dataset, each record consists of 41 discrete or continuous attributes (e.g.: connection duration, protocol type, etc.) and the class type (normal and the detail attack type such as Probe, R2L, U2R and DoS and etc.).Not all the attributes are useful for the detection, Srinivas Mukkamala et al. [7] indicated that the most important attributes of the KDD99 dataset are the 13 attributes such as  duration, src_bytes, same_srv_rate, dst_host_count, urgent, dst_host_same_src_port_rate, dst_bytes, srv_count, count, dst_host_srv_count, dst_host_same_srv_rate, protocol_type and service, where the field attributes are discrete or continuous, and this experiment is based on the 13 attributes. In the experiments, there are 4 group data set which contains 100000 normal records and 5000 intrusion records for each attack type, and the parameters are set as follows: window_width=1000, slide_unit=10, the experiment is shown in Table 1. The proposed outlier mining algorithm has an excellent detection and false-alarm rates on the Dos and Probe attack types; instead, for the R2L and U2R, the result is not satisfactory. However, in the KDD99 cup, the detection and false-alarm rates of the winner?s algorithm were 13.2% and 8.4% respectively.

TABLE I. Detection result on the same intrusion data with the different (DR: Detection Rate; FAR: False Alarm Rate)  DOS R2L U2R Proble DR FAR DR FAR DR FAR DR FAR  6 100 4.2 45.1 4.2 38.1 5.52 100 4.18  7 100 4.1 40.2 3.6 33.4 4.52 100 3.0  8 100 3.9 40.1 2.46 28.7 4.49 100 2.34  9 100 2.5 35.0 1.23 19.1 3.58 100 1.63  10 95 1.5 24.5 0.2 14.3 2.04 100 0  11 0 0 12.7 0 4.76 1.43 100 0  B. Experiment of Self-Adaptive IDS  Snort was used as the platform IDS because of its lightweight open source and scalability. And the outlier mining and association analysis modules were integrated into Snort with the form of intelligent plugin so that Snort can detect the unknown intrusion activity.

In the experiment, 11 basic attributes(source ip and port, destination ip and port ,protocol type, data field length, Tcp flags (4 fields) )and 5 extension attributes(connection duration, connection frequency, data payload length, payload mean, payload variance) were selected for the outlier mining and cluster. Because the Snort rule set only contains the basic attributions, the association analysis only based on the basic attributions. The parameters were set as follows: =9, window_width=1000, slide_unit=10, support=20%, confidence=80%. Snort and IDS Informer was deployed on 192.168.10.10 and 192.168.10.20 respectively. Only parts of the result were listed in Figure.2 and Figure.3 for the limitation of space.

Figure 2. Two exported rules examples with outliers mining algorithm  for the IDS Informer attack data   Figure 3. IDS Detection results for the variant attack of IDS Informer  with the exported rules.

The new IDS can generate association rules by  anglicizing the log records with feature generator. Further more, the rules were converted into Snort detection rules so that Snort is capable to detect the known attack variants and unknown attack.



V. CONCLUSION  We have proposed a novel algorithm of self-adaptive intrusion detection based on outlier mining which integrates the association analysis of outlier data and intrusion detection. Experimental results show that the proposed self-adaptive IDS is able to detect unknown attack more efficiently and accurately. Our future work will focus on the improvement of outlier mining algorithm.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 60973120 and No.

60903073, by the National High-Tech Research and Development Plan of China under Grant No.

2007AA01Z440, by Research and Development Project on Application Technology of Sichuan under Grant No.

2008GZ0009.

