MelT 2010

Abstract  Ant Colony Systems (ACS) have been successfully utilized to optimization problems in recent years.

However, few works have been done on applying ACS to data mining. This paper proposes an ACS-based algorithm to extract membership functions in fuzzy data mining. The membership functions are first encoded into binary bits and then given to the ACS to search for the optimal set of membership functions.

With the proposed algorithm, a global search can be performed and system automation is implemented, because our model does not require the user-specified threshold of minimum support. We experimentally evaluate our approach and reveal that our algorithm significantly improve membership functions and reduce the computation costs.

Keywords: Ant colony system, Data mining, Fuzzy set, Membership  function, Association rule, Threshold setting.



I.Introduction  Recently, the fuzzy set theory has been used more and more frequently in intelligent systems because of its simplicity and similarity to human reasoning [1]. As to fuzzy data mining, Hong and Kuo proposed a mining approach that integrated fuzzy-set concepts with the Apriori mining algorithm [2].

Currently, Ant Colony Systems (ACS) has been successfully applied to several difficult NP-hard problems, such as Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP),   Job Schedule Problem (JSP), Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP), etc. [3, 4, 5]. They are a heuristic approach inspired from the behavior of social insects.

Ants deposit their chemical trails called "pheromone" on the ground for communicating with others.

According to the pheromone, ants can find the shortest path between the source and the destination.

Han, Wang, Lu, and Tzvetkov [6] have pointed out that setting the minimum support is quite subtle, which can hinder the widespread applications of these algorithms. Our own experiences of mining transaction databases also tell us that the setting is by no means an easy task.

In particular, our approach does not require users to specify the minimum-support threshold. This approach leads to (1) effectiveness and efficiency for global search; and (2) system automation, because our model does not require the user-specified threshold of minimum support.

Numerical experiments on the proposed algorithm are also performed to show its effectiveness.

The remaining parts of the paper are organized as follows. Section 2 presents An ACS-based mining framework. The proposed algorithm based on the above framework is described in Section 3. Numerical simulations are shown in Section 4. Conclusion and future work are given in Section 5.

2.The ACS-based fuzzy mining framework  The proposed framework modified the ACS-based Framework for Fuzzy Data Mining in [7]. The framework is divided into two phases. The first phase searches for an appropriate set of membership    functions for the items by the ACS mining algorithm.

Having searched for the solutions in the first phase, we use the best membership functions for fuzzy data mining in the second phase.

The ACS algorithm plays an important role in extracting the membership functions. In the past, Parpinelli et al. proposed the AntMiner to discover association rules [8]. They worked on categorical attributes and discrete values. They proved that the ACS algorithm performed well on handling discrete values in a solution space. In this work, we assume the parameters of membership functions as discrete values and thus try to use the ACS algorithm to find them. We transform the extraction of membership functions into a route-search problem. A route then represents a possible set of membership functions. The artificial ants, which refer to virtual ants that are used to solve this problem, can then be used to find a nearly optimal solution.

3.The ACS_based fuzzy data mining algorithm  3.1. Initializations  As revealing membership functions of all items result in a long code, we will encode the membership function of each item into a binary code. We use the coding algorithm which was represented in [7].

Furthermore, we utilize some rules called State transition rule, Pheromone updating rule, Local updating rule, Global updating rule which were defined in [9].

In this work, each item will have a set of isosceles- triangular membership functions. The membership function stands for the linguistic terms such as low, middle, high. Transforming these quantitative values into linguistic terms requires a feasible population of database. Therefore, we need to initialize and update a population during the evolution process. In this work, we use the fitness function proposed by Hong et al.

[10] to obtain a good set of membership functions.

3.2. ACS-based fuzzy data mining algorithm  In spite of proposed algorithm in [9, 10] which considered one constant minimum support for all items, we use specified minimum support for each item; because, in real world applications, like applications which work on transactional data of chain stores, items have different quantities. Hence, using different minimum supports for each item in order to extracting membership functions is an efficient idea. In this work, despite the previous ones that user specified   minimum supports; minimum supports are achieved by a preprocessing on all items. Finally, minimum support for each item is automatically set as a value correspond with the quantity of the item.

In addition to the parameters defined in the previous sections, the following parameters will be used: the number of artificial ants, the minimum pheromone ratio of an ant, the evaporation ratio of pheromone, the local updating ratio, and the global updating ratio. The proposed ACS-based algorithm for mining membership functions and fuzzy association rules are given as follow.

INPUT: (1 ) n quantitative transaction data, (2 ) a set of m items, which is with I predefined  linguistic terms, (3 ) a maximum number of iterations G.

OUTPUT :An appropriate set of membership functions for all items in fuzzy data mining.

Step 1: Let p = 1, where p is used to keep the identity number of the items to be processed.

Step 2: Let the multi-stage graph for the fuzzy mining problem be (N} E), where N is the set of nodes and E is the set of edges. Also denote the j-node in the i-th stage asNij' and the edge from Nij to N(i+l)k as N ij k. Initially set the pheromone on every edge N ij k as 0.5.

Step 3: Let the initial generation 9 = 1.

Step 4: Sets up the complete route for each artificial  ant Antq by the following sub steps.

Step 4.1: Selects the edges from start to end according  to the state transaction rule.

Step 4.2: Update the pheromone of the edges passed  through by Antq according to the local updating rule.

Step 5: Evaluate the fitness value of the solution (membership functions) obtained by each artificial ant according to the following sub steps.

Step 5.1: For each transaction datum Di , i = 1 to n, transfer its quantitative value vp for item Ip into a fuzzy set fp according to the membership functions obtained from the ant. That is, fp is represented as :  {pi + {P2 + ...+ {pi + ...+ {pl Regionpi Regionp2 Regionpk Regionpl  Where Regionpk is the k-th fuzzy term of iteml.;  fpk is vp's fuzzy membership value in the region, and 1 is the number of fuzzy membership functions.

Step 5.2: The scalar cardinality of each region in the transactions is calculated as follows:  n '\' (i)  countpk = L fpk i=l  Where f~~ is the fuzzy membership value of  region Rpkfrom the i-th datum.

Step 5.3:Check for each R pk whether its countpk In  is larger than or equal to the minimum support threshold a. If Rpk satisfies the above condition, put it in the set oflarge I-itemsets (L l ) .

Step 5.4:Calculate the fitness value of the solution from the ant by dividing the number of large itemsets in L1 over the suitability. That is,  . ILll [itness = . bilisuita L icy  Step 6: Once all the artificial ants find their entire routes, the one holding the highest fitness value will be used to update the pheromone according to the global updating rule.

Step 7: If the generation g is equal to G, output the current best set of membership functions of item I for fuzzy data mining; otherwise, g =g  p  + I and go to s 4.

Step 8: If p f=- m, set p =p +1 and go to Step 2 for  another item; otherwise, stop the algorithm.

number of generations. In addition, we used smaller numbers for generation with the aim of illustrating the difference between our model and the existing one that has static constant minimum support in Figure 2. It is obviously represented that our model reached the best fitness in 100 number of generations, whereas the existing one reached its best fitness in 400 number of generations.

.....ACS with dynamic minimum support  .....ACS with constant minimum support  3.5 -r-------------  ~ 3 la' ~ 2.5 +---------------  ~ 2 +-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - OJs  <;::  o +--.---.---.---.---,---,- o 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000  Generations  Figure 1. The average fitness values along with different numbers of generations  .....ACS with dynamic minimum support  .....ACS with constant minimum support  Figure 2. The average fitness values along with different numbers of generations (in  smaller scale)  The numbers of large l-itemsets along with different generations are shown in Figure 3. The curve of the existing method stabili zes after about three thousand generations while the curve of our approach remained constant after one thousand generations.

Besides, as our model uses dynamic minimum support  ?: .....

?  .,  500200 300 400 Generations  100o  ~ 3 :::J  ~ 2.5  ~ 2 OJ c t;:: 1.5 OJ OJ ~ >? 0.5  o  3.5  We experimentally evaluate our approach to show the performance of the proposed algorithm. The experiments were implemented in C/C++ on a computer with AMD Athlon(tm) 64 Processor 1900 and 2 GB RAM. There were a total of 64 items and 10,000 transactions used in the experiments. The initial size of ants was set at 10. The parameters in the ACS algorithm were set as follows: the initial ratio of pheromone was 0.05, the minimum pheromone of ants was 0.2, the evaporation ratio was 0.9, the local updating ratio was 0.1 and the global updating ratio was 0.9. The average fitness values of the artificial ants along with different numbers of generations are shown in Figure 1.

It can be vividly seen from Figure I that in our approach, because of using specified minimum supports, average fitness values increased sharper than the previous one, thus became stable within less  4. Numerical Experiments  The final set of membership functions output in step 7 and the 1-itemsets obtained are then used to mine fuzzy association rules from the given database.

O +-- .-- -.-- ---r- --,- - ..--- ....

