Mining High Transaction-Weighted Utility Itemsets

Abstract?In this paper, we design a new kind of patterns, named high transaction-weighted utility itemsets, which considers not only individual profits and quantities of the items in a transaction, but also the contribution of each transaction in a database. We also propose a two-phased mining algorithm to discover high transaction-weighted utility itemsets. The experimental results on synthetic datasets show the proposed approach has a good performance.

Keywords: data mining; utility mining; two-phase mining; high utility itemsets; high transaction-weighted utility itemsets.



I.  INTRODUCTION Mining association rules [1] is an important issue in the  field of data mining due to its wide applications. Traditional association rules are, however, derived from frequent itemsets, which only consider the occurrence of items but do not reflect any other factors, such as price or profit. Chan et al. thus proposed the utility mining to solve the problem [3].

They considered both individual profits and quantities of products (items) in transactions, and used them to find out actual utility values of itemsets. Several other researches about utility mining were proposed in these years [5][6][7] [11][15][17][18][19].

Weighted mining has recently been proposed, in which transactions are attached with weighted values according to some criteria [3][10][12][13][16]. It is important because if the same significance is assumed for all the transactions in a database, some interesting association rules may not be found by traditional mining. However, the actual significance of an itemset cannot be easily recognized.

In this study, we thus consider transaction weights and introduce a new kind of patterns, called high transaction- weighted utility itemsets. The proposed patterns consider not only individual profits and quantities of products in transactions but also utility contribution of transactions in a database. Moreover, a two-phased mining algorithm is also proposed for effectively and efficiently finding the high transaction-weighted utility itemsets from a transactional database.

The mining process of the proposed algorithm can be divided into two phases. In the first phase, the possible candidate transaction-weighted utility itemsets are found level by level. In the second phase, the candidate  transaction-weighted utility itemsets are further checked for their actual utility values by an additional database scan.

Finally, the itemsets with their actual weighted-utility values larger than or equal to a predefined threshold are output as the high transaction-weighted utility itemsets. The experimental results on synthetic datasets also show the good performance of the proposed approach.



II. RELATED WORKS In this section, some related researches are briefly  reviewed. They are utility mining and weighted association- rule mining.

A. Utility Mining In association-rule mining, only binary itemsets are  considered. However, products bought in transactions may contain profits and quantities in real-world applications.

Especially, some high-profit products may occur with low frequencies in a database. The high-profit but low-frequency itemsets may not be found in traditional association-rule mining approaches.

Chan et al. thus proposed utility mining to discover high utility itemsets [4]. They considered not only the quantities of the items in a product combination but also their profits.

Formally, local transaction utility and external utility are used to measure the utility of an item. The local transaction utility of an item is directly obtained from the information stored in a transaction dataset, like the quantity of the item sold in a transaction. The external utility of an item is given by users, like its profit.

Liu et al. then proposed a two-phased algorithm to discover high utility itemsets from a database by adopting the downward-closure property [11]. They named their approach as the transaction-weighted-utilization (TWU) model. It used the whole utility of a transaction as the upper bound of an itemset in that transaction to keep the downward-closure property. It consisted of two phases. In phase 1, the model found out possible candidate itemsets from a database. In phase 2, the database was rescanned again to update the actual utility of the possible candidate itemsets and found the ones with their actual utility values larger than or equal to a predefined threshold (called the   DOI 10.1109/ICCEA.2010.69     minimum utility threshold). Several other algorithms for utility mining were also proposed [6][7][17][18][19], and some related studies are still in progress [5][15].

B. Weighted Association-Rule Mining Weighted association-rule mining [3][10][12][13][16] is  concerned with the analysis of significance of items or transactions in a set of data. It is proposed to find out different kinds of interesting patterns from a set of data with item weight or transaction weight. The weights in these approaches may be thought of as an extension of traditional support in association-rule mining. Weighted association rules can be discovered in a variety of forms, like weighted association rules, fuzzy weighted association rules, and weighted utility association rules.

Lu et al. proposed a new mixed weighted mining model [12] for finding weighted association rules from a set of data.

The weighted rules might provide more useful and interesting information to decision makers in many applications such as retail marketing, data stream, medical data analysis, and among others.

Khan et al. then discovered weighted utility association rules from a database by considering both quantities of items sold in a single transaction and weight values of items given by experts [10]. In their model, the transaction weighted utility measure is used to find out all weighted utility association rules from a set of data. However, the model did not consider the actual utility of itemsets in a database. If we consider both the actual utility of itemsets and the weight values of transactions in a database, we may find out different interesting patterns. In this paper, both utility contribution of itemsets and transactions are thus considered, instead of only one perspective of transactions in the weighted utility association rule model.



III. THE PROPOSED MINING ALGORITHM  A. The proposed algorithm for finding high transaction- weighted utility itemsets The proposed algorithm for finding high transaction-  weighted utility itemsets can be divided into two phases.

Phase 1 first finds all the possible candidate transaction- weighted utility itemsets from a database. Next, phase 2 scans the database again to find the actual weighted utility values of the possible candidate transaction-weighted utility itemsets and judge whether they are high transaction- weighted utility itemsets (HTWUI). The details of the proposed algorithm are listed below.

The algorithm: INPUT:  (1) A set of m items I = {i1, i2, ?, ij, ?, im}, each ij  with a profit value pj, j = 1 to m; (2) A transaction database D = {Trans1, Trans2, ?,  Transn}, in which each transaction includes a subset of items with quantities;  (3) The minimum weighted-utility threshold ?.

OUTPUT: The set of high transaction-weighted utility  itemsets.

Phase 1: STEP 1:  For each y-th transaction Transy in the set of  transactions D, do the following substeps.

(a) Calculate the utility value uyz of each z-th item  iyz in Transy as: ,q*su yzyzyz =  where syz is the profit of item iyz and qyz is the quantity of iyz .

(b) Calculate the transaction utility tuy of the transaction Transy as:  .utu z  yzy ?= STEP 2:  Calculate the total transaction utility ttu in the set  of transactions D as: .tuttu  y y?=  STEP 3: For each y-th transaction Transy in the set of transactions D, do the following substeps.

(a) Calculate the transaction-utility weight of  Transy as:  .

ttu tu  tuw yy =  (b) Calculate the transaction-weighted utility of Transy as:  .tuw*tutwu yyy = STEP 4: Calculate the transaction-weighted utility upper  bound ubz of each item iz as the summation of the transaction-weighted utilities of the transactions which include iz. That is:  .tu*tuwub y Transi  yy yz  ? ?  =  STEP 5: Check whether the transaction-weighted utility upper bound of an item iz is larger than or equal to ?. If iz satisfies the above condition, put it in the set of candidate transaction-weighted utility 1-itemsets, C1. That is:  .}1,|{1 mzubiC yz ???= ? STEP 6: Set r = 1, where r represents the number of items  in the current set of candidate transaction- weighted utility itemsets (Cr) to be processed.

STEP 7: Generate the candidate set Cr+1 from Cr with all the r-sub-itemsets in each candidate in Cr+1 must be contained in Cr.

STEP 8: Calculate the transaction-weighted utility upper bound ubs of each candidate transaction- weighted utility (r+1)-itemset as the summation of the transaction-weighted utilities of the transactions which include s. That is:  .* y Transs  ys tutuwub y  ? ?  =  STEP 9: Check whether the transaction-weighted utility upper bound of each candidate (r+1)-itemsets s     is larger than or equal to ?. If s does not satisfy the above condition, remove it from Cr+1. That is:  .},|{ 11 ++ ??= rsr CoriginalsubsCNew ? STEP 10: If Cr+1 is null, do the next step; otherwise, set r =  r + 1 and repeat STEPs 7 to 10.

Phase 2: STEP 11: For each candidate transaction-weighted utility  itemset s, calculate its actual transaction- weighted utility value twus as follows:  ,*)( y Transs si  yzs tuwutwu y z  ? ? ? ?  =  where uyz is the utility value of each item iz in transaction Transy and tuwy is the transaction- utility weight of transaction Transy in D.

STEP 12: Check whether the actual transaction-weighted utility value twus of each candidate transaction- weighted utility itemset s is larger than or equal to ?. If s satisfies the above condition, put it in the set of high transaction-weighted utility itemsets, HTWUI. That is:  ,},|{ CstwusHTWUI s ??= ? where C is the set of all the candidate transaction-weighted utility itemsets.

STEP 13: Output the set of high transaction-weighted utility itemsets in HTWUI.



IV. AN EXAMPLE In this section, an example is given to demonstrate the  proposed mining algorithm based on the concept of transaction-weighted utility of itemsets. This is a simple example to show how the proposed algorithm can be easily used to find out the high transaction-weighted utility itemsets from a set of transactions. Assume the ten transactions shown in TABLE I are used for mining. Each transaction consists of two features, transaction identification (TID) and items purchased. There are four items in the database, respectively denoted A to D. The value attached to each item is the quantity sold in the transaction.

TABLE I.   THE SET OF TEN TRANSACTIONS IN THIS EXAMPLE.

TID A B C D Trans1 1 0 1 14 Trans 2 0 0 6 0 Trans 3 1 0 2 4 Trans 4 0 1 4 0 Trans 5 0 0 3 1 Trans 6 0 0 1 13 Trans 7 0 0 8 0 Trans 8 4 0 0 7 Trans 9 0 1 1 10 Trans 10 0 1 0 18   Also assume that the predefined profit value for each  single item is defined in TABLE II.

TABLE II.  THE PREDEFINED PROFIT VALUES OF THE ITEMS.

Item Profit A 1 B 10 C 6 D 3   In this example, the transaction-weighted utility values  of itemsets {C}, {D}, {BD} and {CD} are larger than or equal to ? according to the processing way of the proposed algorithm. They are thus put into the set of high transaction- weighted utility itemsets, HTWUI, as shown in TABLE III.

TABLE III.  HIGH TRANSACTION-WEIGHTED UTILITY ITEMSETS.

High Transaction- Weighted Utility Itemset  Transaction- Weighted Utility  C 9.20 D 14.79  BD 9.20 CD 10.97   In this example, four high transaction-weighted utility  itemsets are generated. Note that if the traditional utility mining way is used, the results will be {C}, {D} and {CD}.

The proposed algorithm based on the transaction-weighted utility concept can discover more unknown utility itemsets from a set of high-utility transactions in a transactional database. For example, the itemset {BD} is a high utility itemset in the high-utility transactions such as transactions 1, 6, 7, 9 and 10. But the itemset {BD} cannot be discovered by using traditional utility mining.

Under the perspective of the transaction-weighted utility, utility contribution of itemsets in the high-utility transactions will be more noticeable with the increase of influence degree of transaction utility. The item combination in a high transaction-weighted utility itemset can thus really show different information against the traditional high utility itemsets.



V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS A series of experiments was conducted to compare the  effects of the traditional and the proposed high utility patterns and to evaluate the performance of the proposed mining algorithm with different parameter values. The experiments were implemented in J2SDK 1.5.0 and executed on a PC with 3.0 GHz CPU and 1GB memory.

The public IBM data generator was first used in our experiments [9]. However, since our objective was to discover high utility itemsets, we also developed a simulation model, which was similar to that used in [11], to generate the quantities of the items in the transactions. Each     quantity ranged among 1 to 5 according to the way in [11].

Moreover, for each dataset generated, a corresponding utility table was also generated in which a profit value lying among 0.01 to 10.00 was randomly assigned to an item.

Figure 1 shows the profit value distribution of all the items generated by the simulation model in the utility table.

Figure 1.  The profit value distribution in the synthetic data set.

In the experimental evaluation, the used parameters, T, I, N and D, represented the average length of items per transaction, the average length of maximal potentially frequent itemsets, the total number of different items, and the total number of transactions, respectively.

Experiments were made on the synthetic dataset T10I4N4KD200K to evaluate the difference rate between traditional high utility itemsets and high transaction- weighted utility itemsets. The experimental results for different minimum weighted-utility thresholds are shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2.  The difference rate between two kinds of patterns under different minimum weighted-utility thresholds.

It could be observed from the figure that the difference rate between the two kinds of patterns varied along with different minimum weighted-utility thresholds. The obvious difference rates between the two kinds of patterns were achieved. It could be explained as follows. In the traditional utility mining model, it only considers actual utility of itemsets but not significance of transaction utility. It may  lose some unknown high utility itemsets in a set of high- utility transactions. But those unknown high utility itemsets existing in a set of high-utility transactions may be easier to be found by our proposed algorithm. The difference rate between the traditional high utility itemsets and the described high transaction-weighted utility itemsets was thus very obvious under the same parameter settings.

Experiments were at last made to evaluate the efficiency of the proposed mining algorithm (TP-HTWUI). Figure 3 showed the execution time on the T10I4N4KD200K dataset for different thresholds varying from 0.10% to 0.02%. It could be easily observed that the execution time of the proposed mining algorithm increased along with the increase of the threshold value.

Figure 3.  The execution time under different thresholds.



VI. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we have proposed a new kind of patterns,  called the high transaction-weighted utility itemsets, which consider the transaction utility significance of each of the transactions in a database. Moreover, we have also proposed the two-phased mining algorithm to effectively and efficiently discover the described patterns from a transactional database. The experimental results show that the proposed high transaction-weighted utility patterns have a good effect from high-utility transactions in a database when compared to the traditional utility patterns. In the future, we would apply the proposed knowledge type and approach to some practical applications, such as supermarket promotion applications.

