Application of Distributed Oblivious Transfer Protocol in Association Rule Mining

Abstract?The purpose of association rule mining is to reveal patterns of kinds of knowledge that are not easy to find.

However, it may constitute a threat to privacy and information security, even more, seriously limit the development of the application of data mining, if we can not properly use this knowledge. In this paper, we introduce a concept of distributed oblivious transfer protocol, then propose and simulate a good safe and high efficient association rule mining algorithm with distributed oblivious transfer protocol. It can avoid the deficiencies caused by centralized data mining, and ensure that users can safely interactive statistical information but do not involve concrete privacy details, it also can be conveniently applied to business management and business decisions.

Keywords- association rule mining; privacy preserving; distributed oblivious transfer

I.  INTRODUCTION Along with the computer processing power, storage  technology, Internet?s fast development, as well as the explosive growth of the information that people possess, which has inspired people to seek for the desire of ?treasures of knowledge?, and promoted the development of the association rule mining[1,2].

The purpose of association rule mining is to reveal patterns or kinds of knowledge that are not easy to find.

However, every thing has two sides, with the development of the society and people?s attention to privacy, it may constitute a threat to privacy and information security, even more, seriously limit the development of the application of data mining, if we can not properly use this knowledge; besides, a traditional association rule mining algorithm exists some shortcomings: (1) Regarding a database may have many branch nodes, the network transmission load is substantial, if we excavate knowledge from a central server for all data; (2) Relative to distributed data mining, centralized data mining?s efficiency is very low; (3) Carrying out central excavating in the same place for all data will do harm to data privacy preserving. In view of the above questions, we have proposed and simulated a good safety and high efficiency association rule mining algorithm with distributed oblivious transfer protocol[3, 4].

In this algorithm, it not only can avoid traditional drawbacks of centralized data mining but also can find all global frequent itemsets satisfying a given support threshold under the condition that each site can not obtain others?  privacy. In order to ensure that all participants can safely interactive statistical information but do not involve concrete privacy details, such as the content of the database, size, local frequent itemsets, local itemsets thresholds and so on, we need to do the following works: each site adds a random number to each local frequent itemset of his own so as to get corresponding surplus thresholds; all participants carry out  n rDOTmk ?),(  protocol; each site subtracts the random  number that he has added, then sends the final result to R; R decrypts it and finds all global frequent itemsets satisfying the given support threshold.



II. TERMINOLOGY AND PRELIMINARIES  A. Association Rule Mining Association rule mining[5,6] is the process involving the  discovery itemsets that frequently co-occur in a transaction database so as to produce association rules that hold for the data.

Assume that a large transaction database D is distributed to n sites: ,,...,, 21 nSSS and those local transaction databases located in these sites are denote as },,...,,{ 21 nDDD where  ,21 nDDDD ?? ?= and iD locates in the site n)i(1 ??iS .

Let },...,,{ 21 niiiI = be a set of literals, called items, where ),...,2,1( mkik = may be goods in shopping basket or insurance customers. Let },...,,{ 21 n  i TTTD = be a transaction database, where each transaction iT contains a set of items from I , such that ITi ? . A unique identifier TID (stands for transaction id) is associated with each transaction. Each association rule is defined as an implication of the form ,YX ?  where YX  , are frequent itemsets in the transaction database, such that ?=? YX . Assume that items in an itemset are sorted in lexicographic order.

Definition 1: sX '  support threshold in D is defined as: ||/|},|{|:)( DTXDTTXs ??= .

Definition 2: The confidence of the association rule YX ? is defined as:  )(/)()|(:)( XsYXsXYPYXc ?==? .

DOI 10.1109/ICCEA.2010.193         Definition3: We assume that sup.X and iX sup. are thresholds for a given itemset X in transaction database D and iD respectively (If there are iX sup. transactions contain ,X the itemset sX ' local threshold is iX sup. in iS and  its global threshold is ? =  = n  i  iXX  sup.sup. .), then we can  say that X is a global frequent itemset, if  ? =  ?=?? n  i  iDsDsX  ||||sup. .

B. Distributed Oblivious Transfer Protocol As we are known that all OT [7] schemes not only require  public-key operations, such as modular exponentiations, but also have high computational complexity, low efficiency, high bandwidth consumption, which is likely to become the bottleneck in many applications. Therefore, in order to solve above questions, Naor and Pinkas[8] first proposed a distributed oblivious transfer protocol, in which the task of the sender is distributed between several servers.

A nrDOTmk ?),( scheme involves three types of parties:  - A sender S which has n secrets .,..., 10 ?nss It is convenient to assume that these secrets are elements in a finite field .F  - A receiver R that has a set of inputs ),...,,( 10 r??? , where .10 ??? nr .

- Additional m servers, .,...,1 mSS A nrDOTmk ?),( scheme must guarantee the following  properties: Reconstruction. If a receiver gets information from k out  of m servers, she can compute the secret ,?s ).,...,,( 10 r???? =  Sender?s Privacy. Given any k values, a receiver can gain information about selected secrets but no information about the others.

Receiver?s Privacy. Any coalition of less than t servers can not obtain any information the receiver has recovered, where t is a parameter in the range .1 kt ?? The parameter t should be as close as possible to k .

Receiver-servers collusion. A coalition of the receiver with l corrupt servers can not learn anything about the n secrets more than can be learned by the receiver herself.

An additional requirement is that if the receiver gets information from less than k servers she gains no information about the n secrets.



III. THE IMPLEMENT OF DISTRIBUTED OBLIVIOUS TRANSFER IN ASSOCIATION RULE MINING  A. The description of ARDMDOTmk nr ??),( scheme  First of all, we need to do the following assumptions: (1)The number of sites is 3?i , and let 4=i in this paper;  (2) All participants are semi-honest and provide true information.

The problem that is going to be solved in this paper is finding all global frequent itemsets satisfying a given support threshold under the condition of each site can not obtain others? privacy. Now we will give a concrete description about this algorithm:  Step 1: S equally distributes the data locates in a large transaction database to m sites;  Step 2: Randomly select a site as the receiver R, after that, R sets the value of k and sends it to electronic bulletin board for other sites downloading.

Step 3: R and other sites excavate local frequent itemsets using data mining algorithm and send the mining results to electronic bulletin board;  Step 4: S downloads all local frequent itemsets and keeps count of the standard frequent itemsets, then publishes them to electronic bulletin board;  Step 5: Every site updates his own local frequent itemsets after downloading standard frequent itemsets from electronic bulletin board in order to ensure his frequent itemsets? order is consistent with standard frequent itemsets? (If an itemset locates in standard frequent itemsets but not in local frequent itemsets, we will add this itemset to the right position for local frequent itemset and set its threshold is 0), then they add a random number ? for each frequent itemset?s threshold and send them to S independently.

Step 6: all participants execute nrDOTmk ?),( protocol; Step 7: After execution above protocol, R can get a set of  sums of surplus threshold corresponding to each itemset in standard frequent itemsets, then sends these results  )(),...,( 1 rEE ?? that are encrypted by Paillier homomorphic encryption algorithm [9] to one of sites iS .

Step 8: The site iS deducts the random number ? that is added in step 5 for each itemset?s threshold, when he receives message from R, and sends results  )()(),...,()( 1 ???? EEEE r ?? to next site until all sites have done the same operations. After that, the final result is sent to R.

Step 9: R decrypts a set of surplus thresholds corresponding to each itemset in standard frequent itemsets and deducts himself random number, then he will be able to judge which items are global frequent itemsets satisfying the given support threshold.

B. The scheme of nrDOTmk ?),(  At present, the study on 1-out-of-2 distributed oblivious transfer protocol has a lot and is going to be perfect, but for the general form of the n -out-of r distributed oblivious transfer protocol has not given a description in detail. Now, we will propose a nrDOTmk ?),( scheme bases on a nDOTmk 1),( ? scheme.

Let 10,..., ?nss are sums of surplus thresholds corresponding to each itemset in standard frequent itemsets.

In this paper, considering the requirement of finding all         global frequent itemsets that meet given support threshold, we not only need to let the number of R?s choices is equal to the number of the standard frequent itemsets, in other words, satisfying nr = , but also we need to ensure that all participants can interact with each other, namely, mk = .

Initialization Phase: (1) S generates 1?n random polynomials  )(),...,( 11 xBxB n? of degree l and one random polynomial )(0 xB of degree 11 ?+?? tlk with values in ,F  such  that 00 )0( sB = and for ).0()0(,1,...,1 0 ii BBsni +=?=  (2) S constructs a n -variant polynomial ),...,,( 11 ?nyyxQ with values in ,F such that  .)1,...,0,0(,...,)0,...,1,0(,)0,...,0,0( 110 ?=== nsQsQsQ  More precisely, ? ?  = ? +=   011 .)()(),...,,(  n  j jjn yxBxByyxQ  (3) For ,,...,1 mi = S sends the )1( ?n -variate polynomial ),...,,( 11 ?nyyiQ  to the server .iS  Oblivious Transfer Phase. : Let ]1,0[),...,,( 10 ?? nr??? be the receiver?s R  choices.

(1) R generates )1( ?n random polynomials  )(),...,( 11 xDxD n? of degree 1?t , such that ))0(),...,0(( 11 ?nDD is a )1( ?n -tuple of zeroes with 1 in  position ),...,,( 10 r??? which corresponding to secrets? positions in which she is interested. Define a univariate polynomialV to be )).(),...,(,()( 11 xDxDxQxV n?=  (2) R sends the following queries with the form of ),...,((,)),(),...,(()),(),...,(( 1     1 j  r jnjjnj iDiDiDiDiD ??  ))(1 j r n iD ? to the server ),...,1( rjS ji = .

(3) The server  ji S calculates values of r sets of  ))(),...,(,(),())(),...,(,( 2 1   1 jnjjjjnjj iDiDiQiViDiDiQ ?? =  ),())(),...,(,(,),( 11  j r  j r nj  r jj iViDiDiQiV == ? then  sends the results back to R.

(4) After receiving r  sets of values of ,V say  ),(),...,(,),(),...,(),(),...,( 1    k r  kk iVriViViViViV R interpolates )(,),(),( 21 xVxVxV r and computes  )0(,),0(),0( 21 rVVV .



IV. SYNTHETIC EXPERIMENT AND RESULT ANALYSIS  A. Synthetic Experiment To further test our scheme can have high efficiency and  robustness of the mechanism in practical operation, we design a synthetic simulation for ARDMrDOTmk n ?? 1),( and ARDMDOTmk nr ??),( .

With the development of bar code technology, the typical example of association rule mining is shopping basket analysis. Association rule mining is widely used in the transaction database to find patterns in different commodities (items), to discovery the model of the customer?s buying behaviors, such as the effect of purchasing a commodity on purchasing others. The analysis results can be applied to shelf layout, warehousing arrangements as well as carrying out the classification according to the purchase pattern to the user and so on. Therefore, the dataset used in this experiment is intercepted from a Belgian supermarket? real transaction records of three times during 1999-2000 years, which generates 3.9Mb transaction data according to the normal distribution. In this experiment, we have selected 400 records and distributed them equally to 4 sites.

The practical execution performance of two algorithms are shown in Figure 1 with support threshold is 2% and 3=k .

Figure 1.  Synthetic Result  B. Result Analysis We will give some analyses for our algorithm from the  following aspects: (1) A coalition of all sites cannot learn about R?s choices.

As we all know, the standard frequent itemsets are  maintained by all sites in addition to the sender S, therefore, except R other sites can obtain some itemsets that are the same with R?s, but can not be able to learn corresponding threshold, what?s more, they are also unable to learn whether R does have other frequent itemsets as well as their information in detail.

Therefore, all sites can not learn R?s choices, even if they have acted in collusion with each other.

(2) Any site can not be able to learn other sites? information, which makes each site?s privacy to be protected.

In the ARDMDOTmk nr ??),(  algorithm, each site carries out excavating local frequent itemsets in their own local database, which does not involve the problem of privacy infringement. further more, all other participants are executing a distributed oblivious transfer when the receiver R determines if a itemset is a global frequent itemset or not.

After execution of the protocol, the receiver reveals these secrets at her choices, but obtains no information on others, while the sender does not know which secret the receiver has recovered, according to the definition of the distributed oblivious transfer protocol. In addition, we also do some         modifications for transaction information in this algorithm, for example, adding a random number for local frequent itemsets? threshold so that a malicious third party can not infer concrete information, even if he has captured some information.

(3) Algorithm Complexity The main consumption of this algorithm is to be involved  in the implementation of a distributed oblivious transfer protocol. The two algorithms ARDMrDOTmk n ?? 1),( and  ARDMDOTmk nr ??),( all can solve the problem that makes R can obtain all global frequent itemsets under the condition of protecting all sites privacies, but the difference only lies in the implementation of a distributed oblivious transfer scheme. Now, we will give some communication complexity and computational complexity analyses:  Communication Complexity Let u represent the output bits of the information that S sends to other sites, v represent the output bits of R?s requiring information, w represent the output bits of feedback information receiving from other sites, then we can learn that the former algorithm?s communication complexity is ))(( wvurmO ++ , the later algorithm?s communication complexity is  ))(( rwrvumO ++ .

Computational Complexity For the former, it needs to  execute r times nDOTmk 1),( ? , but for the later, it only demands to execute 1 time nDOTmk 1),( ? and 1?r times Lagrange's interpolation. Through some analyses, we can learn that 1 time nDOTmk 1),( ? consumes less time cost than  1?r times Lagrange's interpolation, therefore, our scheme is more efficiency.

Based on the above, we can learn that the algorithm used in this paper is better for communication complexity and computational complexity, especially confronting massive data and the number of frequent itemsets that need to determine whether they are global frequent itemsets or not is very large, our scheme has better efficiency.



V. CONCLUSIONS Not only the network is playing more and more important  role in today?s social life, but also the association rule mining is receiving more and more attention in the business management and business decisions, therefore, how to efficiently solve the problem of privacy protecting in data mining is becoming a hot spot day by day. In the view of the practical need of society and the shortcomings caused by centralized data mining, we propose and simulate a good safety and high efficiency ARDMDOTmk nr ??),( algorithm, which not only can meet consumers' demand but also can be widely applied to business management and business decisions.

