

Abstract?This paper presents an applied study in data mining and knowledge discovery. It aims at discovering patterns within historical students' academic and financial data at UST (University of Science and Technology) from the year 1993 to 2005 in order to contribute improving academic performance at UST. Results show that these rules concentrate on three main issues, students' academic achievements (successes and failures), students' drop out, and students' financial behavior.

Clustering (by K-means algorithm), association rules (by Apriori algorithm) and decision trees by (J48 and Id3 algorithms) techniques have been used to build the data model.

Results have been discussed and analyzed comprehensively and then well evaluated by experts in terms of some criteria such as validity, reality, utility, and originality. In addition, practical evaluation using SQL queries have been applied to test the accuracy of produced model (rules).

Keywords- Data Mining (DM), Knowledge Discovery, Decision Trees, Clustering, Association rules.



I. INTRODUCTION Currently, Data mining becomes a hot research field  which attracts a significant concern. It converts raw data into knowledge that has a meaning for the real world by mapping low-level data into other forms that might be compact, more abstract or more useful.

Many successful data mining applications appear and have been deployed in operational use on large-scale real world problems in science and business. Data mining techniques are using today to increase revenues and to reduce costs. Innovative organizations worldwide are already using data mining to locate and appeal to higher-value customers, to reconfigure their product offerings to increase sales, and to minimize losses due to error or fraud. It is applied in astronomy, finance, fraud detection, manufacturing, telecommunications and Internet agents [1].

On the other hand, higher educational institutions face big challenges in predicting paths of students and alumni.

Institutions would like to know, for example, which students will enroll in particular course programs, which students will need assistance in order to graduate, and are some students more likely to transfer than others. Higher educational institutions can use classification, for example, for a comprehensive analysis of student characteristics, or use estimation to predict the likelihood of a variety of outcomes,  such as drop out, retention, and course success and other academic quality measures in general [2][3].

To benefit those advantages mentioned earlier about data mining in higher education, this paper will conduct an analyzed case study on UST students data based on data mining techniques. It aims at uncover hidden patterns within data which are modeling students behavior corresponding of academic achievement, demographic students data and financial students behavior.

This paper presents a basic knowledge about data mining and its techniques and also about relevant needs in higher education. It shows literatures and related work relevant to the paper topic. Then, it illustrates our scheme in applying data mining techniques upon the data and also provides a concise description of the target data. Finally, findings are objectively evaluated by UST administration according to some criteria.



II. DATA MINING PURPOSES AND TECHNIQUES Data mining provides many techniques and  computational tools that assist in extracting useful information (knowledge) from huge databases.

At abstract level, data mining is used for two general purposes, they are description and prediction. Under these two abstract purposes, different detailed purposes can be addressed. They can be concluded into six comprehensive tasks: classification, estimation, prediction, affinity grouping, clustering, and description. For these purposes many variations of techniques and algorithms can be used. For example, decision trees (Id3, J48, C4.5, CART and CHAID algorithms) and memory-based reasoning are techniques well-suited for classification, Neural networks are well- suited for estimation, and Apriori algorithm and its extensions is the most common algorithm for association rule.

Authors have concluded some criteria mentioned in different literatures which can aids when making trade-off such as implementation complexity, model type purpose (this means that the target model is predictive or descriptive), preprocessing effort (this means all techniques used for data cleaning, transformations and outliers analysis), post- processing effort (because of results of different algorithms are differing in term of simplicity and clarity, they vary in post processing effort needed to make results), processing time (time needed for processing or for training according to  Volumn 2  978-1-4244-5586-7/10/$26.00      2010 IEEEC       some algorithms), generalization degree (how extent we can generalize the produced model), decision making support, scalability (how extent it can deal with large scale data), and finally, common used or not which reflect simplicity of understanding the technique.



III.  HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS AND DM Quality in higher education has been placed front on the  contemporary agenda in higher education. There are some quality characteristics and measures in higher educational systems that facilitate evaluating the quality of the system.

In order to evaluate different aspects of the higher educational system, different quality models use different indicators. For example, in systematic approach these indicators can be categorized into three groups: educational system input, process and output. Input indicators of educational system are organized as human resource, financial resources, and systematic resources. In respect to higher educational systems process a series of process indicators can be addressed. These are educating methods, researching methods, teaching methods, studying opportunities, qualitative and quantitative educational improvements. The most important output indicators are alumni and graduates. Some of these measures and characteristics can be used in evaluating the implemented data mining system in a higher educational system.

Nowadays, higher education encounters many challenges which prevent them to achieve their quality objectives. Some of these problems come from knowledge gap in higher educational processes. Knowledge gap is the lack of enough and deep knowledge at educational processes such as evaluation, planning, registration, counselling and marketing.

Data mining technology can help bridging knowledge gap in higher educational systems. The hidden patterns that are discovered by data mining techniques from educational data can improve decision making processes in higher educational systems [4][5].



IV. RELATED WORK Scientific literatures related to data mining in higher  education include number of studies based on different data dimensions and different purposes. Ref. [5] shows such studies which based on students' evaluations using decision tree algorithms, quantitative methodologies adopted to mine data from Learning Management Systems (LMS). Ref. [6] has conducted an applied study about monitoring and evaluation of students' academic achievements using data mining techniques. It has developed a methodology by the derivation of performance prediction indicators to deploy a simple student performance assessment and monitoring system within a teaching and learning environment.

In attempting to find an association between students' academic achievements and continuing their postgraduate studies, ref. [5] has implemented J48 algorithm using an analysis tool applied on data collected from surveys of different specialization students of the researcher faculty.

Main purpose of this study was to predict students who tend to continue their education with postgraduate studies through decision trees. From other side, distance on-line learning  with its inherent high technical educational infrastructure and huge number of students represent a potential opportunity of research by studying quality level of web-based learning systems through analysing students' behaviour on these systems applying text and web mining techniques. Ref. [7] and [8] are examples of such researches.

Generally, we can observe that many of earlier studies tend to focus on analyzing students' evaluations and achievements with less attention to students' demographic data and other educational elements, especially different education processes. Furthermore, they have obviously a lack of clear mapping of the significant results into educational procedures or actionable guidelines for relevant educational institutions to involve these findings within the strategic plans of such institutions. This lack may be result because of that the researchers are always technical specialist rather than educators. What we have conducted in this research is involving students' demographic data within study to investigate if there are correlations between such data and students' achievements. In addition, to realize the results of this research on UST quality plans, we evolve professional educators, some stakeholders and top managers of UST in the evaluation phase of the produced model.



V. UST DATA ANALYSIS SCHEME In this section, we describe our scheme followed when  we have applied different data mining techniques on UST data.  Then, we illustrate the nature of data in terms of its sources, volume and different subject dimensions.

Our scheme uses both directed and undirected knowledge discovery. The process followed in this paper covers the following stages:  ? Building a reliable data mart (a subset of UST data warehouse which must contain all dimensions of student data). This stage passes through two main phases: databases integration and data preprocessing.

In the first phase, concerned databases are integrated from different applications into one and huge database. As a result of this phase, many integration errors are produced. These errors are processed in the second phase by applying preprocessing operations upon the data.

? In stage 2, obtaining homogenous groups of data applying clustering technique is achieved. These homogeneous groups present a good description of data and simplify next stages.

? Third stage concerns determining the relations and patterns of variables by applying association rules algorithms in terms of produced groups at last stage.

? In stage 4, we will apply decision trees algorithms to get a Knowledge representation from selected groups of data in driven with obtained association rules. The output of this stage is decision rules.

? In stage 5, results are discussed and evaluated in terms of some criteria such as validity, potential utility, simplicity and originality.

Volumn 2       As mentioned earlier, data used in this model is UST students' academic and financial data. It contains students' achievements through different academic semesters and contains them financial transactions as well. One of the most important reasons for choosing this data was the huge volume. Because of that some faculties have changed its names and also some academic programs done after 2005, we find us have constrained to use the data produced before 2005 to maintain the validity of produced patterns. So, we have selected the database of UST that contains records from the academic year 1993 to 2005.For lucky, it also still huge, it contains about 14,106 students who have 334,211 academic transactions and 55,302 financial transactions.



VI.  APPLYING DATA MINING TECHNIQUES This section explains the different stages of  implementation. It contains data preprocessing stage and different stages of applying the proposed techniques. For achieving data preprocessing, different Ms-Access queries were applied. In order to apply proposed data mining techniques, WEKA environment has been used. This product has been chosen according to some criteria such as supporting different platforms including various algorithms and wide data input/output options.

First of all, a reliable data mart has been created. For this end, different operations were applied on the original databases. These operations were database integration, missing values filtering, erroneous values processing, variables adaptation and variables decoding. The operations consumed about 80% of the overall time.

Many transformation operations have been applied over different values either to be more appropriate for coming later processing or to be suitable for some data mining techniques used. From an initial population of 334,211 records, a final population of 330,524 records was obtained.

As mentioned in the previous section, the first technique was applied is clustering. Clustering data was applied using different algorithms in WEKA environment. In order to obtain a global optimal solution, Iterative implementations of k-means algorithm have been applied with different initial random values. As shown in Tabel I The instances are grouped into 7 clusters. Clusters (2, 3, 5, and 6) show that grouping students in these clusters tend to have a very poor score (fail). The larger clusters 0 and 3 also indicate poor academic achievement (pass and fail).

TABLE I.  ATTRIBUTES OF DIFFERENT CLUSTERS  Attribute   Cluster  Faculty Status Accumulate d Score  Payment Behavior  0 Science &Engineering  graduate pass pay  1 The National College  Dropped out  pass pay  2 Science& Engineering  Dropped out  fail don?t pay  3 Medical Sciences  regular fail pay  4 Arts remain pass pay 5 Arts regular fail pay  6 Administrative Sciences  regular fail pay   In addition, cluster 2 shows that students in this group  tend to have a negative behavior toward fees payment. They also then dropped out from the university.

Generally, produced model (clusters) shows that in consideration of issues relevant to academic field, three regions can lay out data: student drop out, student academic achievements, and fees payment. Thus, next models have selected homogenous grouped according these three attributes, especially with decision rules.

After applying clustering technique in which relation between variables is going to be clear, association rules with guiding lines from clustering will produce clear relations and patterns. Association rules technique was applied with WEKA as well. Association rules were produced using Apriori algorithm.. Seventy two rules have been produced in this stage. According to three issues discussed in clustering, these results can be concluded as follows: One rule with confidence 0.8 clearly shows that dropped out students were failed regardless faculty or department. Another rule with confidence 0.68 shows that the most students' failures occur at earlier levels, specifically at level 2. Students have a poor score at high school; have a poor score in academic accumulative average as shown in a rule with confidence 0.55. Students that have good scores at high school; will graduate as shown in a rule with confidence 0.7 and in other rule with confidence 0.69. Students who pay late or don?t pay, usually dropout as appear in a rule with confidence 0.61.

Three important rules were produced clearly address a remarkable new issue: most regular students don?t have a good score in academic accumulative average especially at Administrative faculty, and Faculty of Science & Engineering.

After that, decision rules have been obtained with the assistance of results produced in the last two stages. Three classifier attributes (decision attributes) have been selected to apply the technique of decision trees. Classifier attributes were student status, academic accumulated average, and payment status. Id3 and J48 algorithms were used. By tracing produced trees, we can see that many produced patterns in the last stages were confirmed as decisions. Four important decision trees produced seven clear decision rules about students' success and failures, student drop out, and fees payment behavior. Produced model is as follows:  If student_status=Regular    then academic_accumelated_average = fail     (62%).

If student_status= Dropped-out then academic_accumelated_average = fial     (66.6%).

If student_status= Dropped-out and    student_level= 1 or  2  or  3 then academic_accumelated_average= fail  (60%).

If student_level=1 and academic_accumelated_average=fail   then student_status = Dropped-out    (90%).

If student_level=2   and academic_accumelated_average=fail    then student_status = Dropped-out (60%).

Volumn 2       If student_status =DROP OUT then payment_behaviour = don?tpayer (87.5%).

If   student_level= 2 or and   high_school_score=pass or accepted   then student_status = Dropped-out (57%).

We can see that patterns produced by association rules are confirmed here: poor scores in high school affect students' performance in faculty (rule 7). Most regular students have a poor score in accumulated average. Most drop out occurs at earlier levels (rules 3, 7, 4, 5). Student's failures lead to drop out. Students that are dropped out usually pay fees late or don?t pay (rule 6). In addition, many produced decision rules confirmed that there are a relationship between students drop out and poor scores in some courses. In general: Most of these courses were at the earlier years (1 or 2). Most of these courses have a complex nature.



VII.  DISCUSSION AND EVALUATION Results have been evaluated by the university academic  administration experts and decision makers in consideration of some criteria (validity, reality, utility and originality) on a scale from 1 to 10. These criteria were carefully selected to evaluate the produced model keeping in mind criteria that evaluate the models of decision trees in general. Results have a general score of (8.4). The best evaluated characteristic was the utility with score of (9.5) followed by validity (8.7) and reality (8.5) and finally originality (7).

Keeping in mind all produced results, some of these results were questionable. The common level of achievement for regular students which were poor addresses many inquiries. As shown in Fig. 1, the distribution of the academic achievements is so far about the normal distribution in which grade fail represent the most percentage as produced in the model. This result can be justified by various reasons which can be studied by decisions makers at UST. As shown, the most failures are at the early levels, and these failures affect student dropping out, these poor scores may appear due to poor scores at high school, or maybe, students don?t know the nature of different department adequately before starting study, so students may surprise with the nature of the department and so, they drop out. Also, some students may have a high ambition not compatible with cognitive abilities of themselves. These types of students may face many disappointments which can be avoid with academic guidance.

Figure 1.  Distribution of student's academic achievements.

Also correct admission policy can help or even adding a primary semester/year to prepare students. Finally, changing  positions of some complex courses to upper levels within programs specifications may help reducing the ratio of students' drop out.

Furthermore, produced model shows that dropped out students have a negative behavior regarding to fees payment.

Negative feelings which are a result of failures may make students feel not settled and so, they don?t easily pay fees.



VIII. . RECOMMENDED ACTION STRATEGIES Finally, results can be mapped into some action strategies: ? Developing an academic guidance program could  present a vital service for new students. It could help them determining their abilities and attitudes that will help in choosing the appropriate specialization.

Also, this program can present consulting services about study strategies and skills, administrative procedure, psycho-social support for students to support their academic performance.

? Objective admission policy should be designed in each specialization independently in terms of the nature and academic standards.

? Academic programs specification especially courses flowcharts and paths should be carefully reviewed so that each course should be in the appropriate position with its appropriate prerequisites so students can move toward upper level smoothly.

? Some academic programs may in need to a primary semester or even a year to prepare students to study specialization courses later.

? Some courses which have a complex scientific nature which were included in patterns related with failures and dropout may be in need to develop the teaching and learning strategies and methods. It could be taught using tutorials labs to make it easier for students especially if these courses are at earlier levels.

? Supporting students to enhance their academic achievements leads to improvement of fees payment.

This crucial pattern can be considered as a strategic policy in UST focusing in supporting students especially at earlier levels.

? Students' achievements evaluations methods of different academic programs should be carefully reviewed and should be strongly involved in academic annual evaluation of university which is responsibility of quality assurance and development department.

? Building a reliable incremental data warehouse involves all branches with different subjects dimensions will help decision makers in UST to improve academic performance.



IX.  CONCLUSION Keeping in mind the aim of this research, the proposed  solution has achieved a good result. Findings were well evaluated in context of some criteria such as validity and reality by the decision makers at UST. Quality assurance departments in higher education institutions could get a  Volumn 2       useful knowledge about the quality level of the different elements in education systems using such techniques.

Discovered patterns could be reformulated into academic strategies about many academic issues as admission policy, students' services, and teaching methods. As farther work, these findings can be improved with expanding dimensions and volume of data such as attendance, students? transfer data, residence data, staff data and other branches data.

REFERENCES [1]  Two Crows Corporation, ?Introduction to Data Mining and  Knowledge Discovery?, Scientific Report, 1999.

[2]  Jing Luan, ?Data Mining Applications in Higher Education?, 2004.

[3]  P.Ramasubramanian et all, ?Mining Analysis of SIS database using  Computational Intelligence and Multimedia Applications, 2007.

[4]   Naeimeh Delavaril et all , ?A New Model for Using Data Mining Technology in Higher Educational Systems?, IEEE  ,2004.

[5]  Vasile Paul Bre_felean, ?Analysis and Predictions on Students' Behavior Using Decision Trees in Weka Environment?, Proceedings of the ITI 2007 29th Int. Conf. on Information Technology Interfaces, June 25-28, 2007.

[6]  Emmanuel N. Ogor, ? Student Academic Performance Monitoring and Evaluation Using Data Mining Techniques?, Fourth Congress of Electronics, Robotics and Automotive Mechanics, IEEE, 2007.

[7]  Irene Kuan Lau and Joseph Fong, ?Investigation on the Effectiveness on Web-Based Learning Using Data Mining Approach?, Proceedings of the 14th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications, IEEE, 2003.

[8]  Juan Jos?e Garc??a Adeva et all, ?Applying Plagiarism Detection to Engineering Education ?, IEEE, 2006.

