

Study of Privacy Preserving Data Mining  Haisheng Li East China Jiaotong University, Nachang330013,China  lhscqdx@163.com    Abstract?There has been an important research area that how to protect private information or sensitive knowledge from leaking in the mining process, meanwhile obtain more accurate results of data mining. This paper describes data distortion, data encryption and reconstruction techniques in detail. Following a comprehensive comparison and analysis of existing technologies, the future work is showed.

Keywords- Data Dining; Privacy Preserving; Data Distortion; Data Encryption; Data Reconstruction

I. INTRODUCTION With the database technology and network technology  development, people generate and collect data has increased dramatically. Data mining as a powerful data analysis tools, can find the potential models and rules in data, and is applied more and more in-depth such as business decisions, scientific and medical research areas. At the same time, data mining is directly on the original data set, which also produced the inevitable leakage of privacy. So the main research direction of privacy preserving data mining is that how to protect private information or sensitive knowledge from leaking in the mining process, meanwhile obtain accurate results of data mining.

Privacy preserving data mining can be divided into two levels [1]. The first level of privacy preserving data mining is the protection of sensitive data, such as name, id number, address and other sensitive data. The second level of privacy preserving data mining, called knowledge hiding in database, is the protection of sensitive knowledge that is showed by data mining. It is problem to be solved is how to effectively hide sensitive rules of the data set, with minimal impact on non-sensitive rules and the usefulness of data sets.

Privacy protection technology is what is used to hide sensitive data or sensitive knowledge, which is mainly focused on data distortion, data encryption and data reconstruction technology to the study at present.



II. THE DISTORTION-BASED PRIVACY PRESERVING  Data distortion perturbs the original data to achieve privacy preserving. The perturbed data would meet the two conditions. First, an attacker cannot discover the real original data. In other words, the attacker cannot reconstruct the real original data from the issuance of the distortion data.

Second, the distorted data is still to maintain some properties of the original data, namely some of the information derived from the distorted data are equivalent to data obtained from the original information. So it ensures that some applications based on the distorted data are feasible. At present, the  techniques of privacy preserving based on data distortion include randomization [2], data blocking [3] and so on. Data randomization is the technique that adds random noise to the original data, and then distributes the disturbed data.

Randomization techniques include two types. The first type of randomization is called random perturbation. The other type of randomization is called randomized response.

A. random disruption based on association rule hiding Random perturbation modifies sensitive data in random  process, thus achieving data privacy preserving. The basic idea of data transformation method is: to find the sensitive transactions to support the sensitive rule in the original database, to delete them or add items, so support or confidence of the sensitive rule reduced to below the threshold specified in order to achieve the sensitive rule hidden.

The problem of mining association rules was introduced in [4]. Let I = {i1, i2, ? , in} be a set of literals, called items. Let D be a set of transactions, which is the database that is going to be disclosed. Each transaction t ? D is an item set such that t ?  I, an association rule is an expression X ?Y where X ?  I, Y ?  I, and X ? Y =? . The X and Y are called respectively the left hand side and right hand side of the rule. The confidence of the rule is calculated as | X ? Y |/|X|, where |X| is the number of transactions containing X and | X ? Y | is the number of transactions containing both X and Y. The support of the rule is calculated as | X ? Y |/|N|, where |N| is the number of transactions in D. The problem of mining association rules is to find all rules that are greater than the user-specified minimum support and minimum confidence.

B. data blocking Data blocking is different from data transformation  modifying the data and provide non-real data, it don?t distribute some specific data to achieving data privacy preserving because some applications hope more to conduct studies based on real data. Blocking specific responses to the data table that the certain value of data table is replaced with an uncertain symbol. For example, an uncertain symbol ??? with the exception of {0,1} is introduced to realize the Boolean association rule hiding. Because some values are instead of  ???, then the count of some itemsets is an uncertain value that is located between a minimum estimate and the maximum estimated value range. So achieving sensitive association rule hiding is to design an algorithm, in case of the data values as little as possible blocking, the  Third International Symposium on Intelligent Information Technology and Security Informatics  DOI 10.1109/IITSI.2010.14         support and confidence of sensitive association rule is controlled at below a predetermined threshold.

C. random disruption based on classification rule Classification is a process, which can identify the model  or function to describe and distinguish data classes or concepts, in order to be able to use predictive models to mark the unknown object classes. Classification goal is to construct a classification model to predict future data trends.

At present classification methods are mainly used in classification rules, decision trees, neural networks and so on[5].

Parsimonious downgrading is a combination of rules and decision tree classification of privacy preserving method [6].

Parsimonious downgrading is such an algorithm that the information in the data to be downgraded will be removed as a formal description. The so-called downgrading is to make the sensitivity level or the privacy level reduced to level can be announced. In other words, downgrade is right to make public release of information privacy preserving handling process. The parsimonious downgrading uses ? instead of the data to be blocked, while the other blocking methods are often used ??? instead of the data to be blocked. ? values are between 0 and 1,which represents the blocked property to take the probability of a certain value.

D. randomized response[7] The basic idea of randomized response is: the data owner  distributes the original perturbed data, so that an attacker can not be higher than the predetermined threshold probability to obtain the original data whether to include some real or false information. Randomized response technique and random perturbation techniques difference is that sensitive data is through a kind of indirect way of answering specific questions provided to the outside world. Randomized response model has two types: related-question model and unrelated-question model. Related-question model designs the two opposing issues of sensitive data. For example:  ? I contain sensitive values A; ? I don?t contain sensitive value A.

Data owners according to own data select at random a  question to be answered. But questioner isn?t aware of the specific problems to be answered by data owners. After large amounts of data owners answered questions, the proportion of respondents containing sensitive values and the proportion of respondents not containing sensitive values can be obtained by calculating. It is supposed that he probability of respondents randomly selecting the first question is ?, and then the probability of the second question to be answered is 1-?. In various proportions stated as follows:  ? P (A=yes), The proportion of the data owners containing sensitive values A;  ? P (A=no), The proportion of the data owners not containing sensitive values A;  ? P*(A=yes), The proportion of respondents answered yes;  ? P*(A=no), The proportion of respondents answered no.

The following equation set: ? P* (A=yes)=P (A=yes)??+P (A=no)?(1-?); ? P*(A=no)=P (A=no)??+P (A=yes)?(1-?).

Based on the above two equations, and combined  estimate of all respondents drawn from p * (a = yes) and p * (a = no), p (a = yes), p (a = no) can be obtained.

Throughout this process, the inability to identify issues related to the respondents to answer and therefore cannot determine whether they contain sensitive data values.

Randomized response technique used to provide information with response model, so are used for processing categorical data.



III. THE ENCRYPTION -BASED PRIVACY PRESERVING  In a distributed environment the primary issue to achieve privacy preserving is the security of communications, and encryption technology just to meet this demand. Therefore, privacy preserving based on data encryption technology commonly applies to distributed applications. Distributed applications store data using two models: vertically partitioned data model and horizontally partitioned data model. Vertically partitioned data refers to data by property located in different sites, all sites stored data does not overlap. Horizontally partitioned data refers to data distributed in each site according to records in this condition, the various sites without having to know the specific record information to other sites; we can calculate the overall association rules [10].

There are a lot of data mining algorithms on cryptogr- aphy technology to solve real privacy issues, for example: secure multi-party computation, SMC. SMC is defined as in a distrust of the multi-user networks; each user can be coordinated through the network to complete the reliable computing tasks, while maintaining the security of their data [8][9]. B.Pinkas put forward a theoretical study of cryptography used in data mining privacy preserving, and demonstrated different kinds of data mining problems can be transformed into SMC [8].

For the vertically partitioned data mining association rules, the difficulty is how to calculate the support of itemset, while using secure scalar product or secure size of set intersection to the problem can be resolved [12]. Literature [12] described an algorithm applied to Expectation Maximization clustering without disclosure of information on each site because the algorithm used secure sum computing. In the multi- classification mining areas, Wenliang Du proposed security classification algorithm on vertically partitioned data using secure scalar product [13]; While Liddell made the use of encryption methods to establish the horizontally partitioned data decision tree, and it translate the search for the best classification property into secure multi-party computation [14].



IV. THE RECONSTRUCTION -BASED PRIVACY PRESERVING  Data reconstruction includes numerical data reconstruc- tion and binary data and classification data reconstruction.

For the numerical data of the reconstruction techniques: the original data is modified by discrimination methods and the value of the deformation method, then use reconstruction algorithm to construct the distribution of original data [11].

Literature [16] proposed an improved method based on Bayesian reconstruction with Expectation Maximization algorithm. In the case of a large enough data set, Expectation Maximization algorithm can get the original data distribution of the maximum likelihood estimate. In addition, numerical data reconstruction can achieve the original data protection, but sensitive knowledge is not protected. For the binary data and classification data reconstruction: literature [15] used a randomization technology to modify the binary data and classification data of the association rules as dimensions.



V. ASSESSMENT OF THE PRIVACY PRESERVING DATA MINING ALGORITHMS  So far, there is no a privacy preserving data mining algorithm to effectively hide the various data sets. The current algorithms are mostly designed for specific data sets; therefore, there is no a specific criterion to obtain an accurate assessment of the performance of each algorithm.

But generally speaking, privacy preserving algorithms can be evaluated and compared from the following areas [17]:  ? Efficiency of the algorithm: The main is the algorithm running time to hide sensitive data or sensitive information. It is necessary to evaluate an important indicator of various algorithms.

? Availability of the algorithm: Availability of the algorithm refers to data sets processed by privacy preserving technology, it contains information that should be as far as possible to meet the needs of data mining. If the global association rules derived from data sets processed by privacy preserving algorithms is wrong, or does not reflect the true situation, so that the algorithms lost availability.

? Level of privacy preserving: Level of privacy preserving refers to the extent to which the success of sensitive information hidden and in the data set to be distributed on the use of varieties of data mining algorithms excavated the success rate of private information.

? Scalability of the algorithm: Scalability of the algorithm refers to the ability to handle massive data sets or the variation trend in processing efficiency when the amount of data increases. The efficiency of change is relatively slow for a good scalability of the algorithm when the amount of data increases.



VI. CONCLUSION Privacy preserving is applied widely in many fields and  is the research subject of the emerging academic in recent years. This paper describes the distortion-based privacy preserving, the encryption -based privacy preserving and the reconstruction -based privacy preserving. At present a variety of privacy preserving data mining algorithms are still some shortcomings, and are targeted at specific applications  and data sets, rather than to be extended to the general. The premise of ensuring the privacy of how to reduce the loss of accuracy, how to further improve the algorithm efficiency and privacy preserving generality in different types, distribution characteristics of different data sets are the direction of the future worthy of further study.

