Study of Association Rule Mining on Technical Action of Ball Games

Abstract?Association rule mining is an important topic in the field of Data Mining, which finds strong association rules by mining frequent item sets. Apriori algorithm is typical Boolean algorithm for mining association rules, which uses the method of iteration to create high-dimensional frequent item sets through low-dimensional ones. This paper introduces the design methods and technology realization of association rule mining by Apriori algorithm in technical action of ball games, after a simple description of ball scripting language design method. Then take the association rule mining on table tennis technical and tactical analysis system as an example. That gives the further evidence of the effectiveness of Apriori algorithm.

And resolve the problem of association rule mining on technical movement of ball games.

Keywords-Data mining; Association rules; Apriori algorithm; Technical action analysis

I.  INTRODUCTION Ball game is an important component part in the field of  competitive sports. The field of competitive sports has accumulated a large amount of data. At present, The analysis on these data uses statistical methods. Sports statistics mainly use the statistical principles and methods[1].The disadvantage of statistical methods is random sampling. It will lost useful information, and do not have good results for dealing with large amounts of data. In addition, most of the statistical analysis techniques are on the basis of perfect mathematical theory and lofty technique, so it requires high performance for users[2]. Analyze the data in the area of competitive sports by using Data Mining technique ,discover the important information easily be overlooked and help coaches make the right judgments have became a new challenge on the road of sports information.

One main feature of ball games is the relationship of technical movements. So association rule mining has became an important part of analysis of ball games. At present, ball association rules mining are mainly focused on application of Apriori Algorithm. According to the concept of support, it analyses the correlate of actions users specify, but has not formed a wide range of association rule mining.

This paper adopts Apriori algorithm to analyze match data on the basis of information collection of ball games, resolves the problem of association rule mining on technical movements of ball games, and achieves the purpose of assisting coaches with decision-making.



II. SCRIPTING COLLECTION METHOD OF BALL GAMES  Balls mentioned in this paper include volleyball, table tennis and basketball. In this paper, association rule mining is on the basis of data collection of ball games, so the description and collection methods of ball scripting language must be designed. The common feature of ball scripting description language is that the language must can descript the process of games, so the collection method of ball games is based on process. That requires designing a variety of ball scripting language according to the characteristics of technical movement and games.

Ball scripting description language is defined in the analysis system. The collection technique is based on technical movements coding, which collect the technical movements athletes actually use into computer, according to technical movement encoding rules. Coding uses the form of four yards, and is separated by dots. Below take the table tennis as an example to illustrate the design method of scripting description language and the design method of scripting collection. The scripting language definition of table tennis and basketball, and scripting collection adopt similar design approach. This paper does not elaborate on that.

The scripting coding rule of table tennis includes hitting approaches, hitting effects, technical movements and where the ball is, among which, hitting approaches are classified into fifteen kinds, that is active forehand oblique line(Z), active backhand oblique line(F),passive forehand oblique line(B), passive backhand oblique line(T),sideways oblique line(C),active forehand midst (A), active backhand midst(K), passive forehand midst (Q), passive backhand midst(L), sideways midst(P), active forehand beeline(G), active backhand beeline(Y), passive forehand beeline(W), passive backhand beeline(D) and sideways beeline(S);hitting effects are classified into downward swirling(X),side upwards(S), side downwards (C),not-rotation(B) and fast rush ball(K); technical movements are classified into serve(F),attacking ball(G), loop drive(H),chop stroke(X), swing(B), chop(C), block (D), hand-picking (T), split(P);table tennis table is devided  into ten zones. On the basis of above encoding rule, schematic diagram of technique movement coding rule is as follows.

Figure 1.Technique movement coding rule  X                X               X               X   hitting approach, hitting effect, starting zone, ending zone  2010 International  Conference on Measuring Technology and Mechatronics Automation  DOI 10.1109/ICMTMA.2010.340     According to the above coding rule, a round of table tennis competition ?active forehand oblique line downward swirling near net 16 active backhand oblique line chop far away from table 61 active backhand oblique line loop drive far away from table 12 active backhand oblique line block down the net 20 score ?can be described as? zx16.fc61.fh12.fd20.?.



III. DESIGN OF APPRIORI ALGORITHM IN ANALYSE OF BALL TECHNICAL MOVEMENTS Apriori algorithm is a basic algorithm to find frequent  item sets[3].In acquisition and analysis system of ball games, collect match data according to the collection method of scripting language. In the database, a round of the competition is stored as a record. The design goal of Apriori is to form an association rule mining middleware. Thorough iteration, it searches out all frequent item sets of the transaction database to lay the foundation for generating association rules.

A. Design of Transaction Database Table  Transaction data sets is the direct data source of association rule mining[4].Boolean association rule mining is based on transaction database. Transaction table is generated on the basis of processing the data in relational database of ball games. The relational database of ball games includes match information table and scripting information table. They build relationships through match number. Transaction table take technical movements of table tennis as fields.

Data processing mainly uses the method of separation.

Separate the scripting records by dots, subtract zones, just leave match actions ,gain and loss mark. Then extract all actions of the member to be analyzed. In accordance with considerations of boolean association rules, assign 1 on the corresponding action code field position of the transaction table.

B. Algorithm Design Agrawal firstly proposed the association rule mining  problem among item sets of custom transaction database in 1993[5].Apriori algorithm finds all frequent item sets of transaction database through recursion.Firstly,generate frequent 1-item sets L1,then generate frequent 2-item sets L2,until there is some value ,which makes L is empty, algorithm stops. In the k iteration, firstly generate candidate k-item set Ck, the scan database to calculate the support count of every item set, reserve the item sets to form frequent k-item sets. Their support is greater than or equal to the minimum degree of support. In which, Ck need two steps to generate.

1)joining. Every item set is generated by joining two item sets of Lk-1.The two item sets must meet the following requirements. Their previous (k-2) items are the same, and the (k-1) item is different from each other.

2)pruning. Any non-empty subset of a frequent item sets is frequent item sets, so after joining, it need delete the frequent item sets, which have non-frequent subset. That is pruning[6].

The pseudocode[7] of Apriori algorithm is as follows.

L1=find_frequent_1-itemsets(D) for(k=2 Lk-1?? k++){  Ck=apriori_gen(Lk-1 min_sup) for each transaction t  D{//scan D for counts  Ct=subset(Ck  t) for each candidate c  Ct  c. count ++ } L k = {c  C k | c. count ? min_sup}  } return L= k L k  prodedure  apriori _ gen(Lk-1:frequent(k-1)- itemsets; min_sup : minimu  m support threshold)  for each itemset l1 Lk-1 for each itemset l2 Lk-1  if(l1[1]=l2[1]) (l1[2]=l2[2]) ? (l1[k-2]=l2[k- 2]) (l1[k-1]<l2[k-1]) then{  c=l1 l2;//join step:generate candidates if has_infrequent_subset(c,Lk-1) then  delete c; else add c to Ck;  } return Ck;  procedure has_infrequent_subset(c:candidate k-itemset; Lk-1: frequent(k-1)-itemset)  for each (k-1)-subset s of c if s Lk-1 then return TRUE;  return FALSE;

IV. CASE ANALYSIS In this paper, Apriori algorithm middleware has been  applied in the table tennis technical and tactical analysis system, and achieved good result. It gives the maximum support for the table tennis technical and tactical analysis system.

A. Data Preprocessing  This paper chooses three games of Wang Hao, china table tennis team members as analysis object of mining association rules. Extract match code from table tennis relational database. The data format is ?zx16. fc61. fh12.

fd20.?.That is the description of a round of competition.

Now, separate the code, the separation steps are as follows.

1)Firstly, separate the code, subtract zones, just leave math actions , gain and loss score. Separate the above code, then get the action ZX,FC,FH and FD.

2)Check out whether the member to be analyzed is serving side. If he is, extract his actions from the first action, and then extract interval action until the record is end. If he is not, extract his actions from the second action, then extract interval action until the record is end.

3)After separating, assign 1 on the corresponding action code field position of the transaction table.

B. Mining Frequent Item Sets In order to find high confidence association rules in a  large range, we set lower minimum support threshold.

Suppose the minimum support threshold is 1%,minmum confidence level threshold is 40%.This paper mines association rules among three games of Wang Hao, a total of 352 valid data by using Apriori algorithm middleware. In order to unify abbreviations, code gain score as GO and loss score as LO. The specific process is as follows.

1)Read record data into vector container; 2)Count every word in the vector container, and store  the word and its number into another vector container; 3)Every word is a member of candidate 1-item set C1.If  the word?s support count is greater than or equal to the minmum support count,it can become frequent 1-item set,and be sotred into frequent 1-item sets vector container.The process of generating frequent 1-item sets is as figure 2.Because the candidate item sets and frequent item sets are large enough,this paper can not enumerate.

4)Join L1,L1?L1,and generate candidate 2-item sets C2.Count every word of C2. If the word?s support count is greater than or equal to the minmum support count,it can become frequent 2-item set,and be sotred into frequent 2- item sets vector container.

5) Join L2,L2?L2,and generate candidate 3-item sets C3.

Count every word of C3. If the word?s support count is greater than or equal to the minmum support count,it can become frequent 3-item set,and be sotred into frequent 3- item sets vector container.

6) Join L3,and generate candidate 4-item sets C4.C4 is null. End.

Figure 2.Generate frequent 1-item sets by candidate 1-item sets  C. Generate Association Rules The association rules of transaction database is to find  the relationship among item sets[8].Strong association rules meet the minimum support threshold and the minimum confidence threshold. Find frequent item sets from database D, then generate strong association rules.The process is as follows[2].

1)For every frequent item set l, generate its all non- empty subsets;  2)For a non-empty subset s of l, if  conf scountport lcountport  min_ )(_sup )(_sup ,put out the rules ?s=>(l-  s)?.

In which, min_conf is minimum confidence threshold.

Figure 3 is the association rule mining result.

Figure 3.Association rule mining result  D. Result Analysis Analyze the association rule mining results of math data  of Wang Hao,we can get that his forehand and backhand are both skilled.His main score point is attacking ball, in combination with loop drive and fast band. Coaches should be thinking about is that how to combine with fast band, loop drive ,attacking ball to increase the probability score.

Wang Hao?s main losing score point is defense. How to reduce defense losing score is also an important problem.

But in the mining results, there are still unreasonable association rules. That is unavoidable. However, how to delete the unreasonable association rules to increase the correctness of mining results is to be resolved.



V. CONCLUSION In this paper, the solution and realization scheme for  association rule mining on analysis system of ball matches by Apriori algorithm is proposed. A Apriori algorithm middleware is realized, and it has been verified in the table tennis technical and tactical analysis system, achieved the expected purpose. The association rule analysis is more universal than that between specified actions. Coaches can observe association rules to find hidden information. But how to increase the correctness of mining results is to be resolved. At present, in order to find a suitable threshold to analyze the association rules, coaches can only set different levels of support threshold and confidence threshold to observe the changes in association rules.

