Research and Design for Intrusion Detection System  with Hybrid Detector and Apriori Algorithm

Abstract?Network and host Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) have become a standard component in security infrastructures.

As the action of intrusion represents variable, complicated, and uncertainty characteristic, they face so many problems to resolve for intrusion detection. Each approach has its strengths and weaknesses. We propose a hybrid IDS, which combines network and host IDS, with anomaly and misuse detection mode, utilizes auditing programs to extract an extensive set of features that describe each network connection or host session, and applies data mining programs to learn rules that accurately capture the behavior of intrusions and normal activities. We use an association rule to track all relevant data dependency rule sets for different access roles using a hierarchical structure. We identify malicious transactions from the transaction logs in the database using the data dependency rule sets. These rule sets are continuously updated and stored in a repository. The optimized algorithm actually improves the performance of IDS. Our approach is shown to reduce data access bottlenecks, and ensures minimal manual intervention for maintaining a secure database.

Keywords-intrusion detection; hybrid ids; data mining; analysis engine; apriori algorithm

I.  INTRODUCTION Apriori algorithm in data mining can show that the  attribute-values frequently appear together in a given data set.

It can mine the relationships between attribute values from a database table, and is more suitable method for intrusion detection system.

The most representative of the research in the world is Wenke Lee Research Group in Columbia University [1], [2], 1998. They were supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and the National Natural Science Foundation (NSF) funding, and focused on the research in this area. Since then, the IDS Research Group of the Department of Computer Science, under the leadership of Professor Salvatore J. Stolfo, carried out extensive study on data mining-based IDS.

They have been divided their research into twelve sub-topics.

Their research is on top in the world. The SANS (System Admin, Audit, Network, Security) has outstanding performance in this area [3].

In recent years, both the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and key universities and colleges in China are actively carrying out researches in this area [4], [5]. With the help of the Development Project of National Key Basic Research and the Major Projects Fund of CAS Knowledge Innovation Project,  PhD Xu Jing, in Computing Center, Research Institute of High Energy Physics of CAS, made a preliminary implementation for Intrusion Detection System based on data mining. With the help of the National Natural Science Fund, doctoral students of Department of Computer Science at Nanjing University of Science, Wuhan University, Northern Jiaotong University, and other key universities carried out similar researches.

Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) have been developed to identify any unauthorized attempts or successful attacks on any type of monitored data or resources available as part of a network or host system. Most IDSs detect such malicious activity either at the transaction level or at the operating system (OS) level. It is also shown that transaction level attacks take care of most OS level attacks. But there are many attacks which occur internal to the network such as by a user with lesser privileges accessing data that requires more access rights.

Such attacks can be identified by analyzing the transaction logs, which contains all the transactions made on a database.

By analyzing the characteristics of hacker programs with back door, by which hackers control target hosts, networks may cause unexpected connection records. Because of huge amount of data in the network processing, the number of connection records after filtered is also very impressive. While establishing a connection, it will increase a record. Therefore, we can not simply compare the connection records to achieve intrusion detection.

In recent years, the use of data mining knowledge for intrusion detection system has won more and more attention, but there are a lot of problems. For examples, it is difficult to have a clear standard in the selection of test data, there are large amounts of useless information in the results of mining out of the experiment data, and how we express the rules mined from the experiment data for intrusion detection system.

In [6], malicious writes are the major security threats and simple approach is given to identify malicious writes using data dependencies. The paper does not identify illegal reads.

Our approach identifies all types of illegal accesses. Data mining is required to identify hidden data dependencies which might cause security threats and using triggers and stored procedures, we can only prevent expected loop holes. A possible solution is using dynamic stored procedures to maintain changing database data dependencies for intrusion detection but this an inflexible approach especially for a database which is accessed using a web based application.

Our approach deals with illegal transactions submitted to the DBMS via some mechanism using a user id with lower access rights using a web based application. Also it will prevent those intruders who bypassed the access control mechanism as the data dependency rule set will still track the valid sequence of reads and writes required for each transaction.

The remaining section of this paper is organized as follows.

In the second section, the paper describes the framework of hybrid intrusion detection system. In the third section, we show the experimental design and results of apriori algorithm in data mining. Finally, we draw a conclusion and exhibit a prospect.



II. THE FRAMEWORK OF HYBRID IDS Intrusion detection technology is a new security support  mechanism, and monitors the network system without affecting the network performance to prevent internal and external attacks and misuse. Intrusion detection systems have a variety of classifications. In accordance with the objects of the system detection, they are divided into the host-based, the network- based, and the hybrid IDS; in accordance with system architecture, they are divided into centralized and distributed IDS; and finally in accordance with the detection type, they can be divided into anomaly-based model and misuse-based model IDS.

The hybrid IDS in the paper is a combination of intrusion detection engines of misuse and anomaly detection, uses data mining algorithms as the data processing for vast amounts of security audit data, and generates detection models and test models separately from the network data and host system calls, as shown in Fig. 1:   Figure 1.  Intrusion Detection System with Hybrid Detector and  Apriori Algorithm  The hybrid IDS consists of four parts: data warehouse, sensors, analysis engine and alarm system.

A. Data warehouse Data warehouse technology has the following functions: to  manage decision-making process, subject-oriented, integrated, and time-related data collection, to support multi-process and multi-threading technology. Many commercial DBMS have the function. The project uses SQL Server 2005 data warehouse technology, which includes Analysis Services. It can easily set up a data warehouse, achieve distributed computing, and provide OLE DB Controls and ADO (ActiveX Data Objects) technology, and has a flexible data model, etc. Obviously, the features can improve the speeds of the data mining and the analysis engine.

Data warehouse technology is beneficial that the different components asynchronously handle the same piece of data  stored in a database. Therefore, it is the heart of the data and models in the whole system.

B. Data Collectors Sensors are closely related with the network operating  system, usually to discuss Windows system or UNIX/Linux systems. This paper sets out technical means of sensors as an example of Windows system, as Fig. 2 shows.

Figure 2.  Data collector diagram  1) Host Sensors They gather information in monitored hosts with a variety  of methods, such as application logs, security logs and event logs, running applications and registry changes.

After set up audit features, Windows Server will monitor various states of the system, and write them to logs. With the help of Windows API functions, we develop programs to monitor the system logs, running applications and registry changes, and to send them to the host sensor manager of the analysis engine to be analyzed.

We use the hook function to intercept API calls.

Hook is an important technology of Windows message  processing mechanism. With installing a variety of hooks, the application can set the appropriate subroutines to monitor the system messaging. Before messages reach their destinations, subroutines intercept them and make some analysis according to the user requirement. Hook is divided into thread-specific hooks and global hooks. Thread-specific hooks monitor the specified thread, and the global hooks monitor all the threads in the system. For the global hooks, hook functions must be included in a separate dynamic-link library (DLL) so that they can be called by a variety of associated applications.

Hook function is a mechanism for application programs to monitor message flows and to process some type of the messages that have not yet reached the purpose window in the system.

2) Network Sensors With the netstat tool of Windows system, network sensors  collect the network connection information established between computers. Netstat command can collect all the open port information on the computers. We may design a program to run netstat command at a regular interval, and to output the results. But this way will add to the burden on the system. In a relatively busy system, the records of a day may go up to some  Data Warehouse  Data Collectors  Analysis Engine  Alarm System    ?  Network Sensors  Sensor-1 Sensor-2 Sensor-m   ?  Host Sensors Sensor-2 Sensor-1 Sensor-n  Network Sensor Manager  Host Sensor Manager  Data Warehouse  Analysis Engine    GB in size.

Therefore, we can optimize the program to capture easily the network connection information. It first lists all open ports, monitors the port whether it is a new open and when it is closed, records the port information only updated, and outputs records to Network Sensor Manager in Analysis Engine. The records include port services, port number, activation time, and time stamp and so on.

C. Analysis Engine Analysis Engine consists of three parts: Network/Host  Sensor Manager, Misuse and Anomaly Detector, Mining Algorithm Library and Pattern Mining, as Fig. 3 shows.

Figure 3.  Analysis enginen diagram  1) Sensor Manager receives data from sensors, then analyse the data, translate them into the form of database records, and store them into the data warehouse.

2) Misuse and Anomaly Detection detects intrusions based on the matching patterns stored in the data warehouse.

Traditional IDS is divided into two separate types: misuse detection and anomaly detection. Anomaly detection is known as behavior-based detection, which sets up the behavioral models for users under normal circumstances in the learning phase, then compares the current user behavior with the existing behavioral models, and founds an intrusion if the deviation is greater than the threshold of the credibility. The basic principle is that intrusion comes out if any behavior is not consistent with the known behaviors.

Misuse detection is also called knowledge-based intrusion detection, which sets up intrusion patterns for the known intrusions, then matches the current user behaviors and system status with the existing intrusion behavior patterns. The basic principle is that intrusion comes out if any behavior is consistent with the known behaviors.

We integrate these two models into the hybrid IDS, thus format new basic principles of intrusion detection: any behavior is a normal behavior if it is consistent with normal behavior model, any behavior is a intrusion behavior if it is consistent with anomaly behavior model, and others are added to the detection models in data warehouse by the Pattern Mining module based on Mining Algorithm Library to generate a new detection model. While comparing an unknown behavior with normal/anomaly behavior model, the detectors determine a normal/anomaly behavior by comparing support and  confidence level of calculated results with a given minimum support and confidence level.

3) Mining Algorithm Library and Pattern Mining for mining unknown intrusions.

Point of view from the data warehouse, data mining can be regarded as an advanced stage of online analytical processing (OLAP). We apply data mining technology to IDS, use its algorithms of association analysis and sequential pattern analysis to extract safety-related characteristic properties, generate classification models based on them, and identify automatically security incidents. The analytical methods of data mining can be divided into three parts:  The Apriori algorithm has become a well known standard for identifying patterns using association rules. Its main disadvantage is that, if a pattern of length n is needed, then n passes are needed through the items. This can become a large overhead for our current application.

The approach in this paper is a variation of the Apriori algorithm which identifies frequent rule sets using a pattern repository in linear time. The main advantage of this approach is the ease of updating the rule set and scaling. New frequent rule sets added to the database can be used immediately. Our problem requires rule sets which identify all relevant patterns and not only the frequent ones. The rule set should be complete and all dependencies that may cause a security threat need to be identified. Also the problem requires an algorithm that can quickly adjust the rule sets rather than completely redefining them depending on changing items and itemsets.

We use a pattern repository to keep track of valid data dependencies, and modify the Apriori algorithm to reflect all relevant data dependencies, using pseudo-code described below.

Input: Transaction database D; minimum support threshold min_sup.

Output: D in the frequent itemsets L.

L1= {large 1-itemsets}; for (k=2; Lk-1??; k++) { Ck=apriori_gen(Lk-1, min_sup); //To generate the next candidate itemsets; for all transactions t?D { Ct = subset (Ck, t); For all candidates c?Ct; c.count++; }; Lk={c?Ck| c.count ? min_sup}; }; return L=?Lk?  The algorithm calls the function apriori_gen (Lk-1, min_sup), which generates k candidate sets by k-1 frequent itemsets and uses the following properties: (1) If X is a frequent itemsets, then any non-empty subsets of X are frequent itemsets; (2) If X are non-frequent itemsets, then any supersets of X are non- frequent itemsets. Its pseudo-code of the algorithm is described as follows:  Data Warehouse  Alarm System  Misuse Detector  Anomaly Detector  Network Sensor Manager  Host Sensor Manager  Pattern Mining Mining Algorithm Library  Alarm Message    for each itemset l1?Lk-1 for each itemset l2?Lk-1 if (l1[1] = l2[1])?(l1[2] = l2[2])???(l1[k-1] = l2[k-1]) then { //To merge: generating candidate itemsets c=l1?l2; if has infrequent_subset (c, Lk-1) then delete c; else insert c to C; } return C;  The function of infrequent_subset (c, Lk-1) is to determine whether c adds to the k candidate itemset:  for each itemsets (k-1) subset s of c If s?Lk-1 then return TRUE; return FALSE;  D. Alarm system The main functions of alarm system are to build the  emergency measures based on alarm strategies, such as the appropriate system protection, archiving, intrusion tracing when necessary, as Fig. 4 shows.

Figure 4.  Alarm system diagram

III. THE EXPERIMENT FOR ASSOCIATION ANALYSIS A. The design of associational rule detector  Association analysis in data mining is divided into two parts: the learning phase of the rules and the detecting phase of the application of the rules learnt.

1) In the learning phase: the Analysis Engine applys association analysis to connection records from Network Sensor Manager, to mine out the associations between the values of data items under the normal state of networks, and obtaine the associational rule set, which are filtered by some artificial rules so as to be suitable for detection rule set.

2) In the detecting phase: the Analysis Engine gets the connection records from Network Sensor Manager, and matches with detection rule set to determine whether intrusion takes place. The process matching detection rule is that of the association analysis in the detecting phase.

The detection rule set made in the learning phase is the core of the Analysis Engine. Their validity has a direct impact on the accuracy of detection results.

B. The experimental results for associational rules The number of associational rules of classical and improved  Apriori algorithm with different parameters is as Table I showed. The parameter Smin stands for the minimum support and Cmin for the minimum confidence.

TABLE I.  THE NUMBER OF ASSOCIATIONAL RULES  Items Different parameters  Parameters (Smin=Cmin) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6  Classical Apriori algorithm 13610 3420 1712 907 508 145  Improved Apriori algorithm 5627 1390 785 677 290 68  From Table 1, we can see that, in the same parameter, the effective number of rules of improved algorithm is less than that of classical algorithm; and in the different parameters, the higher the value of parameters, the fewer the number of effective rules. Therefore, the optimized algorithm is useful for improving the accuracy of the rules in data mining.



IV.   CONCLUSIONS The hybrid IDS is efficient to detect known and unknown  intrusions. The research on intrusion detections based on data mining is one of the hot study topics at home and abroad.

There are still a series of theoretical and practical problems to be resolved, and a number of key technologies are required to make further deep study. The experiment shows that the design and implementation of an efficient and accurate IDS based on data mining is a large, complex project.

The experiment gives an efficient approach to deal with intrusion detection in large databases. Our Apriori algorithm reduces the computational time for identifying and maintaining effective rule sets. It provides an ability to detect malicious activity when it occurs within existing or past users of the database without slowing the database transactional activity.

In the future, we will focus the study on how to select appropriate and representative original data and to filter precisely useless rules.

