Data Mining for the Optimization in Manufacturing Process

Abstract? In the real manufacturing process, many conditions influence its process. However, there are three important factors consisting of final customer feedback information, flexible manufacturing and supplier selection affect the manufacturing process. In order to satisfy the real requirements of manufacturing process, this paper employs association rule mining of data mining technology including the above three factors to optimize the process of manufacturing.

Keywords?data mining; association rule mining; customer relationship management; supplier relationship management

I. INTRODUCTION  The intensive global competition among manufacturers to co-ordinate with and respond quickly the industry value chain from suppliers to customers has made customer-supplier relationship management important in the new business era [1]. In such circumstances, decision-making in each business plays a key role in cost reduction. On the one hand, supplier selection is one of the important functions in the supplier relationship management (SRM) because doing business with appropriate suppliers is beneficial for the organization to provide a sufficient production volume with good quality. On the other hand, customer relationship management (CRM) is a process by which a company maximizes customer infor- mation in an effort to increase loyalty and retain customers business over their lifetimes.

Many manufacturers employ the dynamic flexible man- ufacturing system (FMS) to promote new products as fast as possible. Under a static and stable manufacturing envi- ronment, many scheduling models or algorithms have been developed to raise system performance and reduce produc- tion costs [2]. Accordingly, manufacturer need to consider the factors of supplier and customer during the process of manufacturing. The aim of this paper is to propose a novel model to deal with the problem.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses related work such as CRM and SRM. Proposed model is introduced in section III. Section IV concludes our work and discusses future research.



II. RELATED WORK  In order to understand our proposed model better, CRM, SRM and data mining are introduced in this section.

A. CRM  CRM comprises a set of processes and enabling systems supporting a business strategy to build long term, profitable relationships with specific customers [3-4]. Although CRM has become widely recognized as an important business strategy, there is no widely accepted definition of CRM.

Kincaid [5] defined CRM as the strategic use of infor- mation, processes, technology, and people to manage the customer?s relationship with the company across the whole customer life cycle. Swift [6] defined CRM as a company approach to understanding and influencing customer behavior through meaningful communications in order to improve customer acquisition, customer retention, customer loyalty, and customer profitability. These definitions emphasize the importance of viewing CRM as a comprehensive process of retaining customers, with the help of business intelligence, to maximize the customer value to the organization.

CRM consists of four dimensions: customer identification, customer attraction, customer retention, and customer de- velopment [7]. Customer Satisfaction is the central concern for customer retention. Prior research suggests that customer satisfaction is an important source of competitive advantages, often leading to customer loyalty and repeat purchase. Thus, the product provided by manufacturer should satisfy the basic requirements of customer at least.

B. SRM  As the trend toward use of technology to drive competitive advantage has taken root, visionary manufacturers are starting to take advantage of a new competitive opportunity called SRM. Herrmann and Hodgson [8] defined SRM as a process involved in managing preferred suppliers and finding new ones whilst reducing costs, making procurement predictable and repeatable, pooling buyer experience and extracting the benefits of supplier partnerships. Obviously, it is focused on maximizing the value of a manufacturers supply base by providing an integrated and holistic set of management tools focused on the interaction of the manufacturer with its suppliers.

Supplier selection is one of the most parts in SRM.

Strategic partnership with better performing suppliers should     be integrated into the manufacturing to improve the perfor- mance in various aspects including reducing costs by elim- inating wastes, continuously improving quality to achieve zero defects, reducing lead time at different stages of the manufacturing, and so on. In the supplier selection pro- cess [9], there are four phases: (1) problem definition (2) formation of criteria (3) qualification (4) choice. Usually, some publications have addressed supplier selection in recent years to discuss methods such as structural modeling (ISM), expert system (ES), data envelopment analysis (DEA), cluster analysis (CA), and so on. Data mining is also an effective approach for supplier selection.

C. Data Mining  Data mining is an emerging research area, whose goal is to extract significant patterns or interesting rules from large databases. The general purpose of data mining is to process the information from data, so as to develop better ways to handle data and support further decision making. Data mining comprises a number of techniques, such as clustering, classification, association rules, prediction, regression and neural networks [10].

Association rule mining, a widely used data mining tech- nique, is used to reveal the nature and frequency of re- lationships or associations between entities. Moreover, the tasking of mining association rules is essentially to find strong association rules and pattern. Recently, there has been a popular tendency to extend association rule mining in a wider variety of problems of academia and industry, such as customer relationship management, scheduling problems in production. The basic algorithm of association rule is Apriori algorithm. Apriori algorithm finds rules and relations among variables in a data set. The algorithm finds frequent patterns and calculates the rule?s several indices. Support and confidence, are the two major indices, which have useful applications to evaluate the rules.

Accordingly, this paper aims to use association rule mining to solve customer retention and supplier selection toward the process of manufacturing.



III. PROPOSED MODEL  A. Data Mining and Customer Satisfaction  Data mining combines the statistic and artificial intelli- gence to find out the rules that are contained in the data, letters, and figures. The central idea of data mining for customer retention is that data from the past that contains information that will be useful in the future. Appropriate data mining tools, which are good at extracting and identifying useful information and knowledge from enormous customer databases, are one of the best supporting tools for making dif- ferent customer retention decisions. There are many methods of data mining including classification, estimation, prediction, clustering, and association rules. Among these, association  rules can discover the high frequency pattern and discover which things appear frequently and simultaneously [10].

Within the context of customer retention and satisfaction, data mining can be seen as a business driven process aimed at the discovery and consistent use of profitable knowledge from organizational data.

? Association: Association aims to establishing relation- ships between items which exist together in a given record. Market basket analysis and cross selling pro- grams are typical examples for which association mod- eling is usually adopted. Common tools for association modeling are statistics and apriori algorithms;  ? Classification: Classification is one of the most common learning models in data mining. It aims at building a model to predict future customer behaviors through classifying database records into a number of predefined classes based on certain criteria. Common tools used for classification are neural networks, decision trees and if then-else rules;  ? Clustering: Clustering is the task of segmenting a hetero- geneous population into a number of more homogenous clusters. It is different to classification in that clusters are unknown at the time the algorithm starts. In other words, there are no predefined clusters. Common tools for clustering include neural networks and discrimination analysis;  ? Forecasting: Forecasting estimates the future value based on a record?s patterns. It deals with continuously valued outcomes. It relates to modeling and the logical relationships of the model at some time in the future.

Demand forecast is a typical example of a forecasting model. Common tools for forecasting include neural networks and survival analysis;  ? Regression: Regression is a kind of statistical esti- mation technique used to map each data object to a real value provide prediction value. Uses of regression include curve fitting, prediction (including forecasting), modeling of causal relationships, and testing scientific hypotheses about relationships between variables. Com- mon tools for regression include linear regression and logistic regression;  ? Sequence discovery: Sequence discovery is the identifi- cation of associations or patterns over time. Its goal is to model the states of the process generating the sequence or to extract and report deviation and trends over time.

Common tools for sequence discovery are statistics and fuzzy set theory.

Association rule mining and other methods are often used to discover the patterns of customers. For example, Xu et al.

[10] stated to find the patterns of customers (here customers refer to patients) with the help of association rule mining, intuitionistic fuzzy set and ?-cuts. In the meantime, in order to express the conscientious and careful of academy, authors    cutsOriginal database  Transformed database  IFS  Satisfaction factors  Different groups of customers  Expert knowledgeCalculation  Policies part Group one Group two Group nGroup three  Data mining  Pattern and association rules  Making policiesDifferent groups of customers  Classification part  Fig. 1. CP-Model (Lin and Xu [10])  of reference [10] declared that as a poster paper included in the proceedings, is not the final manuscript but the mistaken submission.

CP-Model (see Fig.1) is a classified model concerned on customer satisfaction and customer retention. To CP- Model, Lin and Xu [11] classified the customers into different groups, then utilized association rule mining to find the interesting pattern for customer retention.

B. Data mining and Supplier Selection  Supplier selection can be divided into two parts direct supplier selection (e.g. [12]) and strategic supplier network selection. Chen and Xu [13] proposed strategic supplier network model (see Fig.2). To strategic supply network model, the network in a structured way, the product supplier related the direct strategic suppliers will be searched and evaluated. Of course, these suppliers should check whether they can fulfill the demand internally and if not sent out subsequent demands to their respective suppliers. Association rule mining and graph theory are also employed in this model.

After the discussion of these models, it is obvious to find that both of them cannot be employed in this study. This study aims to find a model can integrate customer information and supplier information for the manufacturing process.

As we known, manufacturing process is difficult. The proposed model is included in Fig.3. This model is a loop process. The patterns related to the product of customer dis- satisfaction are employed to optimize the existing suppliers.

Then further to optimize the existing supplier network.

Direct Strategic supplier(s)  Identify strategic  supply network  Evaluate strategic  supply network  Select strategic  supply network  Communicate demand to existing  and potential suppliers  Aggregate data transformed by  suppliers  Define evaluation criteria  Define evaluation method  Select supply network(s)  Evaluate supply network(s)  Identify target suppliers for  negotiation  Conduct contract negotiations  Specify contract terms  Close contract  Fig. 2. Strategic supply network modeling (Chen and Xu [11])

IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  To conclude, this study proposes a new model, which integrates customer information to optimize the suppliers during the process of manufacturing. Furthermore, more experiments will be employed to confirm its effectiveness in future research.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  This work might not have been possible had it been for the support of my supervisor.

