Social View Based User Modeling for  Recommendation in Tagging Systems by Association

Abstract?Social tagging systems such as Facebook, YouTube, del.icio.us, Flickr become popular recent years and have achieved widespread success. State-of-art user modeling approaches in tagging systems usually use a vector of weighted tags.

Unfortunately, typical user modeling methods using a vector of weighted tags which are based on personal view only and ignore the social view, have some inherent  drawbacks. As in a social network like collaborative tagging system, it is subjective and incomplete to profile using only personal view. In this paper, a novel approach applying association rules is proposed to extend user profiles from the social view. The enriched user profile is a harvest from both personal view and social view. Algorithms of personalized recommendations for tags and items are presented.

Also experimental results of using the profile we proposed are discussed.

Keywords- Social View; Model; Tagging System; Association Rule; Recommendation System

I.  INTRODUCTION Social tagging systems such as Facebook, YouTube,  del.icio.us, Flickr become popular recent years and have achieved widespread success[2] where resources (like urls, video, bookmarks, photos)are tagged(stored) for navigating later and shared with friends or the public. In Social tagging systems, users are allowed to annotate resources freely with any words or tags they want. Through the hyperlinks of tags, people can retrieve a large number of resources attached with theses tags, including the resources having the same description by others.

It is clear that, user modeling or profiling is a critical step before making recommendations in tagging systems. So user profiles must be able to reflect the reality (accuracy) of users? long-term interests, as many domains of user preferences as possible. VSM (Vector Space Model) is the most popular method applied for user modeling in recommendation algorithms or systems. In content-based filtering algorithms, user profile is a vector of weights derived from word frequency or TF*IDF, and each component for the keywords of content.

Among the collaborative filtering systems, user is modeled by a vector of ratings, and one for each items. Other methods like XML, Graph are also applied.

Tags are the comprehension and abstraction of users contenting what they pay attention to. Consequently, tags become novel sources of information about user interests.

Typically, tagging systems use VSM to model user interests, and each component of vector is the weight of tags used by the active user. However, tags are informally defined, continually changing, and ungoverned [4], more importantly, the user profile is based on personal view only. So there is a limitation to express users? long-term interests fully and effectively in the state-of-art approaches.

In this paper, we propose a method to extend user profiles applying association rules from the social view (other users with similar interest topics) as using only personal view to profile is subjective and incomplete in a social network like tagging systems. We argue that social view is also important as personal view and could enrich user profiles. The outline of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related works in tag-based profiling. Section 3 presents the proposed approach for user modeling. Experimental results of exploiting these profiles for making recommendations are reported in Section4. Finally, in Section5, We will make a conclusion and present our future work.



II. RELATED WORKS AND PROBLEM ANALYSIS Many works have focused on building tag-based profiles  in tagging system, taking account of the fact that tags which are more frequently chosen are much more important for describing user preferences. [6] adopts a vector of weighted tags modeling user interest. And the weight of tag is determined by the order and capacity of tag. [5] also uses weighted vector of tags to describe user interest, but tag weights are based on inverse tag frequency. In [3], a vector of weighted tags is obtained using tag frequency of occurrence in resources user tagged. The mentioned approaches above all apply VSM to characterize user preferences, and each component of vector is the weight of the tags used to annotate resources. The difference is the method of weighting.

There are some drawbacks of using a vector of weighted tags for profiling. First of all, from the dataset analysis in Section 4, a user often employs about 2 tags to describe the resource he enjoys. So tag order is unavailable or rather     irrelevant in this scenario. Secondly, as a result of the long-tail of tagging system, a user annotates only a small percentage of items. Furthermore, tags are informally defined, continually changing, and ungoverned. So user?s interest which spans across different domains cannot be embraced by a unique vector [2]. Thirdly, user is profiled from personal view only and social view is ignored. But social view contains novel information which could enrich user profiles.

To address the limitations of VSM based user profiles, [2] proposes to hybrid content and tag-based profiles. But content based profiles rely on the information retrieve technology. The idea of using semantic relationships among tags in tag-based profiles has been explored in [7], in which the semantic distance between two tags is calculated based on co- occurrence statistics and common sense reasoning using ConceptNet[8]. However, as tags are chosen freely and arbitrary, besides, tags are often polysemous and synonymous.

All this will bring challenges to the computing of semantic distance between tags. The idea of constructing user profiles from tagging data has been proposed in [9]. They use a profile graph to represent a user, where nodes are tags used by this user and edges are the relations between tags.

Social tagging systems could be depicted by a triad ( , , )R uid iid tag= , here user uid has annotated resource iid  with tag.

Fig.1 Tagging System  As show in Fig.1, in tagging system, people may be interest in the same or similar items and describe them with tags personally. State of art profiling methods uses tags chosen from personal vocabulary, that?s to say modeling from personal view. However, personal view often contains only part of user preference as untagged items does not represent a lack of interest. Although, people use personal vocabulary to tag items, common interests or topics are among the similar items tagged by user. People with common interests or topics are named Friends in recommendation systems. What friends interested is helpful for us to mine the potential interest of user.

So we propose to model user from social view, in other words, use the information of what friends are interested to extend user profiles. The enriched profiles are much more accuracy to characterize user and can represent the diversity of user interest.



III. USER MODELING As user?s interests often span across many domains, instead  of a vector of weighted tags, each user is profiled as a set of interest topics. We propose to annotate user interest by interest topics as user annotates resource by tags. Tags are the comprehension and abstraction of users to contents they pay attention to. So tags become novel resources suggesting the interest topics. In this regard, user profile in this paper is defined as follows:  ( ) { }the interest topics of uidProfile uid =   (1) Here, interest topics of user uid could be harvested from  personally tagging activities, and the tagging behaviors from friends of user uid. This is the idea of hybrid personal view and social view for user profiling. Personal view regards tags specified by user uid only [6], while social view considers tags specified by the friends of user uid.

User profile in this paper can be harvested by two steps, as show in Fig.2.

Fig.2 Two steps of Profiling  We will give details about how the interest topics are mined in the follow sections. Then a novel recommendation algorithm is proposed to validate the efficiency and accuracy of the modeling method we introduced.

A. Details of User Modeling Algorithm The detail steps for building user profiles are as follows:  Input: all the triads R = (uid, iid, tag), describing that user uid has annotated item iid with  tag.

Output: Enriched user profiles, Profile(uid) = {the interest topics of uid}.

Steps: ? From personal view, interest topics could be mined  from the tags used to annotate  resources by user uid.

So Profile_PersonalView(uid)={tags used by user uid}.

? From social view, interest topics are mined from tags used by the friends of user uid. There are several substeps as follows:  a) Get the resources ItemSet(uid) tagged by user uid.

b) Find the similar resources ( )  ( ) ( ){ | , } SimilarItemSet uid  item titem ItemSet uid item titem rsim item titem T= ? ? ? ? ? >  Here ( ),rsim item titem  is similarity between item and titem. T is the threshold that two items get to be similar.

c) In tagging systems, we treat each post ( , , )t user item tag=  as a transaction with ( , )key user item and tags as commodity.  Here  ( ) ( )item Item Set u id S im ila rItem Set u id? ? . Then association rules is applied for discovering frequent tag patterns of the posts. And these frequent tag patterns are similar interest topics.

There is a parameter called support which is a threshold for defining frequent tag patterns. So  ( ) ( ){ }  Pr _  _ | _  ofiel SocialView uid  tag patterns support tag patterns support= >  Than ( ) _ ( ) _ ( )profile Profile PersonalView uid Profile SocialViuid ew uid= ?    B. Mining Interest Topics From Personal View Regard with personal view, tags represent what user  preferences directly. So we get Profile_PersonView(uid) (user profile from personal view) by choosing tags from the tag set of user uid used in tagging system.

( )1 2 3_ ( ) , , , .profile PersonalView uid tag tg agta= ?  (2)  As from the dataset analysis in Section 4, a user often employs about 2 tags to describe the resource he enjoys. So we argue that all tags contained in  _ (uid)Profile PersonalView  has the same weight, they represent different aspects of user interest. Then, user interest from personal view is annotated by tags which are also used to annotate resources.

C. Mining Interest Topics From Social View ?  Item Similarity  The item similarity rsim<iid1, iid2> between iid1 and iid2 is computed by (3).

| ( 1) ( 2 ) |1, 2 | ( 1) ( 2 ) |  P iid P iidrism iid iid P iid P iid  ?< > = ?  (3)  Here, iid1 and iid2 are the ID of items in tagging system. P(x) is the tag collection which people have used to annotate item x.  ( 1) ( 2 )P i id P i id?  is the number of the common tags.  ( 1) ( 2 )P iid P i id?  is the total number of tags associated with the two items.

Note that when iid1=iid2, i.e. iid1 and iid2 are the same item, 1, 2 1r i s m i id i i d< > =  Furthermore, the similarity by (3) above is symmetrical.

? Simplified Association Rule for Mining Interest Topics  Following the original definition by Agrawal [1], the problem of association rule mining is defined as: Let  1 2 3 4 5, , ,,{ }iI i i i i= , be a set of n binary attributes called items. Let  1 2 3 4 5{ , , , , }T t t t t t= , be a set of transactions called the database. Each transaction in T has a unique transaction ID and contains a subset of the items in I. A rule is defined as an implication of the form  X Y?   where  Y I?   , and  X Y? = ? .

The support support(X) of an itemset X is defined as the proportion of transactions in the data set which contain the itemset.

We will use a simple example to illustrate how it works. As show in TABLE.1  TABLE.1 Example Data Set Transaction Key  (user, item) Tags As Commodity  1t  2t  3t  4t  5t  1u  1i  1 0 1 0 0  2u  2i  0 1 1 0 0  3u  3i  1 0 0 1 0  4u  4i  1 0 0 1 0  5u  5i  0 1 1 0 0  Here, set of tags is 1 2 3 4 5, , , ,t t t t t , and a small database containing the tags (1 codes presence and 0 absence of an tag in a post) is shown in the table to the right. And 1 2 3 4 5,, , ,ii i i i  is a group of resources with similarity greater than threshold. Besides, suppose 1u is active user and the threshold of support for frequent tag patterns is 0.4. In this example, support  1 2( , )t t =2/5=0.4 and support 2 3( , )t t =2/5=0.4. Then we get 2t  and 4t  as  the potential interest topics of the active user. So  1 2 4_ ( ) { , }P ro file Socia lV iew u t t= .



IV. MAKING RECOMMENDATION  A. Recommend Tags for Un-annotated Resource For un-annotated resources but known to the active user  uid, we could recommend some correlative tags when he/her is tagging. Recommendations are made according to (4).

( ) ( )  ( )  e ,  tag ( ) (4)  or ignore tag ( )  IsToR commend tag id  recommend P tag profile uid refuse P tag profile u  id did i  ? ? ???= ? ? ? ???    Here ,P(id) is the profile of item id.

B. Recommend Un?annotated Resources to Active User We could also recommend some un-annotated resources  which are unknown to active user uid.  (5) is applied to    estimate the likeability Probability(uid,iid) of active user on unknown items.

( ) | ( ) ( ) |, ( )  Profile uid P iidProbability uid iid Profile uid  ?= (5)  Here uid is the ID of active user and iid is the unknown resource. P(iid) is the tag collection people have used to annotate resource iid.



V. EXPERIMENT RESULTS  A. Dataset Analysis A movie rating datasets called MovieLens is applied in  our experiments, which is a famous Web-based research recommender system. As in [10], We began pruning the tag- recommendation dataset by selecting movies that had been tagged with at least five distinct tags. We wanted to focus on tags that represented concepts applicable to multiple movies, so we required that each tag be applied to at least five movies. We iteratively repeated this pruning until we reached a stable set of movies and tags. The analysis of pruned dataset is show in TABLE.2.

TABLE.2 Analysis of Pruned Dataset Options Result  total users 2851 total items 2948  tagging activities 60191 tags associated with per items 13.866  tags used by per user 7.289 tags used to annotate a item by per person 1.6459  B. Metrics For each active user u, I represents the set of movies that u has tagged. Let R be the set of movies in the recommendation list.

The average precision is thus defined as:  ( )ui u U  ui  R precision U  I? = ?   (6)  The higher the precision, the more accuracy and better quality the recommendation   is provided by algorithm.

C. Results ? Precision comparison between Personal View based  recommendation and social view based recommendation  In this experiment, we generate a top-N list of recommendations for each user. The comparing result of precision between personal view based recommendation and social view based recommendation is show in Fig.3.

Fig.3 Precision comparison between Personal View based  recommendation and social view based recommendation  As show in Fig.3, the precision of recommendation using social view based profile is higher than personal view based profile. So the quality of recommendation is better. And the precision decreases as TopN grows. This is because user usually tags a minority of items. So as TopN increases, the items recommended contain many unpleased item. Besides, social view based tag recommendation could help user find new items, as the interest topics of friends are considered.

? Personal view based profiles and Social view based profiles.

In this experiment, we select two users from dataset randomly and generate profiles based on personal view and social view separately. And the result is show in Table3.  We have mark the similar part between social view based profiles and personal view based profiles by red color. As show in Table3, user #user1 like ?Superhero? from personal view, and from social view he may pay attention to  something like ?adventure? or ?action?. From personal view, user #user2 have a interest in ?dialogue?, ?love? and ?drama?, ?romance?  appear in the social view. And this similar parts or interest topics have similar meanings. All these similar parts are called frequent tag pattern, as they have a high frequency of Co-occurrence. And frequent tag patterns reflect different aspects of interest.

So personal view based profiles have a limit to express the user. And social view based profiles have the ability to dig the potential interest of user, also could find the similar interest.  A hybrid of them could be a more accurate way to build user profiles.

TABLE.3 User Profiles #user1(20281) #user2(4650)  Personal view Social view Personal view Social  view  space space social commentary  owned  Sci-fi Sci-fi comedy comedy  quentin tarantino  futuristmovies.com dialogue Sci-fi  Comic-book franchise dialogue driven  drama  comedy action nonlinear My movies  Superhero adventure love romance  fantasy fantasy crime crime  notable soundtrack  classic surreal surreal  johnny depp war scenic violence  D. Precision of social view based tag recommendation When tagging, we could recommend some relevant tags to  user. Recommending tags to user could contribute to the stability of the tagging system as user often apply arbitrary words to tag items. In this paper, SVBTR( Social View based Tag Recommendation) using (4) is proposed to recommend tags. And the precision is show in Fig.4.

0.24  0.26  0.28  0.3  0.32  SVBTR   Fig.4 Precision of social view based tag recommendation

VI. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we propose a novel approach applying  association rules to extend user profiles from the social view.

As in a social network like tagging system, it is subjective and incomplete to profile using only personal view. The enriched user profile is a harvest from both personal view and social view. And as experiments show, the new user profile proposed in this paper is much more accuracy to represent the diversity of interest and the precision of recommendation is much higher. Furthermore, making recommendation for  tags and items is become easier.

