An Attribute-based Scheme for Service

AbstractWith the rapid development of m-commerce, pre-  dicting users navigation and making the service recommendation  become more and more important. Most researches focus on  predicting users navigation using context history and user  preferences. But, the influence of the attributes of a service has  been ignored. Simultaneously, some attributes are variable, so the  recommendations are changeable. Therefore, the paper proposes  an attribute-based scheme for service recommendation based  on CASUP (context-aware system considering user preference).

In proposed approach, the services are classified into several  service clusters, and the service recommendations are carried out  using Apriori algorithm and ant colony algorithm. Finally, the  proposed model is validated by several simulation experiments,  which demonstrate the effects of the service attributes in m-  commerce.

Index Termsm-commerce; service recommendation; Apriori;  Ant Colony algorithm

I. INTRODUCTION  Due to the rapid development of wireless communication  and hardware techniques, the mobile commerce (m-commerce)  [1] has become more and more popular. M-commerce has  shown immense potential in the electronic market through the  encouragement of the wide promotion of mobile communica-  tion technologies and rapid adoption of mobile devices with  Internet capabilities. In the future, there is no doubt that the  mobile devices (e.g. hand-held PC, PDA and mobile phone)  will enable to facilitate users transactions over wireless net-  works. To make the transactions more convenient, providing  proactive service recommendations to users becomes more  important than ever before. The proactive service recom-  mendation is based on the information that characterizes the  situation of a user, also called as context awareness, including  the users current positions, activities, and their surrounding  environments. At present, the context information of users has    been captured and processed on context-aware computing [2].

Consequently, the wireless communication system plays an  important role in m-commerce technologies.

In recent years, wireless communication systems focus on  seamlessly integrating the existing wireless technologies and  providing fast and pervasive access and service for mobile  users. In this evolving environment, Wireless Sensor Networks  (WSNs) [3] are expected to form an integral part of the  foreseen ubiquity intelligent, future mobile network, and are  envisaged to play a key role in the vision of offering mobile,  personalized services, whenever and wherever needed, while  supporting applications with broadband, wireless connectiv-  ity anytime and anywhere. The contextual information from  sensor nodes is computed for the proactive service recom-  mendation. Recent research has focused on the development  of such services and scenarios. Providing the personalized  service is the main objective of an agent-based framework  (CASUP) in [4], aiming to contribute to the evolution and  definition of proactive service recommendation based on the  users context histories using context-aware computing. The  CASUP provides the personalized services extracting the re-  lationship between users profiles and services under the same  context automatically. Although the context history has been  considered, the attributes of services are not taken into account  such as distance and interest. The next service is recommended  based on the users preferences and association rules, but a  sequence of services that is affected by service attributes is  ignored.

In this paper, a navigation agent will replace existing associ-  ation agent. An attribute-based scheme for service recommen-  dation (ABSSR) is adopted. In our approach, association rules  and ant colony algorithm are used to extract the relationship  among the services or service sequences for recommending  the navigation. The proposed scheme has some contributions  for service recommendation. Firstly, we propose the service  cluster and a cluster association model. On the basis of asso-  ciation rules, a ranking list of service clusters is recommended  to the users before service selection. Secondly, based on the  service cluster selection, an ant colony navigation model is  proposed to calculate a ranking list of service using ant colony  algorithm. In this model, the attributes of the service are taken  into account. Furthermore, this probabilistic model reflects the    users interests dynamically.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the  next section, we present related work on the service rec-  ommendation. Section 3 presents our scheme, including the  framework of ABSSR based on the preference management  978-1-4244-6557-6/10/$26.00 c 2010 IEEE  Fig. 1. The relationship between cluster selection list and service selection list.

layer in the CASUP and two models. Especially, the ant colony  navigation model will be discussed in detail. In Section 4, the  experimental results are reported to evaluate the effectiveness  of our approach. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section 5.



II. RELATED WORK  During recent years, context-aware computing has been a  field of intense research. Several interesting approaches have  been reported. Some researchers focused on inference of high-  level context such as users current activities [5-7]. The context  histories are exploited as one possibility for the prediction  of future context, selection of devices and adaptation. On  this basis, some researches for providing the personalized  services using users preference and the information from  sensor data have been carried out [8-12]. The user profiles  are estimated for service recommendations in efficient and  manageable mechanisms. The CASUP, as mentioned above,  is the most representative one.

The CASUP is a prototype system of an agent-based  framework that offers the personalized services utilizing the  extracted users preferences and association rules. It is com-  posed primarily of eight agents in four layers [4]. The data  gathering layer is used for collecting sensor data, user data,  and service data. The context management layer is used for  inferring a high-level context from a low-level context, storing  collected information into context history and classifying the  user profiles and the selected services under the same high-  level context. In the preference management layer, users  preferences are extracted from context history to infer the  association rules for recommending the next services, and  the application layer provides the personalized services to the  mobile devices of the users. In the preference management  layer, the decision tree algorithm is adopted to extract the  preferences of users for each service and association rules are  used to extract the relationship among the services. It has been  recognized that capturing and inferring the users preferences    is important to offer the personalized services. However, little  research has taken the attributes of services into account.



III. ATTRIBUTE-BASED SCHEME FOR SERVICE  RECOMMENDATION  In this section, we present an attribute-based scheme for  service recommendation (ABSSR) as a way of predicting  users navigation. The ABSSR consists of two models: Cluster  Association Model and Ant colony Navigation Model. Before  presenting the framework of ABSSR, some definitions are  given.

A. Definitions  Firstly, several concepts are defined in order to describe the  attribute-based scheme.

Definition 1 (Service Attributes): A list of attributes  charactering a service. The attributes are the information of  service themselves and the satisfaction from the users. There-  fore, the services can be described by the service attributes  such as introduction and location. Furthermore, the service  attributes reflect influence on services from the users, including  reputation of services, visiting frequency, spending time and  so on.

In this research, some relevant attributes are extracted for  describing service. We define frequency, distance and reputa-  tion as service attributes. frequency is the consumers visiting  times within a time window in the past. distance is denoted  as the distance between two services location, and reputation  is the satisfaction degree that is received from the users in the  past. reputation is calculated based on the method in [13].

Definition 2 (Service Cluster): A group of services that  are similar to each other. The service cluster is the result of  service classification based on similarity. Generally, it is too  hard to manage the services due to huge quantity. Therefore,  all of the services are classified into several service clusters  based on how similar the services are. For instance, in the  Restaurant Cluster, there are Chinese restaurants, Korean food  restaurants and food courts; the Entertainment Cluster includes  cinemas, cafes and bars.

Definition 3 (Service Recommendation List): A list of  ranking services for users selection. The service recommen-  dation lists are ranking lists for users selection. Because the  Fig. 2. The framework of scheme.

services are classified into service clusters, there are two lists,    one is for cluster selection, and the other one is for relevant  service selection. The users can make choices from the lists  that are offered to PDA or mobile device. In each list, there  are several service options that are sorted from the largest  possibility to the smallest one. Meanwhile, a service search  engine is provided to prevent the services that users want are  not in the lists.

We present an example to make this definition precise.

Once a user finishes dinner in Chinese restaurant 1, the  system generates a cluster recommendation list based on the  Restaurant Cluster. And then, if the user selects Entertainment  Cluster in the cluster selection list, the service selection list  will be generated based on the service attributes using ant  colony algorithm. The example is illustrated in Fig. 1.

B. The Framework of ABSSR  Figure 2 shows the framework of the preference manage-  ment layer in the ABSSR. Based on the preference man-  agement layer of the CASUP, existing association agent is  replaced by a navigation agent. Meanwhile, an ant colony KB  and a database for storing service attributes are added.

Tbl 1. Association Rule  Rule ID Rule Support Confidence  R1 Restaurant ? Finance 10.0 35.0  R2 Restaurant ? Entertainment 12.0 37.0  R3 Sport ? Shopping 3.0 15.0    Tbl 2. Selection Probability  Selection ID Selection Probability  S1 Shopping mall 2 ? Cafeteria 3 45%  S2 Cafeteria 3 ? Theatre 1 37%    In the CASUP, the association rule is used for recom-  mending the next service after offering the previous service  based on Apriori algorithm [14]. In this study, the services are  classified into service clusters, and we use Apriori algorithm  to provide the next service cluster based on previous service  cluster. Accordingly, the association rules in the association  KB are changed, Tbl. 1 is an example. Based on a cluster  selection, a service list is generated using ant colony algorithm  [15]. From a service of previous cluster to another service of  the next cluster, there is a probability based on the service  attributes, frequency, distance and reputation. These probabil-    ities are saved in the ant colony KB as Tbl. 2. Moreover, the  probabilities are dynamic, they are updated at regular intervals  based on the users behavior.

C. The Models of ABSSR  In the models, the Apriori algorithm and ant colony al-  gorithm will be used. The Apriori algorithm is the most  prevalent techniques to locate association rule. Ant colony  algorithm aims at exploring optimal course sequences since  such sequencing can predicate several possible items for the  next steps.

1) Cluster Association Model  On the basis of the concept mentioned above, all of the  services are classified into several clusters. Once a user  stops a service, navigation agent will employed to offer a  recommendation of the next service. In order to achieve that  objective, the cluster of next service must be inferred by  navigation agent based on the sequence of the selected cluster  in the past. That is, the cluster selection should be done  before calculating the service selection list. The sequence of  recommended service clusters is based on the association rules  in Association KB. The navigation agent can infer next cluster  according to Support and Confidence in Tbl. 2.

2) Ant colony Navigation Model  Real ants are capable of finding the shortest path from a food  source to their nest based on the pheromone that they deposit  on the ground. Ants choose their way probabilistically by  the strong pheromone concentrations left on pheromone trails.

For providing service recommendations, we regard consumers  service selections as artificial ants. The service selection  depends on the attributes of services and consumers behaviors  and some values of attributes are dynamic. Therefore, an  appropriate approach to recommending services should be  treated as a dynamic probabilistic one, where probabilities  are updated within a specified time window. Our proposed  approach is based on the ant colony navigation model that  analyzes the attributes of services and consumers behaviors  to recommend services. The most of parameters and functions  used in this paper are same as the definitions in ant colony  algorithm [15]. Furthermore, we modify heuristic information  and the pheromone updating function by combining attributes  of services.

a. Heuristic Information    In this research, the heuristic information ?ij indicates the  degree of connectedness from service i to j.The heuristic  information ?ij is defined as follow.

?ij =  Cij  n?

k=1  Cik  (1)  where Cij is the degree of connectedness from service i to  j. It represents the access times from service i to j. In the  service cluster of service j, there are n different selections as  the next service of the service i. This heuristic information is  in fact the access proportion of the consumers from service i  to service j among n services.

b. Pheromone Updating Function  The pheromone trail intensity ?ij is the relational strength  between the ith node and the jth node. The relational strength  in this study is derived from the attribute values of services.

We update pheromone in a way as Ant-quantity system [16]  does for. Specifically, the pheromone is updated as long as  ants move from one node to another. The pheromone ?ij(t) is  updated according to:  ?ij(t + 1) = (1? ?)  ?ij(t) +  m?

k+1  ??kij (2)  where 0 < ? < 1 is the pheromone evaporation rate, ??ij  is the incremental intensity of locate pheromone trail from  node i to j, and m is the number of consumers as ants. The  value of ??kij is related to the values of three service attribute  defined above: distance between two services, frequency and  reputation of service j. Furthermore, ??kij is computed by:  ??kij =  ????

???

Q  Aij  , if (i,j) is in the path of the kth ant  0 , otherwise  (3)  In Eq.(3), Q is a constant quantity of pheromone left on    pathij as every time an ant goes from node i to j. Combining  the three attribute values of the service i and service j, Aij is  defined as follow.

Aij =  ?

?  distance2ij + ?

frequency2j  + ?  1  reputation2j  (4)  Aij takes into account these important features: distanceij is  the distance between the service i and service j, and based on  the practical experience, distance is from 0 to 5 kilometers.

The larger distanceij is, the smaller ?ij is. frequencyj and  reputationj are the attributes of service j, and their initial values  are 1. The larger they are, the higher ?ij is. frequency is a  measure of the consumers interest in a service. If a service  is popular, in a time window, it will be visited more often by  consumers than other services in the same cluster. Moreover,  we adjust the time window to make frequency ? [1, 50].

Similarly, higher reputation of a service contributes to the  consumers prefer selection, with a value from 1 through  10. Furthermore, to protect the same order among distance2ij,   frequency2j  and 1  reputation2j  After using service i, the consumer selects the next service  based on the remaining pheromone trail intensity on the path.

Using Pij(t) to denote the probability of selecting service j  from service i at the time t, we have  Pij(t) =  ??????

?????

[?ij(t)]?  [?ij(t)]??

k?allowedn  [?ik(t)]?  [?ik(t)]?

, j? allowedn  0 , otherwise  (5)  where allowedn is a set of selectable services after service    i in the next step. ? and ? are the parameters that control the  level of consideration of the pheromone trail.

D. The algorithm of ABSSR  In the following, we present our approach in the form of  the algorithm. We suppose that the user is using service S and  he wants to stop it.

Step 1: Service Cluster Selection  Based on the service S, we know the service cluster of S is  sc1. The cluster selection list is generated using association  rules. Suppose the user selects sc2 as the cluster of next  service.

Step 2: Parameters Initialization  This step is pre-processing, in which the parameters of  ?, ?, ?, ?, ? and Q are initialized for ant colony navigation  model. Moreover, a time window for frequency is set.

Step 3: Heuristic Information Calculation  The heuristic information ? is evaluated according to the  connectedness between S and some feasible services in sc2.

Suppose there are n services denoted as S1, S2, . . . , Sn, can  be as the next selection from service S, a set of heuristic  information {?SS1 , ?SS2 , . . . , ?SSn} is calculated using Eq.(1).

Step 4: Pheromone Trail Intensity Calculation  0 5 10 15   0.05  0.1  0.15  0.2  0.25  0.3  0.35  0.4  0.45  The connectedness between the service  i  and service  j      P  ij  Fig. 3. Pij variations by different value of the connectedness.

1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5  0.48  0.49    0.5  0.51  0.52  0.53  0.54  0.55  0.56  distanceij      P  ij  Fig. 4. Pij variations with the increment of distanceij.

0 10 20 30 40 50  0.35  0.4  0.45  0.5  0.55  0.6  0.65  0.7  0.75  0.8  0.85  frequencyj      P  ij  Fig. 5. Pij variations with the increment of frequencyj.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  0.55  0.6  0.65  0.7  0.75  0.8  0.85  0.9  0.95  reputationj        P  ij  Fig. 6. Pij variations with the increment of reputationij.

Based on the attributes of service (distance, frequency  and reputation), a set of the pheromone trail intensity  {?SS1 , ?SS2 , . . . , ?SSn} is calculated, according to Eqs.(2-4).

Step 5: Probability Calculation and Service Selection  In this step the set of probability {PSS1 , PSS2 , . . . , PSSn}  are calculated on the basic of {?SS1 , ?SS2 , . . . , ?SSn} and  {?SS1 , ?SS2 , . . . , ?SSn} using Eq.(5). The service selection list  is generated in decreasing order of {PSS1 , PSS2 , . . . , PSSn}.

Suppose that the user selects service S? in the list as the next  service he wants.

Step 6: Updating  After the user selects a service S? in the service selection  list, the values of three attributes should be updated, including  the connectedness between service S and S?, frequencyS and  reputationS.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  To evaluate the effectiveness of ABSSR, we utilize attribute-  based service recommendation to test the proposed ant colony  navigation model. In the model, the probability in ant colony  KB is related to the values of attributes of services.

Experiment 1: In this experiment, the impact on the prob-  ability from different values of the heuristic information ?ij.

In Eq.(1), ?ij is affected by the connectedness from service  i to j. Without lose of generality, we set Cij from 1 to 15.

In addition, in the service cluster of service j, there are four  other services as the next service of service i, and they are set  randomly between 1 and 15.

With the parameters ? = 1 and ? = 8, the probability  variation is illustrated in Fig. 3. From the result, with the same  pheromone trail intensity, the more Cij is, the higher Pij is.

Experiment 2: In experiment 2, based on the same heuristic  information ?ij, the relationship between Pij and the attributes  will be analyzed. The change of attributes will impact on  pheromone trail intensity ?ij. In the ABSSR, three attributes  are considered: distance, frequency and reputation. If all of  the attributes are inconsistent in the experiment, the results  are confused. Consequently, we observe one attribute with    two other remaining attributes be constant. To protect the  same order among attributes, we fixed the parameters ? = 10,  ? = 2500, ? = 1000, ? = 2 and ? = 1.

In Fig. 4, the distance between the service i and j is in-  creased from 1 to 5 (kilometers) with the same values of other  attributes. From the figure, we can observe that the probability  is decreased with the increment of the distanceij, and vice  versa. Similarly, we varied the values of the frequencyj and  reputationj to analyze the influence of Pij (frequencyj is from  1 to 50, and reputationj is from 1 to 100.). The results are  given in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. The probability has an increase  corresponding to the growths of frequencyj and reputationj.



V. CONCLUSION  As the number of the users of networks has been increased  greatly nowadays, the proactive service recommendation in  m-commerce becomes an important issue. It is computed  by the contextual information from sensor nodes. Although  some researchers focus on context history, the attributes of a  service have been ignored. In this paper, we have presented  an attribute-based scheme for recommending services for  consumers. For this end, we grouped all of the given services  into several clusters, employed a cluster association model  and an ant colony navigation model to track the consumers  behaviors, and then calculate the degree of the influences from  the attributes of services in relation to the recommendation.

After these, a service recommendation list is generated for  consumers. The proposed models were implemented and the  experimental results have shown that the varieties of the  attributes do have affects on ranking lists. By refining the  system, the proposed scheme could be further analyzed and  potentially get its own place in practice.

