A Survey on Actionable Knowledge Discovery Applications

Abstract Real-world data mining is a complex problem-  solving system. In real data mining applications, more and  more researchers realized the need from traditional data  mining to knowledge discovery to deliver useful knowledge  for the business decision-making. Thus, actionable knowledge  discovery is introduced during the context. This study draws on  analysis of the applications of actionable knowledge discovery  and draws conclusions for researchers about its applications in  future.

Keywordsdata mining; actionable knowledge discovery; asso-  ciation rule mining

I. INTRODUCTION  Real-world data mining generally must consider and in-  volve domain and business oriented factors such as human  knowledge, constraints and business expectations. Classic  data mining is heavily dependent on data itself, and relies on  data-centered methodologies. Existing approaches either view  data mining as an autonomous data-driven trial-and-error  process, or analyze business issues in an isolated and case-  by-case manner [1]. As a result, very often the knowledge  discovered does not always generally satisfy real business  needs.

Thus, this encourages the development of a domain driven  methodology to strengthen data-centered pattern mining.

Actually, data mining applications should meet in domain  driven, actionable knowledge discovery in the real world.

It is necessary to address business interestingness and suc-  cessfully deliver knowledge and patterns that are actionable  and dependable [2]. Domain driven data mining targets such  challenges and objectives.

Cao and Zhang [3] stated that domain driven, actionable    knowledge discovery should involve, support and integrate  the following intelligence and constraints: domain experts  role and computational capability, domain knowledge and  intelligence, network and web intelligence, in-depth data  intelligence, and the constrained environment and deliverable  in specific domains. With the development of actionable  knowledge discovery in real applications, this paper aims to  review and summarize some recent applications under the  methodology.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section  II introduces some basic concepts of actionable knowledge  discovery. Section III reviews some applications related to  actionable knowledge discovery. Discussions and future work  are concluded in final section.



II. ACTIONABLE KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY  This section will introduce the basic concepts of actionable  knowledge discovery and association rule mining under the  methodology.

A. Basic Concepts  Data mining and knowledge discovery has emerged to be  one of the most vivacious areas in information technology  during the last decade. It has boosted a major academic and  industrial campaign crossing many traditional areas such as  database, statistics, business as well as emergent disciplines,  for example, genetics.

Compared with the booming fact in academia, data min-  ing applications in the real world has not been as active  and charming of academic research. With many years of  development of this promising scientific field, it is time and  worthwhile to review the major issues blocking the step of  Knowledge Discovery from Database (KDD) into business  use widely. A picture of traditional data mining can be  summarized as the following aspects [4].

Object mined: data is the object being mined, which is  expected to tell the whole story of a concern;  Data sets mined are abstract or refined from real prob-  lems or data. Mining is not directly conducted on raw  data from business;  Models and methods in data mining systems are usually  predefined. It is the data mining researcher rather than  a user that can deploy an algorithm;  The process of data mining is packed as automated, in    which a user is not necessary and actually he/she cannot  do much in the mining procedure;  The evaluation of mined results is basically based on  technical metrics, if a threshold presumed by data min-  ing researchers is higher, then the algorithm is promis-  ing;  The accuracy of an algorithm is taken as one of key  criteria of quality judgment.

978-1-4244-5874-5/10/$26.00 2010 IEEE  While after the origin of data mining, researchers with  strong industrial engagement realized the need from data  mining to knowledge discovery to deliver useful knowledge  for the business decision making. Many researchers, espe-  cially early career researchers in KDD, are still only or  mainly focusing on mining for patterns in data. The main  reason for such a dominant situation, either explicitly or im-  plicitly, is on its originally narrow focus and overemphasized  by innovative data-driven or algorithm-driven research.

Knowledge discovery is further expected to migrate  into Actionable Knowledge Discovery (AKD). AKD targets  knowledge that can be delivered in the form of business-  friendly and decision-making actions, and can be taken over  by business people seamlessly. So a new KDD methodology  on top of the traditional data-centered pattern mining frame-  work, that is Domain Driven Data Mining (D3M) proposed  by Cao and Zhang [1].

The motivation of D3M is to view KDD as AKD-  based problem-solving systems through developing effective  methodologies, methods and tools. The aim of D3M is to  make AKD system deliver business-friendly and decision-  making rules and actions that are of solid technical signif-  icance as well. D3M caters for the effective involvement  of ubiquitous intelligence surrounding AKD based problem-  solving. Some of them are illustrated as follows [4].

Data intelligence, tells stories hidden in the data about  a business problem;  Domain intelligence, refers to domain resources that  not only wrap a problem and its target data but also  assist in the understanding and problem-solving of the  problem. Domain intelligence consists of qualitative and  quantitative intelligence. Both types of intelligence are  instantiated in terms of aspects such as domain knowl-    edge, background information, constraints, organization  factors and business process, as well as environment  intelligence, business expectation and interestingness;  Human intelligence, refers to (1) explicit or direct  involvement of humans such as empirical knowledge,  belief, intention and expectation, run-time supervision,  evaluating, and expert group; (2) implicit or indirect  involvement of human intelligence such as imaginary  thinking, emotional intelligence, inspiration, brainstorm,  and reasoning inputs;  Social intelligence, consists of interpersonal intelligence,  emotional intelligence, social cognition, consensus con-  struction, group decision, as well as organizational fac-  tors, business process, workflow, project management  and delivery, social network intelligence, collective in-  teraction, business rules, law, trust and so on.

D3M consists of a domain-driven in-depth pattern discov-  ery framework [5] through the following contents:  Mining constraint-based context;  Incorporating domain knowledge through human-  machine-cooperation;  Mining in-depth patterns;  Enhancing knowledge actionability;  Supporting loop-closed iterative refinement in order to  enhance knowledge actionability.

B. Combined Association Rule Mining  In real application of data mining, the mining of associa-  tion rules for discerning a relationship between data items  in large databases with representative methods. The basic  terminologies of association rule, Support and Confidence,  are defined in [6]. Lift is also an interesting index of  association rules. For example, consider rule AR: If A then B.

Suppose the probability of B is 0.4, the value of confidence  is 0.8, then Lift=2. Thus, to the rule AR, the value of Lift  greater than 1 indicates that the occurrence of A has a positive  effect on the occurrence of B.

Combined rule is further extracted from single rule, which  generated through association rule mining. In general, a com-  bined rule is composed of multiple heterogeneous itemsets  from different datasets. Combined patterns take the forms of  combined association rules, which are defined as [7].

Based on traditional Support, Confidence and Lift, two    new lifts are designed for measuring the interestingness of  combined association rules (see [7]).



III. ACTIONABLE KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY  APPLICATIONS  Some applications of actionable knowledge discovery are  summarized in this section.

A. Customer Relationship Management  Customer Relationship Management (CRM) consists of  four dimensions: Customer identification, customer attrac-  tion, customer retention, and customer development [8].

Customer satisfaction is the central concern for customer  retention. Prior research suggests that customer satisfaction is  an important source of competitive advantages, often leading  to customer loyalty and repeat purchase.

Customer retention is an significant component in cus-  tomer relationship management. Zhang et al. [9] employed  association rule mining for customer retention with the  help of expert domain knowledge. Du et al. [10] stated to  find the satisfaction patterns of customers with the help of  association rule mining, intuitionistic fuzzy set and ?-cuts.

In the meantime, in order to express the conscientious and  careful of academy, authors of the above references declared  that as poster papers included in the proceedings, are not  the final manuscripts but their carelessness in the process of  submission. Zhang et al. [11] used combined association rule  mining to assist customers to pay off a debt in the shortest  possible time.

B. Supplier Selection  Supplier selection is one of the most parts in supply chain  management. Strategic partnership with better performing  suppliers should be integrated into the manufacturing to  improve the performance in various aspects including re-  ducing costs by eliminating wastes, continuously improving  quality to achieve zero defects, reducing lead time at different  stages of the manufacturing, and so on. Xu and Lin [12]  used Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) and association rule  mining to find key suppliers. In order words, first, use  association rule algorithm to classify the parts based on  the shipment records in order to find supplier sets (supplier  clusters). Second, identify key suppliers from the supplier  clusters combined with a relative ranking (through AHP) of  suppliers who provide parts needed.

C. Crime Identification  Crime detection for credit applications is so popular in  bank industry. Phua et al. [13] presented an updated adaptive  Communal Analysis Suspicion Scoring (CASS) algorithm.

CASS adaptively changes the appropriate parameter setting  to trade off efficiency and effectiveness. Their approach  is validated with three sets of experiments on real credit  applications.

D. Business Intelligence  Business Intelligence (BI) refers to skills, processes, tech-  nologies, applications and practices used to support decision  making. BI technologies provide historical, current, and  predictive views of business operations. Peng et al. [14]  proposed semi-automatic system and methods to iteratively  discover leading indicators from real-time work-flow events,  equipment logs, and other metrics sources. The approach  uses domain knowledge to filter indicators, and enables in-  cremental adjustment of underlying domain model thorough  involving domain knowledge.

E. Blog-Specific Search and Mining  Recently, blog-specific search and mining techniques are  popular. Latent semantic analysis and probabilistic latent  semantic analysis based probabilistic models are investigated  for mining business blogs. Chen et al. [15] stated that domain  driven data mining can better strengthen business intelligence  in complex business applications.

Generally, actionable knowledge discovery aims to find  actionable pattern or knowledge for decision making. Fur-  thermore, decision making process relies on more than one  factor or condition. Actually, in real-life application, every  target problem often relates to many different datasets. In  other words, depth analysis of the correlation among different  datasets is necessary for generating actionable knowledge.



IV. DISCUSSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  To conclude, actionable knowledge discovery is becoming  more and more popular in real data mining applications.

This study summarizes some research domains concerned  on actionable knowledge discovery. Future research can be  involved more issues such as text mining. Furthermore, in  order to find more actionable knowledge, techniques such as  fuzzy set theory and ontology, can be employed for the study  of actionable knowledge discovery.

