Incremental Maintenance of Association Rules Over Data Streams

Abstract-There exist emerging applications of data streams that require association rules mining, such as web click stream mining, sensor networks, and network traffic analysis. In order to efficiently trace the changes of association rules over data streams which are continuous, unbounded, usually come with high speed, in this paper we propose Fd-tree method which requires no scanning of the whole data stream and to only scan the updated transactions once without involving candidate sets generation. The experiment results on synthetic datasets and real datasets show that the new algorithm outperform other algorithm in not only the speed of algorithms, but also their memory consumption and their scalability.

Keywords- Association rules; Data streams; Incremental maintenance; Fd-tree

I. PREFACE  The increasing prominence of data streams arising in a wide range of advanced application such as web click stream mining, network traffic analysis, sensor networks has led to the study of online mining of association rules. A data stream is an ordered sequence of items that arrives in timely order. Different from data in traditional static databases, data streams have the following characteristics [1] [2]. First, they are continuous, unbounded, and usually come with high speed. Second, the volume of data streams is large and usually with an open end. Third, the data distribution in streams usually changes with time.

Traditional association rules mining algorithms are developed to work on static data, therefore, can not be applied directly in data streams. In the past, many algorithms were proposed, most of which were based on the Apriori algorithm [3], which generated and tested candidate itemsets level-by-Ievel. This may cause iterative database scans and high computational costs. Han, Pei thus proposed the FP-growth algorithm[4][5] which use a frequent pattern tree(FP-tree) data structure and allows mining of frequent itemsets without generating candidate itemsets. Compared with Apriori and its variants, it achieves higher performance.

Both the Apriori and the FP-tree mining approaches belong to batch mining. That is, they must process all the transactions in a batch way. In data stream, new transaction insertions and old transaction deletions may lead to previously discovered association rules no longer being interesting, and new interesting association rules may also appear. Designing an efficient algorithm that can maintain   Yingyong Bu2 and Haiming Zhao2  2 College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering Central South University  Changsha, Hunan Province, China e-mail: buyingyong@126.com  association rules as a data stream grows is thus critically important.

One noticeable incremental mining algorithm was the FUP algorithm [6]. The FUP algorithm modified the Apriori mining algorithm and adopted the pruning techniques used in the DHP algorithm [7]. Although the FUP algorithm could indeed improve mining performance for incrementally, changing data streams still needed to be scanned when necessary. Hong, lin [8] modified the FP-tree structure and designed FUFP-tree structure to efficiently handle newly inserted transactions based on the FUP concept. The FUFP? tree structure was similar to the FP-tree structure except that the links between parent nodes and their child nodes were bi? directional. Besides, the counts of the sorted frequent items were also kept in the header-table-of the FP-tree algorithm.

In this paper, we propose a new method that uses a Fd? tree structure to store all the information and requires (1) no scanning of the original database, (2) to only scan the updated transactions once without involving candidate sets generation. A thorough performance study on synthetic datasets and real datasets has shown that our proposed algorithm is both time and space efficient and adapts very rapidly to the change in data streams.



II. PRELIMINARIES  Association rules provide information about whether or not different sets of values relate to on another within a data stream. The following is a formal definition of association rules based on the descriptions presented in [5].

Let 1= (ii, i2 ... iJ be a set of literals, referred to as items.

Each transaction T contains a set of items (i], i2 ... ik) cI. We will refer to a set of items as an itemset. The number of items in the itemset is the length of the itemset. Therefore, an itemset of length k is a k-itemset.

A transaction data stream is a sequence of incoming transactions. For example, FigJ shows a data stream D which adopts sliding window mechanism. Each window is decomposed into a number of equal sizes non-overlapping batches of transaction, called pane. Let the window slides pane-by-pane.

An association rule is an implication of the form X?Y, where X, YcD, XnY=0. X is called the antecedent of the rule and Y is the resultant or consequent of the rule. Each rule has two associated measures, support and confidence.

The support of itemset XY is the percentage of records that    contain both X and Y in data stream., and the confidence is the percentage of records containing X that also contain Y.

Association rule mining is to find all association rules the support and confidence of which are above or equal to a user-specified minimum support and confidence, respectively.

TID        Trans  a, b, d, e  a) b, c) e  b, c, e  c, e  a, C, d  b, C, e, d  PII1'J': Siz?2 WiJldow Slze-2  Strl;'nm Data  Figure I. Data stream D

III. FD-TREE BASED INCREMENTAL UPDATING  When the data stream is updated, because of transaction deletions and insertions, the frequent itemsets may change.

Some frequent itemsets at a given time point may become infrequent after some further insertions. Then, discarding infrequent itemsets will prevent the discovery of the respective new frequent itemsets which may well be frequent.

For instance, assurme current data stream D include the first window transactions (TID 1 ,2,3,4) and assume new transactions TID 5-6 are added to D, the minimum support threshold is equal to 50%. Frequent Abe become now an infrequent itemset (33%) while frequent itemset d is frequent (50%).If itemset abed is initially discarded as infrequent itemset in FP-tree (25%),then the new frequent itemset d would have been missed.

It is not practical to reconstruct FP-tree each time when the data stream is updated. If the minimum support of a data stream is 1, its FP-tree is just a compact version of the current data stream. To distinguish it from the FP-tree of higher support, we call the tree based on minimum support 1 the Fd-tree. This Fd-tree stores all the itemsets of the data stream. When the transactions are deleted or inserted, the changed transaction instead of the whole data stream is scanned. This Fd-tree includes the FP-tree inside it. So, if we can project the FP-tree from this Fd-tree, we can mine the frequent itemsets based on the FP-tree from this Fd-tree. The Fd-tree is just used for maintaining the frequent itemsets when there is an update to the data stream since it keeps information regarding not only previously frequent itemsets, but also previously infrequent itemsets. Thus, it eliminates the need to scan the whole data stream when certain types of updates occur.

To illustrate the construction of Fd-tree. First, scan D to get all the occurrences of all the items. Sort them in descending order of support. Next, use these occurrences to construct the Fd-tree. The Fd-tree is shown in Figure 2.

I-list e 4 b 3 c 3 a 2 d I  Figure 2. Construction of F d-tree  Now, we introduce how to mine the incremental rules with Fd-tree when old transactions are deleted from data stream and new transactions are inserted into data stream.

First, suppose the old pane including TID 1-2 is deleted.

The deletion procedure never would introduce new branches to the Fd-tree. It only follows the branch and decreases the count of the nodes. By only scanning the deletion part once, the occurrences of the items are obtained. The Fd-tree after the old pane is deleted is shown in Figure 3.

I-Ii st c 2 c 2 b 1  Figure 3. the Fd-tree after the old pane is deleted  Next, suppose the new pane including TID 5-6 is inserted.

The Fd-tree just scans the additional transactions only once to update the Fd-tree. When the new transactions share the same branch with the ones in the original data stream, it just increases the count of each item. Otherwise it adds the new branch into the Fd-tree. At the same time the occurrence of each item in the new transactions are also obtained. The Fd? tree after the new pane is inserted is shown in Figure 4.

I-Ii 1: C 4 e 3 b 2 d 2 a 1  Figure 4. the F d-tree after the new pane is inserted    When mmmg the updated association rules in the updated data stream, we need to project the FP-tree out from the updated Fd-tree. Suppose the minimum support threshold is 50%. We note that the frequent item order changed and item a is no longer frequent any more in updated data stream.

Do we need to rearrange the FP-tree? In another words, do we need to delete the node a from the FP-tree and restrictedly arrange the FP-tree structure according to their descending order? We notice that the updated part is usually dramatically smaller than the original data stream. The FP? tree is based on the original data stream therefore most amounts of frequent itemsets are already stored in the FP? tree when data stream is updated. The changed part would have comparatively fewer amounts of frequent itemsets.

Even the changed transactions affect the item' order, since most of the frequent itemsets in the data stream are based on the old order, only small amounts of itemsets follow the new order, it is not necessary to change the order strictly each time the order is changed. Otherwise the order change would cause a lot of overhead before mining. We don't care about the order change among the frequent items and among the small items For example, the occurrences of item c becomes 4 and e becomes 3,but they are still frequent items and all their itemsets are already in FP-tree, so there is no need to rearrange their orders. Only when infrequent items become frequent or frequent items become infrequent, it is necessary to rearrange the order. That means that if there is an infrequent item that becomes frequent, it needs to be placed in the FP-tree part of the Fd-tree; if there is a frequent item is now small, it needs to be lowered down out of the FP-tree part in the Fd-tree. For example, the previous frequent item a becomes infrequent and meanwhile the previous infrequent item d becomes large, so their order changed.

To project FP-tree from Fd-tree, start from the root, following each branch if its next node is frequent till there are no frequent items in a branch. The process is repeated after all branches from root are traversed. The cost of projecting an FP-tree is equal to cost traversing FP-tree once.

At last, mining the updated association rules depends on the FP-tree.

Using the Fd-tree to mine the incremental association rules has the following advantages: (1) no scanning of the original database is needed even when the small itemsets become frequent after updating the database, yet the original FP-growth has to scan the original database to reconstruct the FP-tree in this situation, (2) the mining process is based on the FP-tree, the compact structure instead of generating many candidates, (3) it only scans the updated transactions once,. yet the FUP need to scan on each level.

The incremental association rules mining with Fd-tree follows the following steps: (1) Construct the Fd-tree using all items in the data stream  at the beginning.

(2) After the Fd-tree is constructed, during the later data  stream update just scan the updated part once to update the Fd-tree.

(3) Project the FP-tree from the Fd-tree according to the frequent items.

(4) Using the FP-growth procedure in the original FP-tree algorithm to mine the frequent patterns in the FP-tree.



IV. EXPERIMENT ANALYSIS  We compare the performance of Fd-tree, FUFP and FUP.

All the programs are written in Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 and run with Windows XP on a 2.660Hz CPU and lOB memory. The experiments were performed on a synthetic datasets developed by IBM Almaden Quest research group [9] and a real datasets from the UCI Machine Learning Repository [10] [11]. The synthetic dataset is called TlOI4DlOOK whose average transaction length is 10, average length of the maximal frequent itemset is 4, and total number of transaction is lOOk. The real dataset is chess whose average transaction length is 37, total number of transactions is 3196. The chess dataset is a dense dataset but the TlOI4DlOOK dataset is a sparse dataset. To simulate data streams, the transactions in both synthetic data and real datasets are looked up one by one in sequence and feed them in the buffer.

In the experiment, we compare the performance of the Fd-tree, FUFP and FUP by updating trees constructed using sparse and dense datasets separately. The results of the experiments are shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6. In TlOI4DlOOK dataset, the size of sliding window is changed from 20K transactions to lOOK transactions. In chess dataset, the size of sliding window is changed from 1000 transactions to 3000 transactions. The result clearly reflects that the larger the datasets, the better the Fd-tree performs compared with the FUFP and FUP for both dense and sparse datasets.



V. CONCLUSIONS  In this paper, we propose a novel method for incremental association rules mining over data streams. This method is based on Fd-tree structure which requires no scanning of the original database and to only scan the updated transactions once without involving candidate sets generation.

Experiment result indicates that the algorithm has more excellent performance than the FUP and FUFP methods.

