Association Rules parallel Algorithm Based on FP-tree

Abstract-FP-tree algorithm is the best algorithm in association rules algorithm, it dose not need to scan the database more times, and it dose not need to generate the candidate item set. Therefore, it has repeatedly been quoted by many researchers, and make more depth study based on it and they have made a lot of good results. But when faced with large-scale database, the eiTect is still not very good, In this paper, we propose a parallel algorithm based on parallel mechanism, we divide the large-scale data into many blocks and the blocks are allocated to diiTerent computer nodes for processing. By the way, we found it is very good in time efficiency, and it is fit for any large database to data mining.

Keywords-FP-tree; paraUel Algorithm; MPI

I. INTRODUCTION  With the development of science and technology, people have accumulated large amounts of data in scientific research and daily work, How to discovery potential useful knowledge in them, it has became research focus by scientists. So association rule data mining was proposed base on it, the aim is to discover a large number of potentially useful rule in the database.



II. QUESTION PROPOSE  In the process of data mining, depend on whether generate candidate item set. There are two representative algorithms: one is Apriori algorithm, it needs to scan the database many times, generate a large number candidate sets to get association rule. because it need to scan database many times and generate a great deal of candidate item set, Therefore, efficiency is not good. The other algorithm is FP-Growth algorithm, It needs to generate a large frequent pattern tree by recursively, Storage and mining these conditions FP-tree, it needs to spend much time and waste much storage room, When face with large-scale database, efficiency is not very high. so we propose a parallel association rule algorithm, we divide the database into many blocks to carry association rule mining, at last we get the result by collecting the information from different nodes.



III. RELATED CONCEPTS AND DEFINITIONS  FP-tree algorithm[ 1]: the idea is to convert association rule to be a frequent pattern tree but do not generate candidate item set, and found association rule recursively. step: (1) scan database and get frequent - Item Sets. (2) establish FP-tree Separately, While retain their associated information, mining recursively.

Li Tao Institute of Graduate  Liaoning Technical University, Huludao, China  jakelilintao@163.com

IV. FP-TREE MININoALOORITHM  Procedure FP-growth(FP-tree, a )[2]: (1) if Tree includes a single path p then (2) for each combination of p in the path of nodes (  Named ?) (3) Generate mode ? U a, the degree of support=?, the  support degree is the least in nodes.

(4) else for each ai is in the head of theTree { (5) Generate a mode ?ai U a , the degree of  support=aLsupport (6) Construct the conditional pattern base of the ?,  then Construct the condition FP-tree of the Tree ?; (7) if Tree ?* <t> , then (8) call FP-growth Algorithm (Tree?, ?)} The step of construct tree[3]: (1) scan the database at first, get the frequent - Item Sets (2) sort it in decreasing according to the degree of  support of the items (3) can the database again, construct FP-tree Recursive Mining FP-tree, the main steps: (1) generated the Conditional model library for each  node in FP-tree.

(2) construct FP-tree according to the conditional  pattern base.

(3) Construct condition FP-tree recursively, at the  same time increase frequent set that it contains: if condition FP-tree only include a path, so generate the frequent set that it included directly.



V. PARALLELALOORITHM  The step[4]: (1) Task division, to divide a large task into smaller  sub-tasks, distribute them in the different processor nodes.

(2) Communication, exchange information between the various nodes.

(3) Combination. the result compose together.

(4) Mapping. each task is mapped to each processor  node.



VI. ALoORITHMIDEA  When we carry on frequent pattern data mining, at first scan database to form frequent one set and to sort by descending, delete the set that less than the minimum degree of support, then divide candidate one set into many blocks  978-1-4244-6349-7/10/$26.00 @2010 IEEE V4-687    and use master-slave mode computer, host computer distribute tasks to many different computer nodes, make all frequent mode tree become smaller ,through task distribution to accelerate the speed of implementation.

Step: Step(I):At first scan database to form candidate one set,  if the candidate is less than the minimum degree of support.

we will delete it .

Step(2):Divide candidate one set into many blocks then construct FP-tree and retain their associated information.

Step(3):Use master-slave mode then assign tasks to different computer nodes and carry on FP-tree mining separately.

Step(4):The host collected the information from various slave computers.

Step(5):Output.

FP-tree parallel idea: Examples: (1) Scan database to form frequent-item set (minimum  d f . 2) egree 0 support IS TID Items bought  100 a, p, c, m, f, g 200 p, b, a, c, g, f 300 f, a, b, y 400 g, c, f 500 y, c, a, m, f  Frequent items f, a, c, g, p, m f, a, c, g, p f, a, y f, c, g f, a, c, m, Y  Figure I. Frequent one items  (2) Construct FP-tree  Header Table Item cOUIl1  I ! ----]r - ---- g ; , ........... --- a4  ,?, ; ?J:: y ??? ('3'"' '--------??"= "-  ??t'- I? "  B Figure 2. Frequent model tree  (3) construct the conditions model library for every node  Item the condition model library  a f:4  C fa:3,f:1  g fac:2,fc:1  p facg:2  m facgp: l.fac: 1  Y facm: 1 ,fa: 1  Figure 3. conditions model library  (4) construct condition pattern tree of FP-tree.

(5) Output the result  TID  ......



VII. EXAMPLES  t e ( h  d egree 0 f . 2) support IS Items bought Frequent  items a,c,d,b,f,e c,b,d,f,e,a f,c,d c,d,f b,f,d,c,e c,b,d,f,e e,d,c,f,b c,b,d,f,e c,b, a c,b,a a,C,D,ffi,e C,a,ffi,e,n m,b,n,c,a c,a,m,b,n c,b c,b c,a,m,b, e c,a,ffi,b,e C,a,ffi C,a,ffi ...... ......

Figure 4. Tasks distribute  Host f>rocCSSOI Taskdislribut(  -----  Cpu  CpUl  CpU2  CpUn  Figure S. Tasks distribute in different processors  FP-tree parallel algorithm description[5]: ( MPCInt( &argc,&argv); MPCComm_size(MPCCOMM_ WORD,&nproc );// get  the number of processes MPCComm_rank(MPCCOMM_ WORLD,&myid)://  get the process ID Data_input(Di);// read into the data block of the Di MPCBarrier(MPCCOMM_ WORD); //every process  synchronization if(myid= =0) Starwtime=MPC WtimeO; for(i=O;i<COLUMN;i++)// distribution the tasks to  different computer nodes (procedure FP-growth(FP-treei, a ) ; } if(myid= =O){ MPCGather(Pfars,FARs,MPCCOMM_ WORLD);//  gather all association rules endwtime=MPC WtimeO; print( "wall clock time=%t\n" ,endwtime-startime);  } MPCFinalizeO; }

VIII. TEST  We test it with 2pc and 3pc,and they are different in configuration, cpu and memory respectively are 2.0GHz(dual),lG;1.60(dual),2G;1.73GHz,O.99G.we got the data from http://archive.ics.uci.edulrnl/data-sets.html.

By experiment, we found if the processors are more the time they cost is least. we get the result the next.

2:  ----. 20  g '" .? I; oJ) c  'u; '" 8 Ie  Q..

... FF-trcc ... FF?lrcc with 2 pc -A- FF?lrcc with 3 pc  20 Ir  minimum degree of support (%)  Figure 6. Algorithm time comparison

IX. CONCLUSION  The way is fit for large database to carry on data mining, It helps to reduce the time of execution.

