Notice of Retraction

Abstract?Customer retention is increasingly pressing issue in today?s competitive commercial arena. This is relevant and important for sales and services related industries. Practicing customer relationship management (CRM) demands the ability to explore the strategy of customer retention. Despite existing the importance of customer retention to CRM, there is a lack of a comprehensive and effective approach to realize it under dynamic markets. Identifying customer segments and tracking their change over time, mining the pattern of customer segmentation are important applications for companies who need to understand what their customers expect from them now and in the future. This is significant for companies who operate in dynamic markets better fit the needs and wants of customers who, driven by new innovations and competing products. In this paper, we present a model for customer retention which accounts for the dynamics of today?s markets. Our study provides a new road-map to guide future research concerning the application of data mining techniques in customer retention under dynamic markets.

Keywords?data mining; association rule mining; customer relationship management; customer retention

I. INTRODUCTION  Customer retention is an important strategy in modern business to keep a company?s customers and to retain their revenue contribution. Customer retention is the driving force behind customer relationship management (CRM), relation- ship marketing and loyalty marketing.

Studies across a number of industries have revealed that the  cost of retaining an existing customer is only about 10% of the cost of acquiring a new customer, so customer retention is essential for a company.

Customer retention is the central concern for CRM. As  such, traditionally, elements of customer retention include one-to-one marketing, loyalty programs and complaints man- agement. One-to-one marketing refers to personalized mar- keting campaigns which are supported by analyzing, detect- ing and predicting changes in customer behaviors [1]. Loyalty programs involve campaigns or supporting activities which aim at maintaining a long term relationship with customers.

