Applying Instant Business Intelligence in Marketing Campaign Automation

Abstract?In order to make a marketing campaign effective, the business must analyze the spending behavior of his customers and know the best promotional time period.

However, extracting these data manually is a time consuming and an inefficient task. Thanks to the current internet and wireless technologies together with existing data mining tools, our system is able to automate the data mining process efficiently with instant business intelligence built into it.  In this paper, we introduce an Enterprise Marketing Campaign Automation (EMCA) system that can provide data for businesses to instantly assemble them for determining effective and accurate marketing campaign strategy. Through market basket analysis, both the business and customers benefited by having a recommended list of ?most likely to purchase? products being generated instantly.  By generating a mailing list targeted to a specific group of buyers with reference to their buying habits can reduce marketing cost by just mailing the promotional items to the specific group of buyers. Being able to predict the low and peak sales seasons will enable the business to plan ahead with good marketing campaign strategies for consumers to have a more enjoyable shopping experience!

Keywords-business intelligence; marketing campaign automation;data mining; market basket analysis

I.  INTRODUCTION In this ?Information Explosive? world, we, as consumers,  are constantly and extensively being exposed to various kind of marketing campaign promotional items such as catalogue, pamphlets, flyer, brochures and so on either in hard or softcopy.  What would you do with all these promotional items? Most of the times, we may just browse through them and then put them aside.   How often do you make use of these promotional items or put in another words, how useful are they for you? Are they able to help you in making the right purchase at the right time?  Imagine a scenario at a grocery store where consumers come to purchase the products they require; the challenge of the grocery store would be to attract the buyers to buy the products they want and simultaneously consider buying other products which may be secondary to them at that time. So which products need to be highlighted for promotions? The grocery store must analyze the spending behavior of his customers, when is the peak sales period and so on. All these have to be  acknowledged before extracting them for generation of a list of potential products to be placed in pamphlets catalogue, flyers and so on.  However, extracting these data manually is a time consuming and an inefficient task. Therefore, this data mining process has to be automated. Thanks to the current internet and wireless technologies, especially the 3G broadband service [3] which has enabled the cell phones, PDAs and many other mobile devices to be able to  transmit and receive huge amounts of data.  These technologies together with existing data mining tools, and the developers? sense of creativity has enabled  data mining process to be automated efficiently with instant business intelligence built into the system as well. In this paper, we introduce an Enterprise Marketing Campaign Automation (EMCA) system that can provide data for businesses to instantly assemble them for determining effective and accurate marketing campaign strategy.  In addition, member buyers can log onto the websites through internet or mobile device to make a purchase. The buyers will also be provided with a list of related products recommended for purchase.



II. BACKGROUND SAS [4] defines data mining as the process of sampling,  exploring, modifying, modeling, and assessing large amounts of data to uncover previously unknown patterns, which can be utilized as a business advantage. And, among the data mining techniques such as decision tree, clustering, neural network, and Na?ve Bayes, association rule [2] is perhaps the most common form of local-pattern discovery in unsupervised learning systems. Thus, it represents the best technique to be used in market basket analysis because as mentioned in [1] that the purchase of one product when another is purchased represents an association rule.

According to [2], during market basket analysis, one common analysis is used to run against a transaction database to find sets of item that appear together in many transactions. The business can then make use of knowledge of these patterns to improve the placement of these items in the stores or on the layout of catalogue or web pages.

After much in-depth studies and comparisons of features in some existing data mining software or tools such as SAS [4, 5], Microsoft tools [6, 7], the co-authors of this paper: Mohamad Fazli Abd Aziz and Siti Suhaily Hasan have decided to build the EMCA system under the Microsoft   DOI 10.1109/ICCRD.2010.180     ASP.NET platform. Basically, the system consists of the front-end and back-end portions.  The front-end portion is built using Microsoft Visual Studio 2005 to provide the graphical user interface with the functionalities for both administrator and users such as login, browse products, create products, online purchase and so on.  As seen in Figure 1-EMCA system architecture, this EMCA system not only provides the market basket analysis feature, but also consists of 2 other features namely: targeted mailing, and sales prediction.

As for the back-end database, Microsoft SQL Server 2005 with its add-on services such as Analysis Services and Business Intelligence Development Studio are used for storage and data mining purposes.

With the creativities of the developers, this system provides online as well as mobile access to front-end users such as customers or potential buyers, as seen in Figure 2- EMCA front-end web login for online users and Figure 3- EMCA front-end mobile login for mobile access.  Due to security reason, the back-end users (administrative users) who require direct and read/write access to the database or data warehouse, are only allowed online access to the system as seen in Figure 4-EMCA back-end login.

All these three features can further enhance the timely, efficient, effective and accurate planning for marketing campaign. With these features, the data mining solutions require no separate follow-up actions by the users after the data mining process is completed.  This removes the need for the organization to hire additional business analyst to analyze the mining results as the results can be represented in an easy-to understand format.  It also eliminates the problem of having several versions of the same mining models as the mining model is shared in a centralized server.  This complies with the goal of data warehousing where in any single point in time, there should only be one single version of true data.

Figure 1.  EMCA system architecture.

Figure 2.  EMCA front-end web login.



III. THE IMPLEMENTED SOLUTION The above mentioned features are built into the EMCA  system using the data mining techniques such as association, decision tree, Na?ve Bayes, and time series algorithms.  For market basket analysis, association rule is used.  In this algorithm, each attribute/value pair, for example, product/bicycle,  is considered as an item and an itemset is a combination of items in a single transaction. The algorithm scans through the dataset trying to find itemsets that tend to appear in many transactions.  However, in a database with large volumes of transactions, which are those items and itemsets that are the most appropriate for our market basket analysis? This relies on two parameters, support and confidence parameters. The support parameter defines how many transactions the itemset must appear before it is considered significant or in other words, how often it should occur in the database.  The confidence parameter determines the minimum probability before a rule can be considered; it measures the strength of the rule.  Generally, large confidence value and smaller support values are used. For example [1], if confidence is 100% and support is only 20% indicates that if antecedent A occurs, consequent B always occur, even though this association rule exists only in 20% of the transactions.  With this rule, it is still effective to target the promotional campaign to those consumers purchasing item A. As shown in Figure 5-EMCA list of recommended products (mobile) that by using this algorithm, our EMCA system is capable of providing instant product recommendations to customers so as to improve their shopping experience.  For the business part, they are able to determine which products to be included for promotion instantly while planning a marketing campaign.

Figure 3.  EMCA front-end mobile login.

For the target mailing analysis, our system makes use of the decision tree and Na?ve Bayes algorithms since both these algorithms support classification and work well for predictive modeling.   In building a model, the decision tree algorithm examines how each input attribute in the dataset affects the result of the predicted attribute, and then it uses the input attributes with the strongest relationship to create a series of splits called nodes.  If an input attribute is seen to cause the predicted attribute to favor one state over the other, a new node is added to the model.

Figure 4.  EMCA back-end login.

The model continues to grow and seeks to find a combination of attributes and their states that create a disproportionate distribution of states in the predicted attributes, therefore, allowing us to predict the outcome of the predicted attribute.  Naives Bayes algorithm on the other hand, calculates probabilities for each possible state of the input attribute.  Since these probabilities used to generate the model are calculated and stored during the processing of the cube, the results are returned quickly and making the model a good option for exploring data and for discovering how various input attributes are distributed in the different states of the predicted attribute.

As seen in Figure 6-EMCA campaign management that by using the Naives Bayes algorithm, our system is able to categorize the customers into groups not only based on their geographic areas, but also based on demographic information.  The results obtained from the analysis will enable the business to identify which customer will most likely to buy a product first based on his/her actual purchase history, and secondly making references to geographic and demographic information of existing customers who have actually bought the product.  This more focused and accurate way of generating mailing list shall reduce the marketing cost by targeting the promotion to a specific group of customers according to their preferences.

Figure 5.  EMCA list of recommended products (mobile).

Figure 6.  EMCA campaign management  As for the sales prediction feature, our system makes use of the time series algorithm to create model that can be used to predict continuous variables over time.  For example, you can choose one or more variables to predict, but they must be continuous and can have only one case series for each model.

The case series identifies the location in a series, such as the date when looking at sales over a length of several months or years.  As shown in Figure 7-EMCA sales forecasting, that by using this algorithm, our system is able to find patterns from existing product sales information and predict how the sales will progress in the future.  These results obtained will enable the business to plan their marketing strategy ahead effectively before the low or peak sales seasons occur.

Promoting the right product at the right time to the right people indeed makes a great difference in sales and market shares.

Figure 7.      EMCA sales forecasting

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE ENHANCEMENT As can be seen above that the EMCA system can, indeed  help businesses to instantly carry out analysis for determining effective and accurate marketing campaign strategy. Through market basket analysis, both the business and customers benefited by having a recommended list of ?most likely to purchase? products being generated instantly.

This helps the business to promote the right products to the right customers.  As for the customers with more accurate information, they are able to make better purchase decision.

By generating a mailing list targeted to a specific group of buyers with reference to their buying habits benefited to both the business and the consumers. The business can reduce marketing cost by just mailing the promotional items to the specific group of buyers while the consumers gained from not receiving unnecessary and un-related promotional items.

Being able to predict the low and peak sales seasons will enable the business to plan ahead with good marketing campaign strategies.

Perhaps with a well planned marketing campaign strategy, the consumers shall have more enjoyable shopping experiences! As no system is perfect, one suggestion for future improvement to EMCA is to enable the front-end module to be able to send SMS and MMS regarding promotions to the customers; not just emails only.  Currently, EMCA system is built under the Microsoft ASP.NET platform with Microsoft software and tools. Perhaps in the not too distant future, it can be integrated with other software or tools in other platforms as well.

