DEFECT ASSOCIATION AND COMPLEXITY PREDICTION BY MINING  ASSOCIATION AND CLUSTERING RULES

Abstract Number of defects remaining in a system provides an insight into the quality of the system. Software defect prediction focuses on classifying the modules of a system into fault prone and non-fault prone modules. This paper focuses on predicting the fault prone modules as well as identifying the types of defects that occur in the fault prone modules. Software defect prediction is combined with association rule mining to determine the associations that occur among the detected defects and the effort required for isolating and correcting these defects. Clustering rules are used to classify the defects into groups indicating their complexity: SIMPLE, MODERATE and COMPLEX.

Moreover the defects are used to predict the effect on the project schedules and the nature of risk concerning the completion of such projects.

Keywords-Defect Associations, Clustering, Defect Correction Effort, Defect Classification

I.   INTRODUCTION  Software defect prediction classifies system modules into fault prone and non-fault prone thereby enabling the users to identify the modules which are infected with defects. This project work deals with the process of identifying the fault prone modules, detecting the defects, identifying the associations among them, predicting the effort required for correcting these defects, grouping the defects into clusters and classifying projects based on the defects. This helps the user to determine the defects remaining in a system, the association among them and the effort required for correcting these defects. The defect association helps in identifying maximum number of defects occurring with a given defect and helps testers to perform specific testing by enabling them to search for specific defects based on the association rules. Defect associations help developers to analyze the reason why certain defects occur in association with each other and defect correction effort prediction provides an estimate of the probable amount of time taken for correcting the defects.

The process of grouping a set of objects into classes of similar objects is called clustering. By clustering one can identify dense and sparse regions and overall distribution patterns. Clustering technique categorizes the defects into  groups based on their complexity. The defect correction effort is used as the criterion for classifying the defects thereby providing the project managers with a general idea about the nature of complexity of defects. Three general categories are defined for grouping defects: SIMPLE, MODERATE and COMPLEX. This clustering technique helps the project managers to understand about the nature of defects and allocate resources accordingly.

Moreover the occurrence of defects in a project is used to determine the risk of the project overshooting its schedule by using a weighted analysis method.



II. MINING METHODS  A. Association  Classifying the modules as fault prone and non-fault prone is a renowned software prediction method. This method of classification is based on a classification model derived from previous development methods [1]. The accuracy of these classifiers is based on four possible results: If a module is fp and classified accordingly, then it is True Positive (TP); if it is wrongly classified as nfp, then it is False Negative (FN). Similarly if a module is nfp and classified accordingly, then it is True Negative (TN); if it is wrongly classified as fp, then it is False Positive (FP). The defect prediction accuracy can be determined from these four figures [2]. Defect prediction method should determine maximum number of defect modules without raising false alarms. True Positive Rate and False Positive Rate are used to evaluate defect prediction classifiers.   Fig. 1 describes the overall architecture diagram of the system.

1) LARGE ITEMSET GENERATION  The defects are divided into their various constituent types [3].The effort required for isolating and correcting these defects is calculated in hours.

R.KARTHIK School of Information Technology &  Engineering VIT University Vellore-632014 India  karthik_jkr@yahoo.com  N.MANIKANDAN School of Information Technology &  Engineering VIT University Vellore-632014 India  manikandan.n@vit.ac.in            Figure1. Architecture  Defect Prediction System  Obtain defect data set Obtain defect isolation and correction effort data set  Obtain transactions from data set  Obtain training and defect data set  Mine association rules to determine defect associations  Mine association rules with effort as consequent  Generate strong association rules with support and confidence greater than minimum  Obtain training and defect data set  Rule Ranking  Defect association prediction  Defect isolation and defect correction effort prediction  Clustering the defects into groups based on their correction effort  Weighted analysis  Determining the risk associated with the project     For the purpose of defect correction effort prediction, the following attributes are taken into consideration Defect type, Effort, Typological error, Bad code and Omission error  The defects are grouped into transactions based on the following approach: All defects whose change date falls within a particular time period are considered to be part of the same transaction.

The large defect data sets are obtained from the transactions based on the minimum support. Support of an itemset is defined as the number of transactions containing the itemset. The minimum support is fixed by the user and the large defect sets are obtained [4].

2)  ASSOCIATION RULE MINING  For a given transaction database T, an association rule is an expression of the form X=>Y, where X and Y are subsets of A and X=>Y holds with confidence c, if c% of transactions in D that support X also support Y. In this method association rules are mined from the large defect sets in order to identify associations among the defects.

The minimum confidence is fixed by the user. The defect association rules are generated based on previously known method [4]. For defect isolation effort prediction and defect correction effort prediction, a special type of association rule mining is used such that the consequent of the association rule contains only the effort for correcting the defects. This method called Mining Association Rules with item constraints helps us to mine association rules with effort as consequent [5].

The rules are ranked based on their length. The rules with maximum length are given highest priority. For rules of equal length, the confidence, support and alphabetical order of defects are considered for assigning priority.

3)  DEFECT ASSOCIATIONS  The defects that occur together with the given defect are identified using the defect association prediction method. The association rules are mined from the large defect sets and they are pruned based on the user specified minimum confidence and the rules are ranked.

The given k-defect is taken and the rules are searched one by one to determine the rule which contains the given defect. If all the pre-associations are contained within the antecedent of the rule, then the consequent is combined with the k-defect to generate a k+1 defect and the defect associations are displayed [6].

4)  DEFECT ISOLATION AND CORRECTION EFFORT  For defect isolation and correction effort prediction, special kinds of association rules are mined in which effort occurs as the consequent. Once the rules are obtained and ranked, the rules are searched one by one to identify the rule whose antecedent contains the defect.

The defect is merged with the antecedent to generate the defect element set and the most probable effort for the defect element set is determined [6].

B. Clustering  Clustering is a data mining technique used to place data elements into related groups without advance knowledge of the group definitions. Clustering is a useful technique for separating data into groups whose members belong together. Each object is assigned to the group it is most similar to.

In this paper, clustering is applied to the identified defects along with their effort in order to group the defects into three categories based on their isolation and correction effort. The three categories are:  1. COMPLEX: Defects that require a large amount of isolation and correction time.

2. MODERATE: Defects that require a considerable amount of time for isolation and correction, but not large enough to be complex.

3. SIMPLE: Defects that are easy to isolate and correct and which require a very small amount of time for isolation and correction.

This categorization is not based on any fixed boundaries. The boundaries are dynamic and are formed based on the data present in that particular system. Hence the clustering is specific to the system or database to which it is applied and it changes from system to system.

In this project, clustering is performed based on the following attributes  Defect Isolation Effort, Defect Correction Effort, Typological Error, Bad Code and Omission Error  Typological error, bad code and omission error are attributes whose presence or absence influences the time taken for correcting and isolating defects.

Hence each of these attributes is given a value 10 if they are present and are given a value 0 if they are absent. For defects whose isolation and correction effort is independent of these attributes, each of these is given a value of 10.

DEFECT CLUSTER ALGORITHM     1. The number of clusters is fixed as 3(SIMPLE, MODERATE and COMPLEX).

2. 3 initial clusters are formed by choosing one defect set for each cluster from the database.

3. The defect set with the lowest isolation and correction effort forms the first defect set in the SIMPLE cluster while the defect set with the maximum isolation and correction effort forms the first defect set in the COMPLEX cluster.

4. The average of the isolation effort and correction effort of the defects in the SIMPLE and COMPLEX cluster is computed and the defect set with effort nearest to the average forms the first defect set in the MODERATE cluster. Now each cluster consists of one defect set.

5.   Next each defect set is assigned to only one of the clusters. Each defect set is assigned to the nearest cluster by computing its distance using the Euclidean Distance Method  6. Each defect set is assigned to the most similar cluster based on the distance method and the arithmetic mean is calculated for all the defect sets in a cluster. For example, if the SIMPLE cluster consists of two defect sets ? Logic={1,3,10,0,0} and Interface={2,1,10,10,0},then SIMPLEMEAN={2+1/2,3+1/2,10+10/2,0+10/2,0+ 0/2} where each defect set is of the format Defect={Isolation Effort, Correction Effort, Typological, Bad Code, Omission}  7. The arithmetic mean forms the new centre for this cluster. Similarly centers are computed for each cluster.

8. The defect sets are reassigned to the cluster based on their distance from the new centers.

9. This process is repeated until stable clusters are formed  FORMULA  EUCLIDEAN DISTANCE(X, Y) = (|X1-Y1| 2 + |X2-  Y2| 2 + ... + |XN-1-YN-1|  2 + |XN-YN| 2)1/2                      (1)  This clustering method helps in identifying and categorizing the defects based on their complexity.

The project managers can allocate time and resources based on the nature of complexity of the defects. This helps the project managers to manage project schedules and ensure that the project isn?t delayed.

Fig 2 describes the clustering process.

Figure 2. Clustering Module

III. CLASSIFICATION  Based on weighted analysis method, it is determined whether the presence of a particular defect might affect the project schedule significantly.

This helps to determine whether a project is risk prone due to the presence of a defect. The following inputs are required for this method: Defect Isolation  Defect correction effort obtained from database  Three clusters are defined: simple, moderate and complex  One defect set is assigned to each cluster  Compute Euclidean distance  Assign each defect to the nearest cluster  Compute arithmetic mean to determine new centers  Reassign defects based on new centers     Effort (DIE), Defect Correction Effort (DCE) and Number of Associated Defects (NAD)  From the defect associations, the number of defects (NAD) that occur in association with the given defect can be obtained. More the number of defects that occur in association with a particular defect more is the amount of time required for correcting the defects increases. This affects the project schedule and makes the project risk prone. Thus the number of associated defects plays a major role in determining the project risk.

FORMULA  WA = 0.5*NAD * (0.2*DIE + 0.3 * DCE)  (2)  Where:  WA ? Weighted Analysis  NAD ? Number of Associated Defects  DIE ? Defect Isolation Effort  DCE ? Defect Correction Effort  The threshold value of WA depends on the size and complexity of the project. Based on the project characteristics, an appropriate WA value is set. All projects with values below the threshold are classified as safe and all projects with values above the threshold are classified as risky.



IV. RESULTS  This project mines defect associations, groups defects into clusters and classifies the projects based on the defects found. The resulting data is used as the basis for determining the nature and complexity of defects and the risk associated with the project.

A possible extension of this project would be to include other data mining methods to classify defects. Future works can take into account attributes such as severity and cause of defects as the basis for classifying them.



V.  CONCLUSION  In this paper, an innovative approach for identifying the associations among the defects in a system and  predicting the effort for correcting these defects is described.   This new defect prediction method helps in identifying the maximum possible number of defects that occur in association with a given defect. By using this method, the accuracy of defect prediction is improved and moreover this method helps in producing a lower false negative rate in comparison with other prediction methods. Clustering technique is used to group the defects based on their complexity and the projects containing the defects are classified based on the risk associated with them.

