Data Mining and Its Applications in CRM

AbstractThis paper, through the introduction of data mining  technology, focuses on expatiating on the working methods of  data mining technology and analyzing its basic steps.

Furthermore, combining with the corporate marketing practices  as well as citing the case description, the paper explores the  applications of data mining technology in customer relationship  management.

KeywordsData Mining; CRM; Data Warehouse; Application

I. INTRODUCTION  Data Mining (DM) is the process in which the enterprise  extracts its useful knowledge from a lot of incomplete, random  information that has been generated from the production,  marketing, customer services of the enterprise, and then  through the analysis of data to find the information and  knowledge within the data. With the extensive use of  databases, the application domains of data mining also become  more and more extensive. Because of the realization of  industrial automation, the business domain has generated a  mass of business data, of which there is little truly valuable  information.Therefore, it can enhance enterprises  competitiveness to do in-depth analysis in the mass of the data,  and to acquire the truly valuable information that is conducive  to business operations and the business decision-making. The  main feature of data mining is executing extraction,  transformation, analysis, and other models of treatment to the  abundant business data in the commercial databases, to extract  the critical data that can assist the business decisions.



II. THE COMMON DATA MINING METHODS USED IN CRM  Data mining is a process of discovering knowledge.

It is mainly based on the statistics, the artificial  intelligence, the information science and other  technologies, and analyzes the data in a highly  automated way,   makes the inductive reasoning,  from which to excavate the potential models, and to  predict future events. In this way, the data mining    can       assist the decision-makers to assess risks,  and make the right decisions. (Figure1)  Figure 1 the evolutionary process from data to the knowledge  In practical applications, data mining mainly adopts the  following methods.

A.   The Association Analysist  To learn more about association rules mining, firstly, it  should meet the support degree and the confidence level.  The  support degree reflects that there is enough data may support  this rule, the confidence level reflects the credibility of this  rule.  The association analysis is analyzing the intimate degree  of relations among the variables,     and it mainly based on  observational data to establish the appropriate dependency  relationship among the variables. The association rule can find  out the relations among different commodities in the database,  then it come to reflect the customers purchasing habits. This  rule is one of the methods that are applied quite extensively at  present.

B.   The Time Series Analysis  Being similar to the association analysis, the time series  analysis is also aimed at digging out the relations among the  data, but it is more focused on the causality of data in  chronological sequence.  As a retailer's example, it is the time  series analysis if the data mining system divides into groups  according to the customer number   rather than the transaction  number in the analysis, and further classifies each group by  time. By utilizing the time series to analyze customers  purchasing records, the retailers can find out the potential  purchasing patterns of customers.

C.    The Classification Analysis  Firstly, the classification analysis endows every  observation with a tag, and then checks these marked  observations, describes their characteristics. This kind of  description may be a mathematical formula or a model, which  can be used to categorize the new observations.  Several usual  typical classification models include the linear regression  model, the decision tree models, the rule-based model and the  neural network model.  For example, based on the debt level,  income level and working conditions, it can carry out credit  risk analysis to the given customers. The classification analysis  will give out the predicted results through estimating the  relation between the above properties and the degree of risk in    the known data.

D.  The Cluster Analysis  The process that a set of objects are grouped into  multiple classes consisting of similar objects is called  clustering.  The objects, which are grouped into the same class,  are similar to each other, while the objects in the different  classes are distinct.  The cluster analysis has being widely  applied?For example, in the business, the clustering can  group the customer information through customer data, and  describe the customers purchasing patterns; in the biological,  by classifying the gene-sequence, it can find that which kind of  feature or symptom will be led by the specific genes  combination.

The data  The data  warehouse  Data  mining    The Solutions of intelligent  data analysis  Data  Manageme  Knowledge  Discovery   978-0-7695-4043-6/10 $26.00  2010 IEEE  DOI 10.1109/ICCRD.2010.184

III. THE BASIC STEPS OF DATA MINING  Under the premise that the target of data mining is explicit,  based on the established enterprise-level customer-information  data warehouse, it can carry out the data mining work.  Data  mining should keep to the following steps: to confirm the  objective of analysis and forecasting, to establish the data  mining database, to analyze the data, to establish the model, to  evaluate and validate the model, to implement the model and  several other basic steps.  (Figure 2)      Figure 2      To confirm the objective of analysis and forecasting is the  basic condition of data mining. Only confirming the objective  of analysis can we extract the data and select the methods.  The  implementation process of data mining is also carried out  around this objective.  For example, the objective of data  mining is to find the high-value customers. Whether it can  accurately find the high-value customers according to the rules  of data mining, which has been mentioned, has become the  most important criterion of the mining model.

Creating a data warehouse is regard as the object of the  data mining and analysis. To the collected data, it should  record in a detailed way about the source of data, the size, the  storage location and the limitations in the application of data.

After finishing the collection of data, it is necessary to describe  the data. For instance, in the data, which properties are  included, the total number of records, the names of properties,  the number of incomplete records and which properties is  missing in these incomplete records, etc. In this way, it can  make the characteristics and regularity of the data in the data  warehouse to be more notable.

In the process of data analysis, it can show the  characteristics of the searched data through multi-dimensional  analysis and visualization; and then, through the operation of  the additions and deletions to data or several new variables  recombined and generated by the existing variables, it can  describe the data characteristics more effectively.  In a word,  analyzing the statistical characteristics of data plays an  important role in the data analysis process.

To establish the model is a process that selects appropriate  methods and algorithms for data analysis to get a data-mining  model.  It is necessary to choose the right methods and  algorithms when it establishes the model.  In fact, modeling is  a repeated process, and it needs to improve or replace the  algorithms continually to find the model which obvious effect  on the objective analysis, at last it will get a reasonable and  most appropriate model.

The main work in the checking-model phase is to substitute  the testing data into the built model, and then to observe the  response of the model. By comparing the model response with  the real data, it comes to assess the accuracy of the model.  If  the accuracy of the model is relatively poor, we should re-  explore the data to create a new model, until checking the new    model.  Thus, in the practical applications, data analysis, model  building and model testing is an iterative process.



IV. THE APPLICATION OF DATA MINING IN THE CRM  In the CRM, the premise of data mining is that it is  necessary to establish the enterprise-level customer-  information data warehouse, which can assemble the customer  data in different OLAP, and can    provide a correct, complete  and single customer-data circumstance. As the basis for data  mining, the data warehouse possesses the subject-oriented,  integrated, non-renewable as well as time-varying  characteristics. Regarded as the original data source of the data  warehouse, every OLAP system provides the customers' basic  information, the customer lists, the customer bills, the history  records of customer contacts and other data in the form of  documents. The data warehouse, through the ETL process  (extracting, transforming and loading), will dispose these  interface files, and will organize, store and manage the  customer data according to different themes domains. At last,  through the interface of data warehouse, it can carry out the on-  line analysis and data mining to the customer data in the data  warehouse.  After completing the establishment of enterprise-  level customer-information data warehouse, you can proceed  the data mining based on this platform, and apply it into  different areas and stages of the customer-centric enterprises'  decision-making analysis and management.

A.   The group classification of customers  Classifying customers is conducive to the customer  analysis for different types of customers, and then it can  institute customer service strategies respectively.  Data mining  can divide a large number of customers into different  categories;   the customers in each category have similar  attributes, while the attributes of customers in different  categories are also different with each other. Through data  mining, we can understand the tastes of different customers,  and provide targeted products and services to improve the  satisfaction of different kinds of customers to the enterprise  and its products.  For example, in the long-term financial  services, the bank has accumulated a large amount of data  information including the history of customer service, the sales  history and income to the customers, as well as the customers  demographic data and lifestyle, etc.   In the customer database  To confirm the objective of    analysis and forecasting  To establish the data mining  database  To analyze the data  To establish the model    To evaluate and validate the  model  To implement the model  To revise the model   of the bank, a large number of customers may have very high  similarity in depositing, loaning or utilizing other financial  services. In this way, it forms the customer groups owning  commonness.  Through the classification analysis, we can find  out their commonness, provide them targeted services, and  thus to guide their investment behaviors and to enhance the  bank's comprehensive service level, as well as to achieve more  benefits. Customer classification can also be carried out on the  customers' consuming behavior analysis. It will be more  customized to mine the post-classification data; in this way, the  enterprise can offer different product contents for the  customers with different behavior patterns.

B.   The customers acquisition and maintaining analysis  The growth and development of the enterprise need to  maintain old customers and to acquire new customers  constantly. New customers include the people who had never  heard of our enterprise products previously; the people who  did not need our products before ; as well as the people who  had been the customers of our competitors previously. No  matter which kind of customers the enterprise requires, data  mining can help it to identify these potential customer groups,  increase the response rate of market activities and finally to  enable the enterprise to know exactly what to do and shoot the  arrow at the target.  Since the enterprise doesnt know much  about the information of new customers, it should take some  necessary means to obtain information on potential customers.

The information should include the address, age, income range,  occupation, educational level and buying habits.  After  acquiring the related information, by observing the potential  customers reaction to its   products, the enterprise can  establish the data-mining predictive models according to    feedback, and find the products in what the customers show the  most interest. The mining results will show a list of potential  customers; at the same time, it can analyze which kind of  people most likely potential customers is, according to the  analysis of potential customer information. After getting these  outcomes, the enterprise will have the leading direction when it  is searching for the potential customers.

Customer retention is a process to keep old customers and  to prevent them from losing.  In this process, we should first  analyze the data of the customers whom we have lost, to find  the behavior patterns of these customers, and to analyze the  reasons for losing customers. Based on the characteristics of  these losing customers, the enterprise should promptly adjust  service strategies towards them, and act appropriately to retain  customers according to the characteristics of customers which  are got from classifying the customers. Customer retention is  an extremely important part in the customer relationship  management.

C.   The analysis of customer loyalty  The analysis of customer loyalty mainly analyzes the  customer durability, immobility and stability. The durability of  customers reflects customers continuous consumption in the  enterprise. Then, the immobility of customers reflects the  degree that the customers are affected by various factors.

Moreover, what the customers stability reflects is the  customers consumption cycle and frequency. The customer,  who purchases products of the enterprise at short intervals,    is  considered as being stable.  For example, by carrying out data  mining to the customers VIP card information, we can record  the customers ' buying sequence and group the goods that a  customer has purchased at different times and in different  marketing activities into sequences. The data mining of  sequential patterns can be used to analyze customers  purchasing trends and thus to distinguish the customers  loyalty. At the same time, it can predict changes of customers  loyalty. According to all of these, the enterprise can adjust and  update the price, the types of goods, as well as their marketing  strategies to retain the existing customers and attract new  customers. The analysis of customers durability, immobility  and stability mainly take advantage of the trend analysis  approach in the time series models.  Trend analysis consists of  the analysis about several aspects, like trending, cycle trend    and changes, seasonal trend and changes, irregular random  trend.  According to the trend analysis, the enterprise can  understand customers consumption trends over past a period.

Combining the analysis results and predicting results of data,  we can estimate a customer's durability, immobility and  stability, and then determine the customers loyalty.

D.   The Cross-Selling Analysis  Cross selling refers to the process that the enterprise sells  the new products or services to the existing customers. The  advantage of cross selling is that, for the existing customers,  the enterprise can easily get relatively abundant information  about them, which contributes to the accuracy of data mining.

However, in most cases, the referred cross-selling is different  from the initial sale. In the customer information which is hold  by the enterprise, particularly in the information of previous  purchasing behaviors, it may include the key factor or even the  determining factor that will decide this customer next  purchasing behavior : that is, it can help the enterprise to find  these factors which will affect customers buying behaviors.

E.  The customer profitability analysis  The customer profitability is an indicator for the  quantitative evaluation of customer value.  It is a process that,  based on the prescriptive evaluation scale, it gets a definitive  result through calculating the customer data. Therefore, the  calculation of customer profitability does not need data mining.

However, by utilizing the data mining technology, the  enterprise can predict the changes of customer profitability in  different market competition environment and market activity  environment.  The customer profitability analysis is intended to  find those "high-value customers, and to proceed deeper and  more detailed customer relationship management towards  them.  In the analysis of customer profitability, the data mining  application is aimed at finding out the most suitable market  environment, so that the enterprise   customer profitability can  be optimal.

CONCLUSION  In the information age, the enterprise should make full use  of its information resources, and change the product-centric  management model into the customer-centric management  model. Moreover, it also should focus on the collection of  customer information; establish the customer-data warehouse;  utilize the data mining technology and analyze features of    customers to provide the enterprise with decision-making   supports in the marketing, production and operations, and to  improve the corporate performance continuously.

