An Efficient Algorithm for Mining Association Rules from Multiple Databases*

Abstract?The mining objects of traditional mining association rules techniques mainly focus on mono-database. With the rapid development of database technologies, multi-database mining is becoming more and more important. In order to make the synthetic result of multiple data sources more accurate, the parameter C, which indicates the number of transactions in local branch database, is proposed. We design a novel and efficient multi-databases mining algorithm using the parameter C. It can reduce the network congestion and solve the new incremental addition of transaction data effectively.

Experiment results demonstrate the algorithm is efficient.

Keywords-association rules; data mining; multi-database; incremental addition

I. INTRODUCTION  Data mining can be known as a knowledge discovery process in databases [1]. Database mining is the automated process of extracting interesting and previously unknown patterns and correlations from large databases. Association rule mining [1-6] is the process of discovering items, which tend to occur together in transactions based on some kind of rules. With the rapid development of database technologies, multi-database mining is becoming more and more important. The mining objects of traditional mining association rules techniques mainly focus on mono-database.

Very little work has been done in mining association rules in multiple large databases. A direct application of general algorithms to multiple large databases is not effective, because it requires a large amount of communication overhead.

If the data to be mined were stored by relational models in multiple databases, we can break multiple data sources mining task down into three sub-tasks: 1) Clear multiple data sources; 2) Mine the knowledge of each sources; 3) Integrate the knowledge of every branch database [7].

In this paper we presented a novel and efficient algorithm for mining association rules from multiple databases.

Incremental addition of the data set should not necessitate re- computation of rules for the entire data set. Also, the local branch databases should not necessitate moving data to the headquarters database.

*This work is partly supported by The Project of Shandong Province Higher Educational Science and Technology Program(No. J09LG32), the Project of Youth Science and Technology Star Program of Jinan (No.

20090202) The Project of Youth Science and Technology Star Program of Jinan (No. 20090202).



II. LOCAL BRANCH DATABASES MINING  The development of multi-database association rule mining is a challenging and critical task since it requires knowledge of all the data stored in different locations and the ability to combine partial results into a single result from individual RDBMS. Suppose there is a company which has several branches in different locations, and each branch having its own database. The main branch or top level within the organizational hierarchy is responsible for making development and decision of the entire company. The above situation can be presented as Fig 1.

Figure 1. Multi-database environment  The individual databases have to be analyzed to generate rules to make local decisions. It would be easier for the organization to make decisions based on the rules generated by the individual branches, rather than by the raw data. If the raw data from each of the individual databases were sent to a single database to generate the rules, then certain useful rules which would aid in making decisions about local branches, would be lost. For example, a rule such as ?50% of the branches in some city saw a 10% increase in the purchase of digital photo frame when digital cameras and memory cards were purchased together? would not be generated if the raw data was transferred. If the raw data from all the databases were transferred to a single database, then each of the individual branches would not be generating the rules of its data. In this case, the organization may lose some important rules that were prominent in branches and were not found in the other branches similar to the above example. Generating such rules would aid in making decisions about specific branches.

Most of the algorithms for discovering association rules [5, 6, 8] require multiple scans about the database. The database was read completely for each pass, which results in a large number of disk readings and places a huge burden on the I/O sub-system. Network congestion problems and poor resource utilization was common in cases where data was to be retrieved from a central database server by a network.

DBMS  Local branch 1  DBMS  Local branch 2  DBMS  Local branch 3  DBMS     Instead of moving data from one database to another, a partitioned approach would be appropriate.

The patterns in multi-databases can be divided into the following classes: local and global. Local branches need consider the original raw data in their datasets so they can identify local patterns for local decisions. Global patterns are the patterns that are supported by most of the branches and are used for making global decisions.

Many association rules that are mined in branches only may appear in one or two companies. They have not any effect on the headquarters? decision-making. In this paper, we introduce the concept of lift. The degree of lift indicates correlation in statistic. It reflects the satisfaction degree and can be used to prune noise rules. We would delete those rules whose degree of lift is less than an assigned value 1 [8,9].

In order to make the synthetic result of multiple data sources more accurate, we propose the parameter C which indicates the number of transactions in local branch database.

When mining the association rules in each local branch database is done, the number of transaction rows is assigned to the parameter C. The frequent itemsets and theirs support degree are submitted to the headquarters along with the parameter C as shown in table 1. Specially, 1-itemset?s support degree is also recorded and transferred to the headquarters.

TABLE I. ITEMSETS, SUPPORT DEGREE AND C  Branch Code China0532  Itemset L,R L R  Support Degree 0.70 0.85 0.66  C 2800  For incremental addition of local branch databases, the mining process is similar. The new mining result is submitted to the headquarters and merged into the table with the same branch code.



III. THE SYNTHETICAL MODEL  The synthetical model is formed in the headquarters. It includes two parts: the new support degree of association rules and the global association rules.

A.  The New Support Degree of Association Rules  When the mining in local branch DBMS(database management system) is done, the mini confidence degree and the mini lift degree are used to prune the frequent itemsets in order to submit useful association rules to the headquarters. In the headquarters we could compute the new support degree of association rules by the following formula.

Support (L)= Support1 (L)?C1/C0+ Suppor2 (L)?C2/C0 +?+ Supportn (L)?Cn/C0  (1)  Support(R) = Support1 (R)?C1/C0+ Support2 (R)?C2/C0 +?+ Supportn (R)?Cn/C0  (2)  Support(LR)= Support1 (LR)?C1/C0+ Support2 (LR)?C2/C0 +?+ Supportn (LR)?Cn/C0  (3)  Conf (L?R)= Support(LR) / Support(L)                       (4)  Lift(L?R)=Conf(L?R)/Support(R)=Support(LR)/Suppo rt(L)? Support (R)                                                               (5)  The parameter Ci is the real exact number of transaction row in local branch database. For the above formulas, the local association rules are merged into the global association rules losslessly. The parameter C0 is the sum of all Ci and represents the total number of transactions.

Whether the branch is large or small, they are equal in the synthetic model. Whatever the sales is, every branch plays a important role. The branch makes decision according to the local association rules individually. The organization makes decision by the global association rules. This model not only reduces the I/O burden, but also enhances the accuracy and authenticity of distributed local databases.

While we compute the support degree and the confidence degree of the global association rules, we could compute the lift degree by the following formula. The lift degree is used for selecting the effective global association rules.

The algorithm C-newSupp to calculate new global degree of support is as the following.

Algorithm C-newSupp Input: R,  //a association rules;  Ci, //the number of the individual database row Output: new RS,  //the support degree of association rules  in global database (1) RS?0 (2) For i=1 to n  //each of individual data source (3) RS?Support (R) ?Ci /C + RS  B. The Global Association Rules  The global association rules must meet the min support degree and min-confidence degree. But strong association rules may not be meaningful. The lift degree of reflects the satisfaction degree. The following algorithm G-finalRule is to generalize final meaningful association rules using the lift degree.

Algorithm G-finalRule Input: R1, R2... Rk,  // a set of association rules; min-support, min-conf, min-lift Output: RS// a set of final meaningful association rules  (1) For i=1 to k, //R1, R2, .., Ri,?, Rk, each of association rule L?R  (2)   Support(LR) ?Call  C-newSupp; (3)   Support(R)?Call  C-newSupp; (4)   Conf(L?R) ? Support(LR)/ Support(R) (5)   If  Support(LR)>=min-support and  Conf(L?R) >=min-conf  then (6)    Lift ?Conf(L?R)/ Support(R); (7)    If  lift>=min-lift then (8)         RS?Ri

IV. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS  To evaluate the synthetic algorithm correctness and efficiency, we use the synthetic classification data sets of the famous site Kdnuggets in the rule synthesis. Table 2 shows the parameters of the data sets.

While we mined a total of 2072 association rules from these databases with Apriori algorithm, we have acquired 2105 association rules with our synthetic model. The prior 10 itemsets are same in term of support degree. The itemsets are shown in table 3. The experiment shows the synthetic algorithm is correct and effective.

TABLE II. THE PARAMETERS OF THE EXPERIMENT DATA SETS.

Database |R| T I |r|  T5I2D100KN1 968 5 2 19985  T5I2D100KN2 965 5 2 20046  T10I2D100KN1 960 10 4 19774  T10I2D100KN2 967 10 4 19798  T20I6D100KN1 968 20 6 19408  TABLE III. THE PRIOR 10 ITEMSETS IN TERM OF SUPPORT DEGREE  Item set Support G-finalRule Support Apriori  C9,E15 0.052870 0.052877  A11,C9 0.052440 0.052400  A27,B247 0.052430 0.052  A27,D103 0.052290 0.052  B247,D103 0.052290 0.052  A27,F12 0.052280 0.052  B247,F12 0.052280 0.052  D103,F12 0.052280 0.052  A27,B247,D103 0.052280 0.052 A27,B247,F12 0.052280 0.052  For multi-processors, we could divide a large database into several partitions and run the synthetic algorithm.



V. CONCLUSIONS  In this paper, we designed a novel and efficient algorithm and proposed the parameter C as the stamp. Using lift, the  noise rules are deleted in local branch mining. Our proposed algorithm also has the following features:  ? It avoids I/O transfers and network congestion.

? It focuses on the number of the itemset as well as  support degree, thus greatly heightening the accurate of the global association rules mining.

? It only scans the whole databases only one and avoids re-scanning the old databases to acquire new knowledge from incremental addition to dataset.

This paper only discussed the positive association rules mining over multi-databases. Negative association rule is another aspect of data mining and different from positive association rules. In future work, we will discuss the case of negative association rules mining over multi-databases.

