

ABSTRACT Data centers are the facilities that house large number of computer servers that dissipate high power. Considering the dynamics of the data centers, their efficient thermal management is a big challenge that needs to be addressed.

Computational analyses using a CFD code is very useful technique that helps the engineer to understand and solve the data center cooling problem. Several ongoing numerical modeling research efforts focus on simulating data center environment with constant boundary conditions. In reality, data centers have highly time dependent boundary conditions i.e. fluctuations in server powers and CRAC flow rate. In this paper, effect on time dependent boundary conditions on rack inlet temperatures will be discussed in detail with the transient modeling of data centers. Case studies will be presented to illustrate the transient fluctuations of rack inlet air temperature by the variation of rack power and CRAC flow rate.

KEY WORDS: Data Center, Numerical Modeling, Flotherm, Transient Analysis, Transient Boundary Conditions.

INTRODUCTION The rapid increase in compute power and storage  capabilities of servers has inevitably lead to higher power dissipations. This introduced a thermal challenge in how to efficiently cool these servers. Grouping together these high power dissipating servers into one room, results in a high power density data center. It becomes even more challenging here for data center managers when trying to provide adequate cooling in order to operate the servers within an acceptable environment. On the other hand, when adequate cooling is provided, data center managers are confronted with the high levels of energy consumption in order to cool data center facilities. A study has shown that 1.5% of the total consumption of electricity in the United States is merely for cooling data center facilities [1]. This makes it necessary to conduct thorough thermal-fluids analyses of data centers.

Many approaches are being considered for reducing energy consumption for the cooling of data center facilities such as the use of wet-bulb economizers [1], the use of evaporative cooling [2], and adapting certain practices in operating a data center facility [3]. In addition, the development of efficiency measures for data center energy efficiency characterization  such as power usage effectiveness (PUE) and data center infrastructure (DCiE) [4] are becoming important.

On the other hand, computational analyses using specialized CFD software have been used to better understand and design data centers for many years. Specifically over the past decade, numerous studies have been presented addressing thermal- fluids analyses of data centers [5-11]. However, most of the analyses conducted in the past have been concerned only with steady state behavior of the data center. Fixed flow rates and rack powers are imposed, and the codes are used to obtain the steady state temperatures of the data center room. Various changes can occur in an operating data center such as the rack power or the CRAC supply flow rate or temperature. This in turn changes the dynamics of the data center room, and understanding the effect of these changes is of great importance for dynamic cooling. In order to address this problem, transient analysis of data centers is required.

Very few have addressed the transient analysis of data centers.

Bash et al. motivated to dynamically monitor CRAC with a cascaded control algorithm by using temperature sensor information from the racks [12].  Beitelmal et al. explored CRAC failure scenario through transient analysis and suggested to distribute rack load accordingly [13]. Sharma et al. discussed the use of dynamic thermal management in the reduction of energy consumption of data centers [14]. This paper is intended to shed light on the importance of transient analysis of data centers and its differences with steady state analysis. The establishment of a transient model and the effects of spatial and time grids on the solution are discussed.

A study by Ibrahim et al. [15] uses the transient model established in this paper to further explore different scenarios of varying CRAC airflow and server power and their effects on rack inlet temperatures and airflow dynamics in the room.

Fig 1 shows a typical raised floor data center with room return infrastructure. In this type of arrangement, the computer room air conditioner (CRAC) units push cold air into the plenum, from where it is introduced into the computer room via perforated floor tiles. The raised floor design offers considerable flexibility in placing the computer equipment above the raised floor. The under floor plenum serves as a distribution chamber for the cooling air. Without the need of ducting, cooling air can be delivered to any location simply by       replacing a solid floor tile by a perforated tile.  The region where perforated tiles are placed is called a cold aisle. On each side of the cold aisle, computer racks are placed with their intake sides facing the cold aisle. The cold air is drawn by the computer racks and the hot air is exhausted in the region between back ends of two rows of racks. This region is called hot aisle. Hot air rises from the hot aisle, into the ceiling space and flows back into the CRAC units.

Fig 1: A typical raised floor data center with alternating hot and cold aisle arrangement [8]  The organization of this paper is as follows: First a numerical modeling section discussing the parameters of the data center room to be studied and the details of the transient model.

Following that is a section comparing steady state and transient models. Then the spatial grid and time grid sensitivities are discussed. A case study showing the importance of transient modeling is addressed. Finally, the paper ends with a summary and conclusions section.

NUMERICAL MODELING In this paper CFD code Flotherm V8.2? is used for predicting airflow and heat transfer in data center environments [16].

Both steady state and transient modeling approaches have been discussed in this paper. A convergence criterion of 1E-04 was used for all the simulations in this study.

Modeling studies were carried out on a representative raised- floor data center with alternating hot and cold aisle arrangement and room return infrastructure (refer to fig 1).

The fluid flow and heat transfer equations are solved numerically using the k-? turbulence model. Buoyancy effects were accounted for using the Boussinesq Approximation.

Effects of radiation were ignored. Figure 2 shows plan view of data center considered to present the numerical study [8-11].

CRAC units are modeled as simple devices which supply cold air to the plenum and extract the hot exhaust from the room at the same specified flow rate. The data center has 20 server racks, each dissipating power that varies between 16kW and 32kW with a fixed air flow  through each rack of 2000 CFM (0.943 m3/s). The temperature rise across the racks varies between 15?C and 30?C for 16kW and 32kW power, respectively. Four CRAC units supply air at 15?C to the raised  floor plenum. To feed cold air to 20 server racks, ideally CRAC flow rate has to be 10,000 cfm per CRAC which is equivalent to 5.48 kg/s. A 80% CRAC flow rate is 8,000 cfm which refers to 80% of the ideal CRAC flow rate (0.8 x 10,000 cfm). This flow rate is equivalent to 4.38 kg/s. The details of the CFD model parameters are given in table 1.

Temperature data was recorded at six vertical locations at the center of each rack. The monitor points were located in the cold aisle to measure the inlet temperatures into the rack at an offset of 75mm from the rack, as per ASHRAE guidelines [17]. The lowest monitor point is located at a height of 333mm and the highest one at 1750mm, above the raised floor. Since the room is symmetrical, only half of the room is considered to reduce the computational time.

With steady state analyses, the CRAC is modeled as a fixed flow device that introduces cold air into the room at a fixed temperature and flow rate. Similarly, server racks, they are modeled as sources of constant power. The addition of a transient analysis required a few changes to our steady state model by allowing the CRAC airflow rate and the server rack power to vary with time. With these changes, one can input any profile shape to vary either CRAC air flow rate and/or rack server power with time.

The CRAC was modeled using a pressure source with a specified transient profile. To supply the airflow at a specified temperature of 15?C, a temperature source was coupled with the pressure source. A cutout was created on the CRAC unit to act as sink for the extract air. Similarly, server racks were modeled as enclosures with sources having specified transient profiles [16].

Fig 2: Rack layout for data center used for study - Plan view.

Table 1: CFD model parameters   Room size 13.42 m x 6.05 m  Ceiling height 3.348 m  Plenum depth 0.3 m  Power per rack 16 ? 40 kW  Rack rated air flow 2,000 cfm  Tile openness 50%  Tile size 0.61 m x 0.61 m  Air flow rate per CRAC 8,000 cfm (80%) 10,000 cfm (100%)  Chilled air supply temperature 15?C  Ambient air temperature 30?C   STEADY STATE VS TRANSIENT  A steady state analysis of data centers is a well established area of research. As previously mentioned, most of the analyses conducted in the past have been concerned only with steady state analyses of the data center. In this section, comparison is made between transient and steady state analysis. For the parameters given in table 1, and a CRAC supply of 80%, the room is initially at steady state with a rack power of 32 kW per rack, when a sudden increase of power to 40 kW occurs. Fig 3 shows the temperature variation of rack A1 with time at 3 height locations. We can note from the figure how the increase in power raises the inlet temperatures to as high as 42oC, which is an unacceptable value according to the ASHRAE data center guidelines. Fig 4 shows a spot on agreement of rack A1 inlet temperatures for the transient model at time equals 50 seconds and the steady state model.

However steady state model cannot predict the time dependent fluctuations (example rack power and CRAC flow rate) in a data center. To capture the dynamic behavior of data centers, transient numerical modeling approach must be used. Hence, remainder of this paper will focus on transient studies.

Fig 3: Rack inlet temperatures comparison between simple and heat exchanger model for 100% CRAC supply.

Fig 4: Variation of inlet temperature with rack A1 height for steady state and transient models.

SPATIAL GRID To investigate spatial and time grid sensitivities, one transient profile was adopted in which the CRAC airflow rate was kept constant at 80% supply. The server rack power was varied with time, following the profile in fig 5. As indicated by the figure, the server rack power is initially at 16kW when it starts to increase linearly for 60 seconds until it reaches 32kW. The server power then decreases linearly for 60 seconds reaching its initial state. This particular shape of the profile was chosen to relate to a sudden fluctuation in server rack power. Such fluctuations in either power or airflow are more efficiently analyzed using transient models.

Grid sensitivity runs were carried out at different grid sizes to obtain grid independent temperature and flow distributions.

Figs 6(a) and 6(b) show rack inlet temperature versus number of grid cells for rack A1 at two monitored height locations of 999mm and 1750mm, respectively. The figures show results at three different times during a transient run. The plots show grid independent temperature distributions beyond 200k grid cells. The number of grid cells used for all the analyses is 230k.

Fig 5: Server rack power profile with time.

Fig 6(a): Mesh sensitivity analysis for different grid sizes for rack A1 at a height 999mm.

Fig 6(b): Mesh sensitivity analysis for different grid sizes for rack A1 at a height 1750mm.

TIME GRID  It is necessary in a transient analysis to conduct a time step sensitivity analysis to obtain time step independent temperatures and flow distributions. Figs 7(a) is a plot of inlet temperature vs. time for rack D1 monitored at a height of 1750mm above the raised floor for computational runs using six different time steps. Similarly, fig 7(b) is a plot of inlet temperature vs. time for rack A1 monitored at a height 333mm above the raised floor. The designations 1 step to 6 step refer to the number of seconds corresponding to a time step (i.e., 1 step corresponds to a transient run with a time step of 1 second; 2 step refers to a time step of 2 seconds, etc).  One can see from both figures that as the time step gets larger, the temperature values tend to deviate from the 1 second time step results where the temperature values are varying rapidly. It is desirable to use larger time steps for a transient analysis as it cuts down the computational time significantly. However, that should not be on the cost of inaccurate results.

It can be seen from both figures (figs 7(a) and 7(b)) that the inlet temperatures are continuously varying with time. This indicates that a steady state analysis will not be a suitable tool in analyzing such a behavior in a data center. One can assume  to conduct a steady state analysis at 80% supply and a server rack power of 32 kW to represent the peak of the fluctuation at time equals 60 seconds. However, this is inaccurate as steady state is not reached at that time.

Fig 7(a): Time step sensitivity analysis for rack D1 monitored at a height of 1750mm above the raised floor.

Fig 7(b): Time step sensitivity analysis for rack A1 monitored at a height of 333mm above the raised floor.

CASE STUDY ? CRAC FAILURE To demonstrate the importance of transient analysis, one case study on CRAC failure is presented. Initially, the data center facility is at 15?C with a 100% CRAC supply when a server rack power of 32 kW is introduced. At time equals 150 seconds, CRAC 1 fails and instantly shuts down. Fig. 8 below shows the location of the failed CRAC.

With this failure, the total supply comes down to 75% of the total server rack power. Figs 9(a) and 9(b) show the inlet temperature variation with time at three different height locations for racks A1 and D1, respectively. Fig 9(a) shows an overshoot of inlet temperature beyond the final steady state value for heights of 1332 mm and 1750 mm. Obviously a steady state run is not capable of capturing such an overshoot in temperature. It is important for data center managers to be aware of such variations within the data center room to efficiently operate a data center facility. Such variations are      only captured by transient analysis. Fig 9(b) shows a dip down in temperature before it goes back up and reaches steady state.

This is only one simple case out of an infinite number of scenarios that can take place in a data center facility, some of which may present more extreme variations. A more detailed study on different data center scenarios can be found in [15].

Fig 8: Rack layout for data center used for study showing the failed CRAC.

Fig 9(a): Inlet temperature variation with time of rack A1.

Fig 9(b): Inlet temperature variation with time of rack D1.

Flow streamlines (fig (10), temperature contours (fig 11), and velocity profiles (fig 11), are all practical resources that may further aid data center managers in the efficient operation of data centers facilities.  As seen in figure 10, the flow profile changes significantly with time. A steady state model is not capable of illustrating these variations, unlike a transient model.

Fig 10: Flow streamlines at various times.

Fig 11: Temperature contour at a height 666mm above the raised floor at time 110 seconds. (Top view).

Fig 12: Velocity profile at the center of racks A1and B1 at time 140 seconds. (Side view).

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS In this paper transient numerical modeling of data center clusters is presented using commercial CFD code Flotherm v 8.2?. Two scenarios (i) Time dependent power variation and (ii) Time dependent flow variations have been presented. A pyramid shaped transient profile for varying power is used to establish a spatial and time grid independent temperature and flow distributions. It was shown that using a larger step reduces computational time, however, may obtain inaccurate results. A comparison was made between the transient model and the steady state model, which showed accuracy of the transient model. One case study was presented in which a CRAC failed. The study showed the importance of a transient model in showing temperature overshoots, which a steady state model is not capable of showing.

