

Abstract?We studied defense mechanism of the Arabidopsis  thaliana subjected to Salicylic Acid (SA) treatment for 0, 1, and  8 hours using a broader application of the frequent itemset  approach. Four genotypes of the plant were used in this study,  Columbia wild type, mutant npr1-3, double mutant tga1 tga4  and triple mutant tga2 tga5 tga6. We defined the major patterns  of transcription regulation governing pathogen defense  mechanism, thereby creating a model of the Systemic Acquired  Resistance (SAR) at three time points. The temporal model  describes the relationships among the regulators and defines  groups of genes that are subject to similar regulation. The  results obtained offered a first glimpse into the temporal  pattern of the transcription regulatory network during SAR in  Arabidopsis thaliana. We found that most of the genes that  responded to SA challenge are in fact dependent on one or more  of the NPR1 and TGA factors tested in this study.



I. INTRODUCTION  ystemic acquired resistance (SAR) is a general plant  immune response that is induced after a local infection.

The onset of SAR requires the endogenous increase of  salicylic acid (SA) and the coordinated expression of  Pathogenesis-Related (PR) genes, which encode small  secreted or vacuole-targeted proteins that have antimicrobial  activities [1]-[5]. Exogenous application of SA can also  trigger a SAR response and activate PR gene expression in  plants in the absence of pathogen infection [6]-[7]. In  Arabidopsis, NPR1 (Non-expressor of Pathogenesis-Related  genes 1) is essential for SA-mediated SAR [8]-[10].  Plants  with npr1-3 mutations are therefore compromised in their  ability to launch a SAR response. Currently there is no  evidence to suggest that NPR1 binds DNA directly to  regulate transcription. Rather, all research to date suggests  that NPR1 indirectly regulates the expression of PR genes  through interaction with DNA-binding transcription factors  (TFs) in the nucleus, such as TGA family of bZIP factors [7].

The actual contribution of individual TGA factors has been  difficult to discern because of functional redundancy among   Manuscript received December 15, 2009. This work is supported by  Genomics and Health Initiative and Institute for Information Technology of  the National Research Council Canada.

A. B. Tchagang, S. Phan, H. B?rub?, F. Famili, and  Y. Pan are with  the  Institute for Information Technology of the National Research Council of  Canada, 1200 Montreal Road, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada: 613-993-  7899; fax: 613-952-0215; (e-mails: {alain.tchagang, sieu.phan,  hugo.berube, fazel.famili, youlian.pan} @ nrc-cnrc.gc.ca).

H. Shearer and  P. Fobert are with the Plant Biotechnology Institute of  the National Research Council Canada, 110 Gymnasium Place, Saskatoom,  SK S7N 0W9, Canada (e-mail: {heather.shearer, pierre.fobert} @ nrc-  cnrc.gc.ca).

the factors, and possible dual function for some single  factors [11]. There are 10 TGA TFs in Arabidopsis [12] of  which seven (TGA1-TGA7) have been shown to interact  with NPR1 [11], [13]. These seven TGAs can be divided  into three groups based on sequence homology [14]. Group I  consists of TGA1 and TGA4, both of which contain two Cys  residues that do not appear in other TGA factors; reduction  of the two Cys residues is responsible for the SA-dependent  interaction with NPR1 in Arabidopsis leaves [15]; Group II  consists of TGA2, TGA5 and TGA6; and group III consists  of TGA3 and TGA7.

Most of what is known about the topology of the defense  signaling network is based on comparing the effects of  various defense signaling mutants on a few particular  phenotypes [16]. Considering the large number of genes  induced or repressed in response to pathogen attack and the  apparent complexity of the signaling network, a comparison  of mutant phenotypes on a larger scale is desirable. One  method for obtaining system-wide information about mutant  phenotypes is expression profiling using DNA microarray  technology. Expression profiling has been used in studies of  responses to pathogens; for example, to describe the  response to pathogens-associated molecular patterns [17], to  discern the defense-suppressing activities of effectors [18],  to characterize particular defense-signaling mutants, such as  mpk4 [19] and pmr4 [20], and to model the genetic network  controlling the Arabidopsis response to Pseudomonas  syringae pv. maculicola at 24h after inoculation [16].

Microarray technology has been prevailing over the past  decade mainly because of its high throughput nature.

Thousands of genes are examined concurrently under the  same conditions. This allows identification of groups of  genes exhibiting similar responses to different experimental  conditions, hence of, groups of genes that are likely to be  controlled by similar regulatory mechanisms. Therefore,  identifying genes with similar behaviors is important in order  to identify and understand the underlying machinery driving  the biological process. From a computational perspective,  this is a clustering problem.

In this paper, as a follow-up to our earlier study on npr1-3  mutant [21], we studied the concerted effect of NPR1 and  TGA factors at the onset of SAR. We used four genotypes,  the Columbia wild type, the mutant npr1-3, double mutant of  group I TGA factors tga1 tga4 and the triple mutant of group  II TGA factors tga2 tga5 tga6. Our objective is to  understand the role and behavior of NPR1 and various TGA  factors and their target genes at the onset of SAR.

Towards a Temporal Modeling of the Genetic Network Controlling  Systemic Acquired Resistance in Arabidopsis thaliana  Alain B. Tchagang, Member, IEEE, Heather Shearer, Sieu Phan, Hugo B?rub?, Fazel Famili,  Pierre Fobert, and Youlian Pan, Member, IEEE  S       We cast the problem of mining the huge amount of gene  expression data collected into the classical frequent itemset  mining problem and define a brute force algorithm to tackle  it. Frequent itemset mining [22]-[23] is a key technique for  the analysis of binary matrices. In the binary representation,  a frequent itemset corresponds to a submatrix of 1s  containing a sufficiently large set of rows. Although frequent  itemset mining was originally developed to discover  association rules [24]-[25], its broader application provides  the basis for subspace clustering and for building classifiers  [26]-[27]. In these applications the ultimate goal is to  discover interesting associations between object and attribute  sets, rather than associations among attributes alone. In gene  expression data analysis, for example, the joint discovery of  both the set of conditions that significantly affect gene  regulation and the set of coregulated genes is of great  interest.

Unlike in the classical frequent itemset mining where one  is interested in the largest all-1 submatrix, we exploited the  fact that we are dealing with a small number of experimental  conditions and used a brute force approach to identify all the  all-1 submatrices. These submatrices are then used to predict  and establish relationship between NPR1 and TGA  transcription factors on one hand and their target genes on  the other. Results obtained showed that most of the genes  that responded to SA challenge are in fact dependent on one  or more of the NPR1 and TGA factors tested in this study.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We first  describe the materials and give definitions. Then, we present  the frequent itemset mining algorithm in Section III; some  application results are presented in Section IV, which is  followed by a discussion and conclusion.



II. MATERIALS AND DEFINITIONS  A. Definitions  We define a gene expression matrix using either an N ? M  matrix (Eq. 1a), or using a set (Eq. 1b).

? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  =  ),(),()2,()1,(  ),(),()2,()1,(  ),2(),2()2,2()1,2(  ),1(),1()2,1()1,1(  MNamNaNaNa  Mnamnanana  Mamaaa  Mamaaa  A  LL  MMMMMM  LL  MMMMMM  LL  LL  (1a)    S = {G, C}                                                                     (1b)    where G = {g(1), g(2), ?, g(n), ?, g(N)} represents the set  of genes corresponding to the rows of the gene expression  matrix. C = {c(1), c(2), ?, c(m), ?, c(M)}  represents the set  of attributes, such as experimental conditions, time points, or  tissue samples, corresponding to the columns of the gene  expression matrix. The entry a(n,m) of the gene expression  matrix (Eq. 1a) corresponds to the expression level of the n th    gene, under the m th  attribute.  a(n,:) = [a(n,1) a(n,2) ?  a(n,m) ? a(n,M)] is a 1 ? M vector corresponding to the  expression level of g(n) under the M attributes. a(:,m) =  [a(1,m) a(2,m) ? a(n,m) ? a(N,m)] T is an N ? 1 vector  corresponding to the expression level of the N genes under  c(m) or the m th  attribute.

B. Gene Expression Data  The gene expression data used in this study was obtained  using Affymetrix Arabidopsis genechip consisting of 22810  probes. The Columbia wild-type, mutant npr1-3, double  mutant tga1 tga4, and triple mutant tga2 tga5 tga6 were  treated with salicylic acid for 0, 1, and 8 hours, each time  point has three biological replicates. After data  preprocessing and normalization, we ended up with 3945  genes with significant expression level. We took the mean of  their replicates, set the Columbia wild-type as our baseline  and take the log2 ratio of the mutant gene expression levels  over the wild-type at respective time points. We then  discretized our gene expression matrix into three numbers  (-1, 0, and 1) for a given threshold ?, corresponding to down-  regulation, constant, and up-regulation relative to the  baseline (wild-type) respectively. In other words, we set its  value to 1 if the log2 ratio a(n,m) ?  ?, -1 if a(n,m) ?  -?, and 0 if - ?  < a(n,m) < ?.

It is important to assess the effects of the ? on the  discretization procedures. This is done by performing a  simple sensitivity analysis in which the parameter ? is  perturbed about its selected value [31-32]. It is enough to  consider one or two values for ? below and above its selected  numerical. In this study we used ? = 0.5. It was inferred  based on the expected level of noise generated during  microarray experiment. Hence, we ended up with three N ?  M matrices, each corresponding to one of the three time  points: 0h, 1h, and 8h, with N = 3945 rows (genes) and M =  3 columns, corresponding to the potential differential  expression of the three mutant sets: npr1-3, tga1 tga4, and  tga2 tga5 tga6 as compared to the wild type.

Discretization of gene expression data [28] is widely used  in computational biology and bioinformatics as  preprocessing step to several reverse engineering  methodologies of the gene regulatory network from the  observed gene expression data [29]-[32]. For example, it is  common to model the behavior of a gene using logical  function such as in Boolean networks [31], where 1  corresponds to active state and 0 to inactive state.

Given the N ? M discretized gene expression matrix D =  [dnm] with set of genes G = {g1, ?, gN} and set of attributes  C = {c1, ?, cM}, our goal is to identify the set of genes that  are controlled by the TFs at a given time point, to study  similarities and differences between them, and to infer a  temporal transcriptional regulatory network controlling SAR  in A. thaliana. Here, we cast this into a frequent itemset  mining problem and seek associations between transcription  factors and their target genes at each time point using a brute  force algorithm.



III. METHODOLOGY  The approach used in this study has two main parts: matrix  decomposition and identification of all the all-1 submatrices.

A. Matrix Decomposition  The first step of the approach used in this study consists of  expressing the discretized gene expression matrix as the sum  of its distinct three values (-1, 0, 1) and their corresponding  binary matrices (D-1, D0, D1) as: D = -1D-1 + 0D0 + 1D1. For  example,    ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  +  ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  +  ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ?=  ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ??  ??  =                     D  (2)    This is the first important step of our algorithm. Because,  after this decomposition, we have a clear picture of which  genes may be downregulated, stay constant or upregulated by  a group of TFs. For example, all the entries of D-1 that are 1  correspond to the set of genes that are downregulated in the  corresponding mutant. Similarly, the ?1? of D0 correspond to  the genes that stay constant; i.e. mutations of the  corresponding TFs do not have any effect on these genes.

Finally, the ?1? in D1 correspond to upregulation. In this  study, we refer to D-1, D0, and D1 for downregulated,  constant, and upregulated matrices, respectively.

B. All-1 Submatrices Identification  The second part of the algorithm consists of identifying all  the all-1 submatrices from D-1, D0, and D1. An all-1  submatrix Bk = [bij] is any submatrix of D-1, D0, or D1 whose  entries are all 1. Finding such matrices from a binary matrix  is well known in the data mining community and it is  referred to as the frequent itemset mining problem. That is,  given an N-by-M (0,1)-matrix, of all its submatrices of all  1?s, which is the largest? By largest we mean that the  submatrix has the most entries. Here, unlike in the classical  frequent itemset, we are not only interested in the largest all-  1 submatrix but in all the all-1 submatrices. The ultimate  goal is to discover all the interesting associations between  objects (genes) and attribute sets (transcription factors),  rather than associations among attributes alone.

Identification of all the all-1 submatrices from a binary  matrix is shown in the data mining literature to be NP-  complete when the set of attributes becomes very large [25].

Here, we take advantage of the fact that we are dealing with  a small number of attributes (three in this study) and apply a  brute force technique to identifying all such submatrices.

This is done using Eq. 3.

uk .* r(n,:) = uk                                                            (3)    The operator ?.*? corresponds to the element wise product  of two vectors. For example, [0 1 1].*[1 0 1] = [0 0 1]. Since  we are dealing with only three attributes that is npr1-3, tga1  tga4, and  tga2 tga5 tga6, the set U whose elements are uk  corresponds to the following seven (7 = 2 -1) row vectors: U  = {[0 0 1]; [0 1 0]; [ 0 1 1]; [10 0]; [1 0 1]; [1 1 0]; [1 1 1]}.

The entries of each uk whose values are either ?1? or ?0?  correspond to npr1-3, tga1 tga4, and tga2 tga5 tga6  respectively. Note that ?1? corresponds to presence and ?0?  absence. For example uk = [1 0 0] is used to identify the set  of genes in npr1-3 genotype plant that are downregulated,  upregulated or stay constant as it is revealed by D-1, D1 and  D0 respectively. uk = [1 1 1] is used to identify the set of  genes in all three mutant genotypes that are downregulated,  upregulated or stay constant as revealed by D-1, D1 and D0,  respectively.

Furthermore, in Eq. 3, r(n,:) corresponds to a row of  either D-1, D0, or D1. U can be viewed as a set of  memberships and Eq. 3 the condition to be verified by any  other genes, i.e. rows of D-1, D0, and D1, in order to be a  member of the corresponding all-1 submatrix Bk = [bij]. For  example, if we consider the toy example define in Eq. 2, uk  = [1 0 1] tells us that genes 1 and 4 are simultaneously  downregulated under attributes 1 and 3. Therefore, genes 1  and 4 under conditions 1 and 3 form an all-1 submatrix. This  is easily shown by proving that only row 1 and row 4 verify  Eq. 3 ([1 0 1] .* r(1,:) = [1 0 1]  and  [1 0 1] .* r(4,:) = [1 0  1], where r(1,:) and r(4,:) are the 1 st and 4  th rows of the toy  example, respectively). The brute force approach that we  defined and used in this study is guaranteed to identify all the  all-1 submatrices (Bk = [bij]) from D-1, D0, or D1.

The cardinality of the set of memberships U is 2 M  -1,  where M is the number of attributes. The cardinality  corresponds to the maximum possible number of all the all-1  submatrices that can be found in a binary matrix. It is 7 in the  current application case. In general, given that we are dealing  with binary numbers, the elements uk of U can be chosen as  the binary representation of numbers from 1 to 2 M  -1 on M  bits, where M is the number of columns of the binary matrix.

The drawback of the brute force approach used here is that,  the complexity of the algorithm will grow exponentially as M  becomes larger ~O(2 M  ? N ? M ? L) (Section D).  In this  study, because of the relatively small number of columns,  taking this combinatorial approach does not incur expensive  computations.

C. Algorithms  The following two algorithms are used for matrix  decomposition and identification of all the all-1 submatrices  respectively. Recall that we have defined an all-1 submatrix  above as: Bk = [bij], It can also be defined using the set  notation that is: Bk = {Ik, Jk}, with Ik subset of genes (Ik ? G), and Jk a subset of conditions (Jk ? C), with i? Ik and j? Jk.

k = 1 to K, where K is the maximum number of all-1  submatrices that can be found in a binary matrix: K = 2 M  -1.

L, N, and M are the number of distinct elements, rows, and  columns of D respectively.

1) Algorithm 1: matrix decomposition.

---------------------------------------------------------------------  Input: - D = discretized gene expression matrix  - ? = [-1 0 1] set of discrete values  Output: - D-1, D0, and D1 = binary matrices associated with  downregulation, stay constant, and upregulation, respectively  Begin, [N,M] = size (D);  D-1 = zeros(N,M); D0 =zeros(N,M);  D1 = zeros(N,M);  For n = 1 to N  For m = 1 to M  If D(n,m) == -1  D-1(n,m) = 1  Elseif D(n,m) == 0  D0(n,m) = 1  Elseif D(n,m) == 1  D1(n,m) = 1  End  End  End  End Begin  ---------------------------------------------------------------------    2) Algorithm 2: All-1 submatrices identification.

----------------------------------------------------------------------  Input: - D-1, D0, and D1  (from Algorithm 1)  - U = {uk}  = set of memberships  - C = [c(1) c(2) ? c(m) ? c(M)] = set of columns  - G = [g(1) g(2) ? g(n) ?g(N)]T = set of genes  Output: - I = sets of genes in all-1 submatrices  - J = sets of conditions in all-1 submatrices  Begin, Z(:,:,1) = D-1; Z(:,:,2) = D0; Z(:,:,3) = D1;  [N,M,L] = size (Z); I = []; J = [];  For l = 1 to L  For k = 1 to K  J{k,l} =C(find(b(k) == 1)));  For n = 1 to N  If U(k,:) .* Z(n,:,l) == U(k,:)  I{k,l} = [I{k};g(n)];  End  End  End  End  End Begin.

----------------------------------------------------------------------  D. Complexity Analysis  We can easily estimate the complexity of the proposed  approach. The matrix decomposition algorithm requires  about (N?M) operations. Algorithm for all-1 submatrices  identification uses O((N?M + N + P + P?M) ? L ? (2M-1))  operations because we perform ~(2M-1)N?M binary  multiplications, N comparisons, and P assignments ~L ? (2M-  1) times. Here, 2 M  -1 is the maximum number of all-1  submatrices and P the number of times the membership  equation (Eq. 3) is verified. Since P?N, the complexity of  our brute force approach is ~ O(N?M?L?2 M  ). Note that L =  3 in this case and that we are dealing with matrices that have  few columns, with M = 3 in this case. Thus the complexity  here will be ~O(3945?3?3?(23-1))= 781110. As we  mentioned earlier, when M becomes very large, the  complexity increases exponentially (2 M  ) and we end up with  large sets of all-1 submatrices.



IV. RESULTS  Using the above described materials and methodologies, we  obtained the following results.

A. Potential Transcription Factor Gene Interactions  Fig. 1-3 show the numbers of genes that are controlled by  NPR1, TGA1 TGA4, and TGA2 TGA5 TGA6 respectively  at different time point experiments: 0h, 1h, 8h, and the  overlap across two or all three time points. For example, at  0h, 249 and 93 genes are downregulated and upregulated in  npr1-3 respectively. 0h_1h_8h shows the number of genes  (35 downregulated and 5 upregulated in npr1-3) that stay  under the influence of NPR1 during the three time points.

The number of genes that are upregulated or downregulated  in npr1-3 is an increase function of time. Unlike the effect of  NPR1, the number of genes regulated by TGA1 TGA4 is a  parabolic function of time, with the maximum (upregulation  and downregulation in tga1 tga4) at 1h. On the other hand,  the number of genes that is downregulated in tga2 tga5 tga6  is an increase function of time whereas the ones that are  upregulated is a parabolic function of time with the  maximum at 1h.

npr1-3          0h 1h 8h 0h_1h 0h_8h 1h_8h 0h_1h_8h  Time points  N u m b e r o f ta rg e t g e n e s  Dowregulated  Upregulated   Fig. 1 Genes downregulated or upregulated in npr1-3 genotype. They  represent set of genes regulated by NPR1.

tga1 tga4            0h 1h 8h 0h_1h 0h_8h 1h_8h 0h_1h_8h  Time points  N u m b e r o f ta rg e t g e n e s Downregulated  Upregulated   Fig. 2 Genes downregulated or upregulated in tga1 tga4 genotype  representing either or both Group I TFs, TGA1 and TGA4 up- or down-  regulated genes.

tag2 tga5 tga6         0h 1h 8h 0h_1h 0h_8h 1h_8h 0h_1h_8h  Time points  N u m b e r o f ta rg e t g e n e s Downregulated  Upregulated   Fig. 3 Genes downregulated or upregulated in tga2 tga5 tga6 genotype  representing any of Group II TFs, TGA2, TGA5, TGA6 up- or down-  regulated genes.

In all three cases, the results show that only a small  number of genes are controlled by a given set of TFs across  different time points. This observation suggests that most of  the genes that participate in SA challenge have an impulse  behavior; different sets of genes are triggered at different  time points to participate in the defense mechanism in  response to a pathogen infection. Also, results showed that  NPR1 is needed by the larger number of genes compared to  TGA1 TGA4 and TGA2 TGA5 TGA6 at 8 th  hour after SA  treatment.

B. Similarities and Differences between Transcription  Factors  Fig. 4-7 show the numbers of genes jointly down- or up-  regulated in two or all three genotypes at different time  points and the overlap across two or all three time points.

The number of genes downregulated in both npr1-3 and tga1  tga4 genotypes simultaneously is a parabolic function of  time, with the maximum at 1h; whereas the number of  upregulated genes is an increase function of time. The  numbers of genes whose expression are altered in both npr1-  3 and tga2 tga5 tga6 genotypes increased over time. The  number of genes that are under the influence of both TGA  mutants (tga1 tga4 and tga2 tga5 tga6) is a parabolic  function of time, with the maximum at 1h.

Finally, the number of genes that are downregulated in all  the three mutants (npr1-3, tga1 tga4 and tga2 tga5 tga6) is a  parabolic function of time, with the maximum at 1h, whereas  the number of upregulated genes increase over time. Here  again, in all cases, the results show that a very small number  of genes are regulated by the considered group of TFs across  different time points.

npr1-3 tga1 tga4            0h 1h 8h 0h_1h 0h_8h 1h_8h 0h_1h_8h  Time points  N u m b e r o f ta rg e t g e n e s Downregulated  Upregulated   Fig. 4 Genes downregulated or upregulated in npr1-3 and tga1 tga4  simultaneously.

npr1-3 tga2 tga5 tga6             0h 1h 8h 0h_1h 0h_8h 1h_8h 0h_1h_8h  Time points  N u m b e r o f ta rg e t g e n e s Downregulated  Upregulated   Fig. 5 Genes downregulated or upregulated in npr1-3 and tga2 tga5 tga6  simultaneously.

tga1 tga4 tga2 tga5 tga6           0h 1h 8h 0h_1h 0h_8h 1h_8h 0h_1h_8h  Time points  N u m b e r o f ta rg e t g e n e s  Downregulated  Upregulated   Fig. 6 Genes downregulated or upregulated in tga1 tga4 and tga2 tga5  tga6 simultaneously.

npr1-3 tga1 tga4 tga2 tga5 tga6         0h 1h 8h 0h_1h 0h_8h 1h_8h 0h_1h_8h  Time points  N u m b e r o f ta rg e t g e n e s Downregulated  Upregulated   Fig. 7downregulated or upregulated in all three mutants simultaneously.

A. Time Varying Transcriptional Network Model  Combining the above results, we built a preliminary wiring  diagram of the genetic network of SAR in Arabidopsis  thaliana at 0h, 1h, and 8h (Fig. 8). For example, only 23, 66,  and 73 are either downregulated or upregulated by the  combined action of the three TFs at 0, 1, and 8h respectively.

The number of NPR1 targeted genes is less than that of  TGA1 TGA4 and TGA2 TGA5 TGA6 at 0h. But at 8h, it is  the reverse situation where the number of NPR1 targeted  genes is higher than those regulated by TGA1 TGA4 and  TGA2 TGA5 TGA6, respectively. This is consistent with the  fact that NPR1 gene expression in the Columbia wild type  was initially moderate but drastically increased at 1 hour and  increased further until 8 hours after SA treatment (Fig. 9).

0 2 4 6 8  Time in hours  G e  n e  e x  p re  ss io  n l  e v  e l  (L o  g  )  WT npr1-3 tga1 tga4 tga2 tga5 tga6     Fig. 9 Expression profile of NPR1 in Columbia wild type (WT), mutant  npr1, double mutant (tga1 tga4), and triple mutant (tga2 tga5 tga6).

Gene ontology (GO) analysis using the GOAL software  [33] [http://bioinfo.iit.nrc.ca/GOAL/] reveals that several of  the genes that are regulated by the three set of TFs (NPR1,  TGA1 TGA4, and TGA2 TGA5 TGA6) at 8h (Fig. 10) are  annotated under response to stimulus (GO:0050896; p-value  = 1.1e-08), stress (GO:0006950; p-value = 1.7e-05), abiotic  stimulus (GO:0009628; p-value = 3.1e-05), biotic stimulus  (GO:0009607; p-value = 1.3e-03), and defense mechanism  (GO:0006952; p-value = 5.0e-02). These correspond to the  fact that the plants were treated by SA, which mimic  pathogen infection. They also confirm the fact that the TFs  tested in this study are known to play major roles in plant  defense mechanism.

Another interesting observation is that significant number  of genes that stay constant across the three experimental time  points are responsible for photosynthesis (GO:0015979; p-  value = 3.3e-25, and KEEG pathway ath00195  p-value =  3.4e-10), which are not closely related with pathogen  infection. These results confirmed that during pathogen  attacks, the plant is mobilized for defense.



V. DISCUSSION  In this work, we used similarities in gene expression profiles  of Arabidopsis thaliana with single, double or triple  mutations of key transcription factors in the defense  signaling network.  We study the network dynamics over a  time series after treatment with salicylic acid (SA), which  mimic a pathogen infection. We found that most SA-  responsive genes were affected by at least one mutation and  that most affected genes fit one of a few patterns of  regulation. We then provided a first glimpse into the  temporal pattern of the gene regulatory network during  systemic acquired resistance in Arabidopsis.

Fig. 1-7 show that only a small number of genes in each or  Fig. 8. SAR transcriptional network at 0, 1, and 8h. In the diagrams, ? (action could be inclusive or exclusive or represents a black box), ? (information flow), ? (up regulation), and ? (down regulation). Numbers in boxes represent the number of genes regulated by the  corresponding groups of TFs at respective time points  NPR1 TGA1 TGA4 TGA2 TGA5 TGA6  8h  1h  0h 49  47 28  8h  1h  0h 37  581 48  8h  1h  0h 66  73 23  8h  1h  0h 189  20 84  8h  1h  0h 573  1513 243  8h  1h  0h 359  130 275  8h  1h  0h  148 310      multiple mutant genotypes overlaps across different time  points. This observation suggests that most of the genes that  participate in SAR have an impulse behavior; different sets  of genes are targeted by the corresponding transcription  factors at different time points during a response to pathogen  infection. On the other hand, these results show that the true  behavior of the underlying biological process is captured at  different time points, with each time point containing a  unique piece of information that should be integrated in  order to get the whole picture underlying the signaling  pathway during SAR. Therefore, studies, such as [16], that  focus on a single time point to infer genetic information and  generalize the results to describe the pathogen-host  interaction could miss out important information.

The models describe in Fig. 8 show the different  regulatory mechanism depicted using our combinatorial  brute force approach. We observed that, at each time point, a  fraction of these genes are regulated by only one of the three  sets of TFs, while others are subject to the collective  regulation of two of the three sets of TFs; and yet another set  of gene are subject to regulation of all three sets of the TFs.

We also found only a small number of genes were  independent of one, two, or all sets of the TFs. This  observation suggests that most of the genes that responded to  SA challenge are in fact dependent on one or more of NPR1  or the TGA factors. This notion is consistent with the fact  that NPR1 binds to specific TGA to regulate SA genes [10].

For example, the group of genes whose expression are  changed in both nrp1-3 and tga1 tga4 (Fig. 4) indicate that  this group of genes are subjected to concerted regulation by  NPR1 and Group I TGA factors. Most likely, NPR1 has to  bind to at least one of the TGA factors in order to regulate  this group of genes. These relationships among the  transcription factors are revealed by their common target  genes. More detailed post-processing and validation of the  results are in progress.

Our analysis further reveals that the number of NPR1  regulated genes is less than that of either Group I or Group II  TGA factors at 0h. However at 8h, the number of NPR1  regulated genes is higher than those regulated by any of the  TGA factors. This indicates that as the progression of  pathogen infection occurs, more genes in the plant defense  machinery require NPR1 regulation. This is consistent with  the fact that the expression of NPR1 gene increases  drastically upon SA treatment and it would subsequently  regulate its target genes, whose differential expression  become more significant at 8 th  hour. This also confirms that  NPR1 play major role in plant defense mechanism [9]-[10].

In this study, we used a broader application of frequent  itemset mining to tackle our problem. We exploited the fact  that we were dealing with matrices with small number of  columns (3 in this study), and used a deterministic  combinatorial approach to identify all the all-1 submatrices.

In real data applications, a ?1? or ?-1? can be accidentally  recorded as ?0? and vice versa because of noise. In a gene  expression data the noise can arise from measurement,  stemming from the underlying experimental technology and  the stochastic nature of the studied biological behavior. In  addition, uncertainty involved in choosing a threshold for  imputing discrete observations from the continuous gene  expression values may introduce errors. Although the  frequent itemsets and the algorithms that generate them have  been well studied, the difficulties that arise from noise have  not been adequately addressed [22]-[27]. In general, the  noise present in real applications undermines the ultimate  goal of traditional frequent itemset algorithms. In fact, when  noise is present, frequent itemset algorithms could discover  multiple small fragments of the true itemset, but miss the true  itemset itself. The problem is worse for the larger itemsets  because the larger the itemset the more vulnerable it is to  noise. Therefore, proper data preprocessing and  normalization algorithms should be applied to reduce the  level of noise in the dataset before its analysis using our  combinatorial deterministic frequent itemsets approach.



VI. CONCLUSION  In this paper, we studied the defense mechanism of  Arabidopsis thaliana using a deterministic broader frequent  itemset mining approach. We used expression profiling of  wild-type and mutants of three sets of transcription factors to  define the major patterns of regulation governing the  response to salicylic acid treatment, thereby creating a wiring  diagram to reveal the number of genes that are regulated by  one or more sets of the transcription factors at various stages  of defense responses. The temporal model describes the  relationships among the transcription factors, and defines  groups of genes that are subject to similar regulation. We  found that most up and down regulated genes fit one of a  small number of regulatory patterns defined by the effects of  these mutations, demonstrating that most of the genes that  responded to salicylic acid challenge are in fact dependent  on one or more of transcription factors, NPR1 or the TGA  factors tested in this study.

