Miniaturization design of the antenna for  Wireless Capsule Endoscope

Abstract?This paper analyzed the type of mini-type antenna, studied the miniaturization technique, and simulated the performance of antenna with tissue. Monopole antenna possesses wide-band frequency characteristic and high radiation efficiency.

It is easy to be designed and manufactured with guarantee consistency, but with the fatal flaw of a large size. Helical antenna can provide sufficient bandwidth for transferring data, generate circular polarized wave. It can reduce the axial size to sixty percent, but must be with comparatively big radial dimension to acquire the excellent performance. The advantages of micro-strip antenna are light weight, compact size, relatively thin thickness, and so on. And the last kind of antenna still requires aggressive miniaturization to meet the requirements of the wireless capsule endoscope. Techniques for miniaturization of antenna mainly include a ground plane, double-layer patch, shorting pin or wall, lossless high dielectric substrate, and the spiral structure. The influence of humane tissue on the antenna behavior must be considered. So the relationship between the antenna and issue was analyzed in this article to improve the antenna characteristic such as return loss, input impedance and standing wave ratio.

Keywords-wireless capsule endoscope; miniaturization;human tissue; micro-strip antenna

I.  INTRODUCTION Wireless capsule endoscope has become increasingly  attractive for low cost visualization of the status of organs health[1]. It contains image sensor, optics and illumination, a transceiver, a system control with image data compression unit and a power supply. It can examine the disease of the small intestine, but also be used for tissue samples and biopsy or treatment[2]. In order to check the organs clearly, wireless capsule endoscope must be required to transmit the high quality image faster. But the signal is easily interfered by other radio-frequency signals and can be attenuated by the humane tissue during transferring image package. In order to enhance the anti-interference ability, the author designed the optimized transceiver mode with channel changing[3,4]. Although these methods can enhance the ability of wireless endoscope RF communication for transferring image package, the characteristic of antenna must be enhanced to ensure the data transfer.

The selection of frequency for wireless capsule endoscope is complicated. The electrical properties of human tissue  directly affect the frequency. The magnetic permeability of humane tissue is same as that of vacuum. But the permittivity and conductivity of humane tissue are depended on the frequency. Because of the high water content of humane tissue, the absorption of electromagnetic power increases with frequency. At higher frequencies, the increased electrical spacing between an antenna and the body counteracts losses in biological tissues.

W. G. Scanlon et al.[5, 6] used the FDTD techniques and the Visible Human Dataset to simulate the body-worn antenna for 418MHz, 916.5MHz and 2.45GHz, which means that body- worn antenna suffers from reduced efficiency due to electromagnetic absorption in tissue, radiation pattern fragmentation and variations in feed-point impedance at UHF and microwave. Despite with much higher tissue losses at 2.45GHz, antenna performs surprisingly well in this band. L.

C. Chirwa et al.[7,8] considered the effect of the human tissue on the propagation of radio signals from a wireless ingested diagnostic device in the gastro-intestinal tract. Unfortunately, they only researched at the frequency  from 150MHz to 1.2GHz. And they studied the radiation emitted from two representative antennas built into an ingested medical device and indicated the maximum radiation occurs between 450MHz and 900MHz. And Q. H. Meng et al.[9] estimated attenuation at the four ISM bands from 100MHz to 6GHz with a simplified experimental model. The result showed 915MHz and 2.45GHz were good choices for the wireless link because of their relatively large electrical size of antenna. And there are many prototypes of wireless capsule endoscope used the frequency of 2.45GHz[10,11].

This article firstly analyzes the type of small-size antenna, and compares the merits and flaws. Besides that, it studies the miniaturization technique of micro-strip antenna. Finally, it simulates the performance of antenna using the mean parameter of human tissue at the frequency of 2.45GHz.



II. ANTENNA ANALYSIS Antenna is an important part of radio frequency micro  device. It requires reducing size as small as possible without changing the characteristic parameter. Because, after wireless capsule endoscope is swallowed into the gastro-intestinal tract, the receiving instrument need to be worn on the abdomen. The radio signals are required traveling no less than fifty cm     through intestinal wall, muscle, bone, nervous, connective tissue, skin, especially other organs. These human-antenna interactions effect electromagnetic performance of the antenna by changing antenna input impedance, modifying the antenna radiation patterns and absorbing antenna delivered power. And, the reflection of different tissue border causes the multipath fading to modify the polarization direction. Therefore, the antenna elements must ideally possess these features:  The ideal antenna for the wireless capsule endoscope should be with low profile and un-obstructive to the gastro- intestinal tract. The difficulty comes from the disturbing of biological tissues to the antenna?s electromagnetic characteristics. In order to degrade the coupling of tissue and electromagnetic wave to avoid performance degradation and health risks, new antenna must be less susceptible to human tissue influence.

The system need transfer the image data from the wireless capsule endoscope to out of body. With the high resolution of the image sensor, the data volumes lineally increase. The antenna must be enough wide bandwidth to accommodate spread-spectrum schemes.

The antenna is encapsulated with the image sensor, control unit, power, and so on. Low-profile physical geometry makes it facilitative be encapsulated. Usually the antenna has a diameter of no more than 1cm. There are some other components should to be considered. And the thickness of antenna should be as thin as possible.

A. The mini- type antenna Because of the wide-band frequency characteristic and high  radiation efficiency, monopole antenna is used to portable communication device. And it usually appears in the electronic systems with facility to design and manufacture for guarantying consistency. But the size of the antenna is big especially in length. According to the theory of electromagnetic wave propagate, the length of antenna is usually the quarter of the wave length. When the carrier frequency of the system is 2.45GHz, the length of monopole antenna reaches to thirty mm.

When taking account of the tissue electromagnetic characteristic, the length could be shorter. Even so, it is hard to encapsulate the antenna into the wireless capsule endoscope.

Helical antenna is regarded as the modified monopole antenna by hovering the line to reduce the axial distance. The size of helical antenna can be decreased by forty percent.

Helical antenna can provide the same performance as the monopole antenna, provide sufficient bandwidth for transferring data, and generate circular polarized wave. Helical antenna owns the normal mode and the axial mode. In the axial mode, the maximum radiation is along axial direction. And the radiation field is circularly polarized field. In the normal mode, the physical dimensions of the antenna, such as perimeter and pitch, are much smaller than the wavelength. The maximum radiation is in a plane normal to the orientation of the antenna.

The helix can be approximately composed of series small loops and dipoles, whose diameter is equal to the diameter of the helix, and length is equal to the pitch of the helix, respectively.

It can reduce the axial size to sixty percent, but must use comparatively big radial dimension to acquire the excellent  performance. And in order to acquire the excellent performance, helix must strictly ensure the diameter, pitch and number of turns.

Micro-strip antenna includes micro-strip traveling wave antenna, micro-strip patch antenna and micro-strip slot antenna.

Micro-strip traveling wave antenna is composed of substrate, periodic structure or quasi TEM transmission line and a ground plane. The last two parts cover on the two sides of the substrate, respectively. Micro-strip patch antenna consists of a single metal patch suspend over a ground plane. Patch antenna is easily to be fabricated,, modified and customized. Micro-strip slot antenna is composed of micro-strip feed line and the ground plane with slot. Micro-strip patch and slot antenna are attractive to be used in many applications as they have a low profile, and are light weight, comfortable and easy to integrate with wireless capsule endoscope.

Although these antennas have different advantages, the performance of the first two antennas will deteriorate rapidly by reduced in size. Micro-strip antenna has a compact structure, but is hardly integrated into the wireless capsule endoscope.

Consequently, miniaturization needs be researched to further reduce the size of antenna.

B.  The miniaturization technique The purpose of the miniaturization technique is to get  smaller dimension without significant reducing performance.

Micro-strip patch antenna owns such features as flexibility, consistency, and optional shape. Therefore, the research hot point at present is the relatively shorter micro-strip antenna that can reduce the volume of the antenna considerably.

Technology for miniaturization of antenna mainly includes a ground plane, double-layer patch, shorting pin or wall, lossless high dielectric substrate, and the spiral structure.

The multi-layer of micro-strip antenna has a remarkable feature which has a length of sixty percent and a bandwidth of four times of the conventional patch, and good cross- polarization characteristic.

The shorting wall leads to a quarter-wave patch. One of the vertical walls is connected to the lower patch, and the other is connected to the ground without touching the lower patch.

This structure reduces the resonant frequency and attains a bandwidth enhancement.

Adding a shorting pin in close proximity to the probe feed reduce the resonant length. The shorting pin is capacitively coupled to the resonant circuit of the patch, which effectively increased the permittivity of the substrate. It has been shown that a shorting pin in suitably place can reduce the resonant length to one third, and the area of the patch to one ninth. The shorting pin and the feed are generally placed at opposite sides of the patch. If the pin is placed close to the feed, which is the case for the rectangular patch, the antenna fails to function properly[12].

Very roughly, the resonant frequency of the patch antenna is inversely proportional to the square root of the permittivity of material. To reduce the dimension of the antenna, high- permittivity material substrate layer is used. The substrate is capable of protecting surrounding tissue from the RF energy    and decreasing the frequency sensitivity of the antenna affected by the electrical characteristics of the biological tissues.

The shape of the patch antenna is rectangular or circular.

Spiral and serpentine micro-strip antennas are significantly smaller than a traditional rectangular patch. Their radiation pattern at the resonant frequency is same as PIFA. The serpentine antenna has a higher resonant frequency for the same physical length, and is more difficult to design[13].

C. The summary of antenna As a conclusion, the multi-layer patch antenna is  complicated, and limited to reduce the size. The structure of shorting-wall needs relatively big space to implement. In the system of wireless capsule endoscope, the techniques of shorting pin, high-permittivity substrate, and spiral shape will be adopted.

S. I. Kwak et al.[14] proposed a wideband small spiral antenna which had size of 10.1mm diameter and 3mm height.

The impedance bandwidth of the proposed antenna is from 430 to 500MHz for VSWR<2. And it has isotropic radiation pattern. The antenna used the RF35-A as the dielectric substrate with dielectric constant of 3.5, thickness of 1.524mm, and the metallic thickness of 0.0173mm. B. Huang et al.[15] designed a four spiral slot using high dielectric substrate materials and adding a short strip for  capsule endoscope. The antenna is 8.25*8.25*0.6mm integrated into the capsule. The resonant frequency is 915MHz. Xiang Xie et al.[16] designed a less than 9mm diameter micro-strip antenna using the shorting pin and F4BK35 substrate. It resonates at 2.45GHz while the impedance bandwidth reaches 104MHz.

And, S. Jacobsen et al.[17] concentrated on the single-arm micro-strip antenna. It showed that micro-strip single-arm Archimedean spiral antennas owned excellent medium coupling, insensitivity to different tissue properties and applicator positioning, broad band-with, and circularly symmetric radiation fields. So the Archimedean spiral patch antenna is a wise choice.



III. SIMULATION On the basis of analyzing the mini-type antenna and the  miniaturization techniques, this paper adopts the resonant frequency of 2.45GHz, shorting pin and high-permittivity substrate to design the Archimedean spiral patch antenna for wireless capsule endoscope. The concept diagram is shown in Fig 1.

Fig 1. Concept diagram of the Archimedes spiral antenna    The influence between human tissue and antenna is an important factor of propagating electromagnetic wave. During designing the antenna, the tissue must be taken into account.

The tissue around the antenna could change its performance, such as the radiation efficiency, resonant frequency, input impedance, and radiation mode. Characteristic parameters change along with  different distance, different frequency, and other factors. Therefore, it is very important that the antenna is quantitatively analyzed by electromagnetic measurement to simulate the situation.

The endoscope encapsulated the antenna is shown in Fig 2.

There is image sensor, the optic system, controlling unite and power source in the right part of the capsule. The dielectric material is vacuum in the capsule. According to the FCC document, when the average muscle tissue dielectric parameters is at 2.45GHz, dielectric constant is 53.6 and conductivity is 1.8.

Fig 2. Diagram of capsule within antenna module   The same antenna is simulated in the condition that there is  vacuum and muscle around the wireless capsule endoscope, respectively. The result of return loss is shown in Fig 3.

(A) With tissue                   (B) Without tissue  Fig 3. Correlation curve of return loss and frequency   During the antenna is surrounded by tissue, the resonant frequency reduced quickly. It will help to miniaturize the antenna.



IV. CONCLUSIONS The miniaturization of antenna is very important. And it is  a hard task in the system of wireless capsule endoscope. First of all, a suitable type of antenna must be selected, such as the helical antenna, the spiral antenna, and so on. Then one or many miniaturization techniques, like shorting pin or lossless high dielectric substrate, must be chosen to reduce the compact and enhance the performance. At last, a simulate software is used to analyze these parameters and adjust the dimension to acquire the excellent antenna according to the real case.

