Intelligence Analysis in Early Warnning Air Roster Training

Abstract-The paper introduces a new simulation system for  training early warning air roster , which uses data mining  technology on the massive accumulation training information  for intelligence analysis. In the system, the model of  association rules are established. Using this model, the system  provide ability that arrange much more reasonable training  plan for each early warning air roster. Furthermore, it can  support an optimized decision of how to make up the team of  rosters.

Keywords- intelligence analysis; simulation training system;  early warning air

I. INTRODUCTION  A great deal of useful data are saved when early warning  air roster are trained which are not fully utilized!/] . We use  data mining technology to discover training data patterns and  trends!2,31. In the paper, these patterns and trends are defmed  as the mining models. They are used to provide a higher  level training and arrange more reasonable training plan for  each early warning air roster. Moreover, they can provide  optimized decision for how to make up the team of roster.



II. THE SIMULATION TRAINING SYSTEM FOR EARL Y  WARNING AIR ROSTER  Currently the main design objective of military  simulation training systems is that the training process is true  as far as possible and the training intensity is meeting its  objectives and so on. It does not pay much attention to  enhancing training value. Therefore, we sought to design a  new simulation training system for early warning air roster to  make better use of the historical data in the training database,  which is not only for technical and tactical training, but also  for intelligence analysis by embedding data mining tools.

A. The Architecture of the Early Warning Air Roster  Simulation Training System  Data mining systems are usually not directly get user  information from the user interface because the data required  for data mining system are stored in the database. Hence, the    traditional two-tier C / S mode can not be used to implement  data mining system. We adopted a three-tier system  architecture model to meet the needs for data mining,  which treat separate information acquisition, information  analysis, and information storage, as shown in Figure 1.

Three-tier framework of the system includes interactive  layer, analysis layer and data layer. The main function of the  tf  Data I  Miming ? Information  r---  Graphing ? Database In[crface ? E Intelligence  W Analysis 8 - Analysis .... V Database ./  ?

Trainee  Management ? Knowledge  Point  Interacti ve Layer Analysis Layer Data Layer  Figure 1. System Architechture  interactive layer is to display intelligence, accept the  operation of combat service personnel, and present the  system analysis results to him. It is also responsible for  interacting with geographic information systems. Analysis  layer is mainly concentrated on the analysis and processing  functions. Whenever a new combat service personnel to  participate in training, the layer generates an analysis proxy  object for him. The analysis proxy object will record and  analyze the tactical combat operations of those who  participate in the training. It also records that the training  progress and technical status of the current trainees.

In this model, we focused on data mining subsystem. It  works as follows. Firstly, both current status information and  past training information in database are analyzed by data  mining subsystem. Secondly, the factors that affect the  operations of early warning air roster and the information of  how to improve training methods can be obtained. Thirdly,  they are provided to the combat personnel management  system (CPMS). Finally, CPMS will generate training result  reports and give the gaps between trainees with high levels.

So that teachers could have complete control of the current  training effects.

B. The Training Evaluation of Early Warning Air Roster    Rosters are the main body throughout the simulation  training system. Personalized training system must always  track the technical state of those participating in the training  and the training progress, identify key factors that affect  training effect, provide evaluation, and brought forward tips  and advice information. The evaluation items are divided  into the following five profiles.

(1) Basic training information. The simulation training  system of early warning air roster will real-timely record all  978-1-4244-6370-11$26.00  2010 IEEE V4-427   operation of trainees. The basic training infonnation can be  obtained by evaluating the accuracy and the time ration of  the operations of the trainees.

(2) Equipment operation capacity. The aim of  simulation training system is that the combat service  personnel master the perfonnance characteristics of control  equipment as soon as possible and enhance their operating  equipment ability. As for EWA, the most important  capabilities are the early warning, command and control  ones.

(3) The coordination capacity of combat service group.

The simulation training system for early warning air roster  should not only serve to train the capacity of post individual,  but also should do to train the synergy of a team (that is,  combat service group). The cooperation of combat service  group can be evaluated by the overall completion for a  given training scenario.

(4) Training intensity. The intensity of training can be  assessed by the accumulating training time or the details of  training time.

(5) Test results. Test results of the trainees include two  parts. One is the scores of the trainees. The other is the  knowledge and operation skills which are discovered by the  data mining. The knowledge is the one that are easily  forgotten and the one that are difficult to be mastered which  should arrange more time for training. The operating skills  are the one that should be arranged time to consolidate  them.



III. DATA MINING MODELS  OLAP (Online Analytical Processing) is a popular data  mining analysis techniques. It has the functions of summary,    consolidation and aggregation. It also has the ability of  investigating the infonnation from various aspects. The  infonnation contained in the data can be deeply understood  through the OLAP system with a graphical user interface[4,51.

This paper does not describe the preparation of data, data  cleansing and consolidation, as well as details of mining  algorithms. They will be introduced in other papers by the  author [1,2,3,4]. This section describes one of the examples  in the use of some typical data mining models for  intelligence analysis in the simulation training system.

We use a rule-based algorithm to perfonn operations  portfolio analysis. Thus correlation hide in the training  operations can be found. Using this method, we found the  mode of operation combination, which means we can found  which operations are often carried out in the order. It will  help designers optimize mUltiple operations as a combination  for less response time and more convenience. In addition,  using this method, we construct the knowledge point  structure chart, which used to discover the association of  operations between a precursor to a successor correlation.

We apply it in the personalized training of combat service  personnel. Therefore we need to create a data mining model  for associated action sequence according to the operation  history of trainees. The algorithm's parameters are set by  the typical values.

1. Item sets  We do some filtering the item sets found by the  algorithm. Filter conditions are that supports is bigger that  100, the minimum item sets size is equal to 3, and it must  include the A operation. In table I, A to F indicates the  different operations.

TABLE I. ITEM SETS  Support size Item sizes  122 3 A-1,B-1,C-1  121 3 A=1,0=1,E=1  120 4 A=1 ,0=1 ,F=1 ,E=1  ... ... ...

2. Rules  Probability is the likelihood of a rule that is triggered.

Importance is that the usable rate of rules. The higher value  means more useful the rule is. For these rules, it may be  misleading if we only use the probability. Therefore, we use    both the probability and importance to investigate the rules.

In the table II, we know from the first rule that if a  trainee operates A and B operation, the probability that he  will carry out C operation is 0.762.

We know from the third rule that if a trainee operates F  and A operation, the probability that he will carry out E  operation is 0.721. Furthennore, this rule is more useful  than the first rule.

Probability  0.762  0.825  0.721  ...

D  D  TABLE II.

Importance  0.735  0.902  1.430  ...

Selected Node  Nodes Predict It  RULES  Rules  A=1,B=1->C=1  A=1,0=1->E=1  A=1,F=1->E=1  .. ,  Bidirectional Predict  Figure 2. Relevance Network Model  3. Relevance network  V4-428   In order to study the relationship among different items,  we use a relevance network to fmd the interactions among  items. In the figure 4, each node represents one item. For  example, node A represents that there exists A operation in a  transaction. The legend describes the mutual relations of the  items in the model.

As shown in figure 2, node A predicts of the node B, C,  D and E. node B, C, D, E predict A also. This means that    these items may appear in a transaction at the same time. In  other words, if a trainee operates operation A, he may also  do operations B, C, D, E.

4. Personalized training  The essential function of individual simulation training  system is providing important and difficult points in the  training process. Through the relevance network, we  construct a knowledge-point chart. Suppose that a knowledge  point is formed by one or more foundation operations.

Figure 3. Inheritance Structure Map  Before to be trained a new operating skill, the trainees  are required to master some basic operational capability. We  build an inheritance structure map to fmd out the correlations  among the operations according to their relationship in the  relevance network, as shown in Figure 5. For instance, if the  trainees are to be trained to master the operator C I, they  should master the operations from Al to An previously. If  we fmd that the trainees do not master Fl operation  thoroughly, we can trackback the knowledge-point chart to  see if they do not master Dl or El operation. And we can  also see from the map the operators C 1 and C2 have many  backward branches, which mean that C 1 and C2 are critical  to further training. So it should be trained intensively.

The some lost points of a specific trainee can be found  after training. We use the knowledge point chart to fmd its  foregoing operations. By strengthen the foregoing operations,  it can help the trainee improve their operation ability faster.



IV. CONCLUSION  We studied and implemented a simulation trammg  system for early warning air roster. The system uses data  mining technology in training early warning air roster. It  provides the personalized training plan for each early  warning air roster according to his operational  characteristics, and commanders can optimize team  members according to the characteristics of combat service  task.

