State Assessment System of Power Transformer Equipments Based on Data

Abstract?The state assessment system of power transformer  equipments based on data mining and fuzzy theory is intro-  duced briefly in this article. The statistics-based association  rule mining will be used as data preprocessing method. As-  sess model of power transformer equipments is created ac-  cording to standards of Transformation Condition-Based  Maintenance equipment which is carried out by State Power  Grid on May 1, 2005, test data are treated with fuzzy com-  prehensive evaluation, then a software platform that in-  cludes functionality to collect and store experimental data,  analyze data and trend, generate assessment report and put  forward suggestions on repairing of transformer equipment  status is built.

Keywords-Condition-Based Maintenance (CBM); Data  Mining; power transformer equipment; Fuzzy Theory

I. INTRODUCTION  Status monitor and diagnosis techniques are used by CBM to obtain the state of equipments and fault informa- tion, judge the device exception, forecast the development tendency of fault, and decide to repair the equipments be- fore the occurrence happens [1]. At present, internal condi- tion-based maintenance is at a stalemate that making the maintenance decision in accordance with the condition monitoring and fault diagnosis of equipments.

With the rapid development of power industrial and investment of various monitoring equipments, the data in power system database is exploding by the explosive in- crease of information technology, which makes it imposs- ible to distinguish the supporting information for deci- sion-making hidden in the database. Besides, traditional query and reporting tool are unable to meet the informa- tion needs of mining. It is imperative to introduce data  mining technology into the analysis of power system. The combination of condition-based maintenance technology and data mining is also a general trend [2-3].

The paper mainly researches assistant decision system of the electric power equipment CBM. The application research of data dig in the electric power equipment CBM also has been detailed analyzed. The system adopts the Condition-Based Maintenance technology based on data mining, combines the monitoring data of device and stu- dies its database, such as analyzing and classifying the state characteristic quantities of devices. The system also reveals the deep information hidden in it and rule of gra- dient performance, discovers the early warning signs of the potential defects, uses fuzzy theory in order to make a judgment for serious degrees and development trends of the faults, and provides decision support.



II. THE STRUCTURE OF SYSTEM  Data mining is the process of abstracting unaware, po- tential and useful information and knowledge from plenti- ful, incomplete, noisy, fuzzy and stochastic data. Data mining is a popular technology supporting for DSS, which is mainly based on statistics, computer science, pattern recognition, artificial intelligence and machine learning. It will make inductive reasoning and obtain the pattern of relationships between data objects by analyzing and deal- ing with initial data highly automatically. Those patterns of relationships reflect the inherent characteristics of data, which is the higher abstraction level of the information included in the data.

The decision support system based on data mining combines the traditional DSS and data mining organically, and extracts useful data and discovers useful knowledge effectively from the large data. The structure of the assis-   DOI 10.1109/ICICTA.2010.308       tant decision system in the article reflects the integrated application of a variety of data mining methods [1, 3-5].

A. Data pretreatment  The data source of this project includes basic technical data, operation data, and maintenance data. Basic technical data includes: drawings, specifications, Ex-factory data, installation data and so on. The operation data includes: operating conditions, defects records, accident records, daily inspection records, online monitoring data, infrared monitoring data, and environmental conditions data. The maintenance data includes: preventive test data, overhaul and minor repairs records, flaw treatment records, accident treatment records, similar equipment accidents or defects and treatment experience and so on.

Not all parameters of power transformer equipments should be stored in the system to avoid wasting because of the mammoth database and uneasy management. We just need to store the state parameters intimately related to the operating condition of power transformer equipments.

These state parameters should be set through national standards and data mining methods such as the association rules and so on.

The data needed in the system is divided into three types: high-pressure test data, oil test data and operation data. Data encoding and data store of the test data in this article has been built, which lay a solid foundation for processing, analyzing and making use of the data.

B. Fuzzy processing[6]  Fuzziness usually means the uncertainty of the defini- tion of the concept and the understanding of linguistic meaning, for example, the uncertainty included in the ?normal state? and ?dubious state? of power transformer equipments is fuzziness. Fuzziness provides a man-made compromise between qualitative and quantitative, subjec- tive and objective, ambiguity and clarity. It can be used to study the state of power transformer equipments.

The fuzzy processing of electrical test data focuses on the processing of preventative test data of power transfor- mer equipments, this includes: high-pressure test data on ontology, Casing high-pressure test data and oil test data on ontology of power transformer equipments. There is the fuzziness and uncertainty of the cause and phenomena of the malfunction and failure mechanism of power trans-  former equipments; it is difficult to describe the relation- ship between them using a simple diagnostic method, though it is very hard to diagnose the cause of the mal- function and the real fault conditions. The fuzzy mathe- matics in this article analyzes quantitatively the obscure phenomenon of power transformer equipments combined with fuzzy language. The method is composed of the fol- lowing steps:  1) Construction of reviews sets of power transformer equipments  The four states ?normal?, ?attention?, ?abnormal? and ?serious? will be set as the reviews sets of power trans- former equipment.

2) Construction of factor sets of evaluation object of power transformer equipments  All kinds of operation condition of power transformer equipments are set as the evaluation factors of the fuzzy evaluation. Such as: insulation resistance, absorption, po- larization and index and so on.

3) Determination of membership function Membership function in fuzzy sets range in [0, 1],  therefore, the concept of relative deterioration degree is introduced to represent the degree of relative deterioration of the actual status compares to the fault condition.

For the state variables which are the smaller the better such as dielectric Loss, the relative deterioration degree can be expressed as:  max  max1)( c  cc xf i  ? ?=  ic  is the actual value, maxc is the maximum value  when the equipment has a fault.

For the state variables which are the bigger the better  such as polarization index, the relative deterioration de- gree can be expressed as:  min  min1)( c  ccxf i??=  minc  is the attention value or the alert level of the  equipment state parameters.

For the state variables which are the type of deviation  such as capacitance, the relative deterioration degree can be expressed as:       mav  mavi  c cc  xf ?  ?= 1)(  mavc  is the attention value of capacitance.

The quantitative data of all kinds of state variables are used by fuzzy distribution method in this article. The tri- angular membership function is simple in structure, and its result is nearly same with other more complex member- ship functions?. Therefore, the membership function ?tri- angular and semi-trapezoidal combination? is adopt to establish the various membership function correspond to the different state levels. As shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Combination of triangular and semi-trapezoid distribution  function  C. processing of historical data  1) Vertical comparison of test data of power transformer equipments  In order to ensure the credibility of the significant dif- ference analysis, two conditions should be required:  a) 6 or more sets of equipments, belong to the same type and the same batch, or are uniform in design, craftsmanship and materials, and the previous test data does not differ greatly.

b) under the same experimental conditions, the same test is the best.

The analysis method of significant difference betw een the amounts of the state is as follows:  Set n (n ? 5) devices in the same family (the same batch and the same manufacturer).The average of the cur- rent experimental values for a state X is x. The sample bias is S (diagnostic equipment are not included). The current test value of diagnostic equipment is x, then the conditions of significant difference is:  The degradation shows in decline of status value (In- sulation resistance):  ksxx ?<  The degradation shows in increase of status value (Di- electric loss):  ksxx +>  The degradation shows in deviate from the initial value (Capacitance):  ),( ksxksxx +??  k in the formulas above are selected according to n,  TABLE 1. Relationship between k and n  n 5 6 7 8 9 10  k 2.57 2.45 2.36 2.31 2.26 2.23  n 11 13 15 20 25 35  k 2.20 2.16 2.13 2.09 2.06 2.03 2) Horizontal comparison of test data of power  transformer equipment The application conditions are: there is a group of de-  vices A, B and C, such as circuit breaker, isolating switch, etc. There are also at least two tests of the value including the current test value, which were recorded as a1, b1, c1 (the last test value) and a2, b2, c2 (the experimental val- ues). If we want to analyze whether the experimental val- ues of A is normal, the value of F can be calculated ac- cording to equation (1). It is abnormal if F>=0.3.

%100 )22(1 )11(21 ?  + +?=  cba cbaF        (1)  D. The overall structure of the system  The deducted points of the substation equipments state are decided by its weight coefficient and the degree of degradation. The state of power transformer equipments should be determined by its deducted points. In order to meet the need of worksite and judge the status of power transformer equipments accurately for the staff of electric power test, fuzzy mathematics method is used to process the test data. At the same time, fuzzy three-ratio method is also used on the dissolved gas in oil for the fault diagnosis       for power transformer equipments. The specific processes as shown in figure 2.

Figure 2.  The overall structure of the system

III. ANALYSIS OF SYSTEM OPERATION RESULTS  The basic technical data, operation data, and mainten- ance data obtained from the Management Information System (MIS) database are sort out in the system. Part of the test data of power transformer equipment are treated comprehensively. Operating parameter data?s points will be deducted according to the condition-based maintenance guidelines carried out by the state power grid in 2008.

Finally, the equipment status assessment report is gener- ated as shown in figure 3 and the corresponding sugges- tions and cycle of condition-based maintenance are put forward.



IV. CONCLUSION  The fairly deep power system-related knowledge and theoretical guidance are called for in the data mining process in power system, which enable data mining more efficient through combining the DSS and data mining or- ganically[5]. This system classify and analyze the data us- ing correlation method of data mining, assess the status of power transformer equipments properly and give a rea- sonable maintenance plan. This system had been applied and had played an important role in the company's condi- tion-based maintenance.

