A Novel Frequent Patterns Mining Method of

AbstractUnusual climate events which may cause disasters  have great in?uence on both the natural environment and the  human society. Finding association patterns among these events  has great signi?cance. Traditional data mining methods have  several problems while applied to climate science data directly so  we propose a novel method that mining frequent patterns among  unusual events in climatic data, including spatial clustering  algorithm based on tight clique, extracting unusual climate events  algorithm and extended generalized sequential pattern (EGSP)  algorithm. In order to verify our method, we do experiments on  real climatic data (Climatic data of East Asian monsoon zone)  and ?nd lots of well-known and previously unknown patterns. It  needs the climatic expert to judge whether the new patterns are  signi?cative. Overall, the experiment told us it was an effective  and viable method for the climatic research.



I. INTRODUCTION  Climate system is very complex. Climate is different be-  tween different areas because of different conditions. However,  climate system is a unitary system. In varying climate condi-  tions there are interactions between climate events in a certain  range that may form some association patterns. The disasters  caused by unusual climate events often make a great deal of  injuries and loses in life and the loses in wealth. To discover  the spatio-temporal patterns of unusual climate events is very    important. It can help us to understand the changing process  of climate, ?nd its rule and enhance the prediction capability.

With the developments of modern-day technologies, climate  science data grow explosively. Due to the overwhelming  volume and high resolution of datasets, traditional climate  science data analysis methods are not enough. Much of the  data acquired at great expense remains greatly under-exploited.

As a new way to discover hidden patterns in huge amount  of data, data mining can help climatic experts to explore the  data. There are lots of works using the data mining methods  in climatic research. However, there are several problems  while applied the method to climate science data directly.

First, the traditional clustering method does not consider the  Xie Kunqing is the correspondent author.

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of  China under Grant No.60703066 and No.60874082.

spatio-temporal changes of the process climatic data. Second,  ordinary events are not only complicated but also meaningless.

Unusual events are important and useful for the research of  climate. Third, Traditional sequence association rule mining  method is suitable for mining common patterns in various re-  gions, rather than mining the relationship between the regions.

To solve the three problems above, we propose a method that  mining frequent patterns among unusual events in climatic  data. This paper is mainly about applying data mining method  to climate science data and our work is as follows:  (1) Spatial clustering based on tight clique. We propose  a clustering algorithm based on tight clique. The clustering  algorithm considers the properties of the climate changing  character as a similarity measure indicator, and form clusters  based on this type of similarity measure. This part of work  can be found in Ref. [1].

(2) Extended generalized sequential pattern mining.

Considering unusual climatic events commonly take place in a  huge area and a changefully spatio-temporal range, we merge  the result of extraction in both spatio ?eld and temporal ?eld  after extracting unusual climate events in each cluster. This  step reduces the complexity of the frequent patterns mining.

We extended the classic generalized sequential pattern (GSP)  algorithm, and apply it to the ?eld of frequent pattern mining.

(3) Experiment with the climatic data of East Asian  monsoon zone. We focus upon the East Asian monsoon    zone that China is located in. The monsoon system is very  unstable and has a large interannual variation. The formation  mechanism of drought, water-logging, cold, heat and other  disasters under the in?uence of the East Asian monsoon  was studied by many meteorologists. They found that there  would be some interesting patterns brought by the unequal  distribution of the east Asia monsoon. We do experiments on  climatic data of East Asian monsoon zone and ?nd lots of well-  known and previously unknown patterns. It needs the climatic  expert to judge whether the patterns are signi?cative.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2  presents the related work. Section 3 is the unusual climate  events extracting algorithm. Section 4 is the extended gener-  978-1-4244-7739-5/10/$26.00 2010 IEEE  alized sequential pattern mining algorithm. Section 5 reports  experimental results. We conclude our study in section 6.



II. RELATED WORKS  Statistical methods are widely used in climate science but  they can not well deal with the overwhelming volume of data.

Methods of data mining are used in the ?eld of meteorological  science. Ref.[2] used shared nearest neighbors (SNN) as a  similarity measure indicator clustering the temperature data  of surface seawater. Ref.[3] clustered trajectory of hurricane  by expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm and composite  regressive model. Ref.[4] proposed a hierarchical classi?cation  algorithm to solve a land cover classi?cations problem.

The co-location rule in Ref.[5] was used to discover non-  sequential pattern between different regions and mainly to ?nd  the association rule among the events which happened in the  same time and the location conform to some spatial relation-  ships. Ref.[6] presented a Depth-First-Search algorithm (DFS-  MINE) for fast mining of frequent spatiotemporal patterns in  environmental data which is different with GSP. Ref.[7] got a  traditional transactional database by pre-processing of remote  sensing image, then used the method of Ref.[8] used P-tree to  store transactions to deal with remote sensing data. Ref.[9]  present an ef?cient method for mining frequent sequential  association rules from multiple sequential data sets with a time  lag between the occurrence of an antecedent sequence and the  corresponding consequent sequence.

There is one key problem in all above researches: how  to process the climate dataset into traditional transactional    database? Then we may use the traditional methods of asso-  ciation rule mining. Ref.[10] reviewed four modes to process  the earth science data into transactional database:  (1) Non-sequential pattern in one region.

(2) Non-sequential pattern among different regions.

(3) Sequential pattern in one region.

(4) Sequential pattern among different regions.

Ref.[8] and [11] belong to the 1st mode. Ref. [7] and  [12] fall into the same category with the 2nd mode. To  the 4th mode, Ref. [10] only presented a primary process:  First, choosing a few interested areas and climate parameters.

Second, add every climate parameter into all the points of the  areas as a variable and get a new transactional database. Third,  use the method of Ref. [13] in the new transactional database.



III. UNUSUAL CLIMATE EVENTS EXTRACTING  A. Extracting unusual climate events in each cluster  Climate disaster means the disaster brought on by large  range, long time unusual climate. The unusual climate could  bring on drought, ?ood, chilling injury, sandstorm and so on.

In this paper, we use the data of temperature and precipitation  to judge whether the unusual climate events take place. The  judging standard includes the frequency and strength.

Def 3.1: Frequency threshold of unusual climate event.

Frequency threshold of unusual climate event is the time  interval of the unusual climate event taking place, denoted as  ?. ? is higher, the unusual climate event is more infrequent.

Def 3.2: Unusual climate event. To one area, under a given  frequency threshold of unusual climate event ?, choose all time  points which property value ful?lls the threshold condition  making up a dataset T. p is a threshold indicating the upper  scale between maximum value MAX and average value. If  the property value of a time point is in this range, we de?ne  this time point a climate unusual high event. q is a threshold  indicating the lower scale between minimum value MIN and  average value. If the property value of a time point is in this  range, we de?ne this time point a climate unusual low event.

The climate unusual high event and climate unusual low event  are generalized as climate unusual event.

Def 3.3: Formal representation of unusual climate event.

An unusual climate event is denoted as C = ?P,E, T ? , where  C is an unusual climate event, P is the location that unusual  climate event takes place and could be a spatial extent or a set    of spatial cluster labels, E is the type of unusual climate event  including drought, ?ood, chilling injury, heat and so on, could  be lone type or a combination of several types such as ?ood  adding chilling injury. T is the duration of unusual climate  event, a single number means unusual climate event happens  in one month and a series of number means it continues for  several months.

In this de?nition, the unusual climate events extracting  algorithm is as follows:  (1) Convert frequency threshold of unusual climate event ?

into the ?rst n items or last n items of climate property values  in one location. According to domain knowledge, during a  de?nite period of time, the corresponding time interval of the  ?rst or last n categories of climate property values expresses  the frequency of unusual climate event. For example, during  100 years, if the maximum value of precipitation in one area  is v1 the unusual climate event v1 is once every 100 years.

If the next to the highest one of precipitation in one area is v2  the unusual climate event v2 is once every 50 years without  consideration of the time interval between v1 and v2.

(2) Record the corresponding unusual climate event C of  the ?rst or last n categories of property values in one area.

(3) Delete the event C that does not meet the threshold p  and q then get the unusual events sequence of one area.

B. Merge the result in both spatio ?eld and temporal ?eld  The neighborhood unusual events in time or space indicate  the same event. If we do not merge the result for the next step  of data mining there would be many reduplicate counts that  may hide the real signi?cative information.

1) Merging in space: (1) Put the unusual events of the same  moth in the candidate set C and choose an event to the result  set R. We use the cluster label A expresses the unusual event.

(2) Put the neighborhood clusters of A into a queue Q.

With each step, we choose one cluster B from Q. If B have  the same unusual climate with A we put B into R and put  the neighborhood clusters of B into Q. Otherwise, choose the  next cluster in Q for judgement until Q is empty.

(3) Clusters in the result R can be combined into one unit.

Delete the clusters in R from the candidate set C and repeat  above steps until C is empty.

2) Merging in time: (1) In the temporal dimension, to each  unusual event E, search forward for all the same type unusual    climate event in the new data set after merging in space.

(2) If neighborhood unusual events in time is also neigh-  borhood in space we merge the events into one event and let  the duration of unusual climate event T a set of time.



IV. FREQUENT PATTERNS MINING  The purpose of frequent patterns mining of unusual climate  events is to ?nd the relationship of unusual climate in different  areas. These unusual climate events may take place in the same  time or with some time delays. This kind of frequent patterns  is interesting rules to meteorologists.

?

?????? ?

????? ?

????? ?

????? ?

????? ?

????? ?

????? ??

????? ?

????? ?

????? ?

????? ??

?,  ?,  ?> ?, ?,  ?>  ?,  ?,  ?,  ?>  ?,  ?>  ?>  ?>  ?,  ? ? ?? ?? ?? ??????

Fig. 1. Frequent patterns mining of climate  Figure 1 shows a unusual climate queue of an area during  12 months. There are some locations with the label a,b,c. H  is unusual high event. L is unusual low event. In this paper,  our goal is to ?nd all frequent patterns among these different  locations. For example, the rule expressions in the form aL ?

cH , which means after the unusual low event take place in  location a, an unusual high event will happen in location c.

A. Sliding time window  Since the annual cycle climate changing, the time interval  of the relationship between two locations could not exceed one  year. We add a time window to the unusual climate sequeue  within 12 months. As shown in Figure 1, the window length  is 3. For each month, item Ip is the unusual climate taking  place at the same time and all these items combining to event  el. The events in a certain window make a sequeue s. There  are 11 window that length is more than 1, so there are 11  different queues. We pay attention to ?nd the frequent sub-  sequences of all queues. The frequent sub-sequences that we  found cover all locations, so it could express the relationship  among different locations.

B. Time aligning  Using the traditional GSP algorithm, there would be many  redundancy and reduplicate counts. For example, to the rule  aH ? cH , aH appears in the 2nd time point of window 1  and cH in 3rd, count plus 1. In window 2, they appear in the  1st time point and 2nd, so count plus 1 again. To avoid this  kind of reduplicate counts, we add a limit of time aligning to  the original GSP algorithm: counting only when the ?rst event  of the rule aligning to the ?rst time point of current window.

With the limit of time aligning the count would not duplicate  with the sliding window.

C. EGSP algorithm  EGSP (Extended Generalized Sequential Pattern) is aimed  at climate mining, but it also can be used for general sequential  pattern mining:  (1) Add a time sliding window when reading the sequeue.

(2) Add a limit of time aligning in the algorithms of  association rule mining.

The function of candidacy generation is same with GSP  algorithm.

D. Scenarios of EGSP algorithm  (1) Without division of region. That means to mine patterns  base on the original clustering result neglecting to merge in  space and time.

(2) Pattern mining base on division of region. This method  forms a new set of unusual climate event with merging the  original result in space and time. We can divide the East    Asia Monsoon Zone into several parts and mine patterns in  the division. The standard of division may base on domain  knowledge. In this paper, we divide the range into two parts:  South and North.



V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS  We use real global data for experiments. Global climate  datasets CRU TS 2.10[14] contains nine variables including  monthly average precipitation, monthly average temperature  etc and we mainly use variables of monthly average precipi-  tation, monthly average temperature.

A. Unusual Climate Events Extracting  TABLE I  CHINESE CLIMATE DISASTER IN 1937 AND 1962  Time Location Type Detail  1937 Anhui, Shanxi,  Shandong, Sichuan,  Henan, Guizhou,  Guangxi, Ningxia,  Gansu  Great  drought  Affected population  hit 30 million  1962 North China, West-  north  Great  drought  Drought acrossing  Spring and Summer  Table I is taken out randomly from Chinese climate disaster  record chart. Set the frequency of unusual climate event as  once every 10-years , p,q as 1%, the result shows in Figure  2. The large scale drought in north China checks up with the  facts in the two years.

B. Frequent patterns mining  1) Without division of region: In this experiment, frequency  of unusual climate is once every 10-years , con?dence  threshold is 0.5, support threshold is 8, the result shows in  Figure 3 (B is latter than A).

The shaded part is the range of drought  Fig. 2. Result of 1937 and 1962  ?A,Feb.,Drought? ? ?B,Nov.,Drought?,    con?dence=51.8%,support=9  Fig. 3. Result without division region  2) Pattern mining base on division of region: We divide  the East Asia Monsoon Zone into south and north (Figure 4).

If the disaster area is larger than 3% of the part we consider  that there is a disaster of the part. The frequency of unusual  climate event is once every 10-years , Con?dence threshold  is 0.5, support threshold is 7, the result shows in table II.

Fig. 4. Division of South and North  TABLE II  ASSOCIAION RULES OF UNUSUAL CLIMATE  ?South, Sept., Cool? ? ?North,Dec.,Drought?

con?dence=81.8%, support=9  ?North, June,Heat? ? ?South,Dec.,Drought?

con?dence=88.9%, support=8  ?North, Sept., Cool? ? ?South,NextJan.,Drought?

con?dence=91.7%, support=11  ?North,Mar., F lood? ? ?South,Dec.,Drought?

con?dence=82.3%, support=14  ?South, July, F lood? ? ?North,Nov.,Drought?

con?dence=62.5%, support=10  Some of the mining results are in accordance with existing  knowledge: if the Paci?c Monsoon is weak, the rainfall belt  staying at south in the long term, there will be the phenomena  as drought in north and ?ood in south. Otherwise, if the  Paci?c Monsoon is power, the rainfall belt staying at north  in the long term, there will be the phenomena as drought in  south and ?ood in north. The results indicate the correctness  and the feasibilities of our methods.



VI. CONCLUSION  Climate system is a unitary system. With the interaction  among climate elements there are many different climate  phenomena so there are some relationship among the climate  phenomena. Mining the spatio-temporal patterns we can delve  more deeply into climate system and discover the law behind  the climate phenomena. In this paper, we mine frequent  Patterns of Unusual Climatic Events in Climatic data of East  Asian monsoon zone. We propose tight clustering algorithm,  Unusual Climate Extracting Algorithm and Extended general-  ized sequential pattern algorithm. In the experiments, we got  some interesting climate rule.

