Theoretical Studies and Experiment Analysis of the  Time Domain Symmetrical Configuration Two-Probe

Abstract?Theoretical studies and experiment analysis of time- domain symmetrical configuration two-probe method are provided in this paper, and the method?s feasibility and error separation?s precision are discussed. Conclusions can be drawn from the results of simulation and experiment that measurement precision and repeat precision of two-probe method is a little higher that of single-probe method. Though radial random errors can not be separated entirely, the measurement theory of symmetrical configuration two-probe method is simple, and the measurement equipments? precision can be easily ensured. In addition, the data processing can be done directly in time- domain, which is more practicable. Two-probe method is useful in practical measurement. High accuracy can be ensured, especially in the case of measuring the shape errors of big parts with general precision.

Keywords- symmetrical configuration two-probe method; error separation; simulation analysis; experiment results.



I.  INTRODUCTION Error separation technique is a potential technique which  has been highly developed since about forty years ago. It is very useful in measuring and compensating the work-piece being machined online. Recently, the studies of error separation of cylindrical parts are mostly focused on multi- probes method. Theoretically, with more probes being used, the harmonic loss in the resultant signals will be less, but actually, the manufacture and installation and adjustment of the probes? clamps will be much more difficult in that case, and hence the precision is not easily ensured. Further more, it is difficult to estimate a good many experiment results impersonally, so multi-probes method is impractical and is not used widely.

The principle of two-probe method is simple, and the precision of the measurement equipments is easily ensured, and the data processing can be done directly in time domain. This method is practical and should be paid much attention to.

However, there just have been a few studies on two-probe method. One reason of that is two-probe method causes much harmonic loss in frequency domain. In addition, the initial values of the shape errors must be assumed in advance in the  recurrence formulas of the time domain non-symmetrical configuration two-probe method. It is difficult to estimate the initial values and theoretical errors are inevitable, which affects the precision of the model [1]. The time domain symmetrical configuration two-probe method can only improve the precision of the single probe method to a certain extent, but is not capable of separating nonrecurring random errors of each revolution.

There have been some studies on the practicability conditions of error separation of multi-probe and new accomplishments are being published now and again [2, 3]. The study of time domain non-symmetrical configuration two- probe method will be provided in some other paper. This paper only discusses the simulation analysis and experiment studies of time domain symmetrical configuration two-probe method and its error separation precision.



II. THE MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF SYMMETRICAL CONFIGURATION TWO-PROBE METHOD  The models are founded with probe 1 and probe 2 being placed in the same line ( 180=? ). Make sure that probes 1V and 2V  are measuring the same cross section. Let Pi be the corresponding sample point of probe 1V  on the measured part.

Without regard to the shifting errors along the axis of the part, the outputs of the two probes can be described as follows:  ++?= ++?=  iii  iii  eVrV eVrV   101                                   (1)  Where ir?  is radius deviation of the measured section corresponding to point iP , 10V 20V  the initial values of probes 1V  and 2V , and ie  the rotating radial system error of the principal axis of point iP .

Make probes iV1  and iV2  sample the data synchronously.

The sample points of the measured section locate in the same interval of angle and are expressed as points iP  This project was supported by the University Key laboratory Foundation of Liaoning Province, P.R.China No.2008S094     ( mi ,,2.1= ), where m is the number of the sample points and m is even. After rotating radial errors of principle axis have been separated, the roundness error?s radius increments of the sample points can be computed with the following formula:  ?<+=?  ??+=?  ?  +  mimVVr  miVVr  miii  miii  ,)(   1,)(   )  (21  )  (21  (2)  Let i?  be the angle of the sample point, and  )1(2 ?= i mi ?? , mi ,,2.1= . Let i?  be the deviation of the  sample point relative to the least square round along its radius.

i?  can be described as  [4]:  iiii baRr ??? sincos ???= , mi ,,2,1=  Where ?cosea = ?sineb = , the location of the centre of the least square round. According to the principle of least square method, that is:  min)sincos( 2  2 =???== =  m  i iii  m  i i baRrQ ???  the values of  R a and b  satisfy expression (3) can be obtained.

?=  ?=  ?+=  =  = m  i ii  m  i ii  i  r m  b  r m  a  r m  rR     sin2  cos2  ,1  ?  ?                                    (3)  Then, i?  can be described as:  iii  iii  iiii  baRr baRrrr  baRr  ?? ??  ???  sincos sincos)()(  sincos   ?????= ???+??+=  ???= (4)  Expression (4) shows that i?  can be computed if ir?  and i?  have been obtained. Expression (4) has more use value,  because ir?  is much easier to be measured than ir . The roundness error evaluated with least square method is given by:  { } { }iif ?? minmax ?=? , mi ,,2,1=                        (5)

III. ANALYSIS OF THE MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF SYMMETRICAL CONFIGURATION TWO-PROBE METHOD AND  SIMULATION The samples iV  ( mi ,,2.1= ) are simulated  according to  formula (1). Let m =128. The simulation values which contain a good many error signals are turned into data file and then will be synthesized into combined signal ),( iii rV ??  in computer to  do error separation. The mathematical model and the processing method are considered correct if the results of the above-mentioned error function are in accord with the initial given values. However, the error separation is considered inefficient if the difference between the separation value and the given value can not be ignored. The simulation results are shown in table 1.

TABLE 1.  SIMULATION RESULTS ideal  round- ness error  EST roundness with two-probe  method  roundness error of probe 1  roundness error of probe 2  data group 1 19.7546 22.1337 24.8087 26.4587 data group 2 45.1832 48.1316 61.5835 55.5405 data group 3 50.5868 49.5374 58.4105 55.0128 data group 4 9.0849 11.6181 13.5633 14.2369  The simulation results show that the precision of symmetrical configuration two-probe method is a little higher than single-probe method in the case of roundness error measurement. However, radial random error can not be entirely separated with symmetrical configuration two-probe method.



IV. ONLINE MEASUREMENT EXPERIMENTS OF ERROR SEPARATION OF SYMMETRICAL CONFIGURATION TWO-PROBE  METHOD  A. Experiment Equipments DGB-5A inductive micrometer, DGC-6PG/A inductance  probe, magnetic dial indicator platform, micro-motion measuring bench, PMAC controller and servo motor. Rotary- R100M2 precise rotating platform. The Rotary-R100M2 parameters of given precision are shown in table 2.

TABLE 2.   PARAMETERS OF ROTARY-R100M2 type circular  run-out error of rotating platform    parallelism between top and bottom    orientation precision (Arc min    repeat orientation precision (Arc Sec)  R100M ?5.00 ?12 2 3  B. Measurement Method Make sure that the precise rotating platform is placed flatly.

Calibrate DGC-6PG/A inductance probe with micro-motion measuring bench and then fix the two probes on the magnetic dial indicator platform. To ensure the measurement precision, the two probes should be placed in the same measurement height, and the line contains the two probes should go through the circle centre of the rotating platform. Then fix the inductance probes on the magnetic dial indicator platform. The platform moves according to the programs controlled by the PMAC card, sampling data on one single section with the same angle interval. The number of sample points is 60 and the time interval between two samples is 10 seconds. The experiment data are read from the inductive micrometer. The roundness error measurement experiment with symmetrical configuration    two-probe method has been done for two times. The curves of the measurement data are shown in figure 1. Compute the roundness errors f1 and f2 of single-probe method according to the measurement data, and compute the roundness error fs after error separation according to formula (4). Then compare the results of the two methods with each other.

(a)The first curve of iV1   (b) The first curve of iV2   (c) The first curve of ir?   (d) The second curve of iV1   (e) The second curve of iV2   (f) The second curve of ir?  Figure 1.  Curves of online measurement experiments  C. Processing of Experiment Data and Result Analysis TABLE 3.   EXPERIMENT RESULTS  EST roundness  error of two-probe  method  roundness error of probe 1  roundness error of probe 2  First measurement fs =6.32 f1=9.0849 f2=5.9069  Second measurement fs=6.92 f1=8.6208 f2= 7.3836  Processing of experiment data and result analysis:  1) Table 3 shows that generally the roundness error computed with the error-separated data from the symmetrical configuration two-probe method is a little smaller than that computed with the single-probe data.

2) The coherence of the roundness error computed with the error-separated data from the symmetrical configuration two- probe method is higher than that of roundness error computed with the single-probe data.

3) The experiment results are in accord with the simulation results.

4) The measured roundness errors are accord with the given parameters of the precise rotating platform, which shows that the results are reliable.



V. CONCLUSIONS In the case of roundness error, higher measurement  precision and repeat precision can be realized with the symmetrical configuration two-probe method than the single- probe method. The measurement precision of single-probe method can be improved to a certain extent by the symmetrical configuration two-probe method. Though radial random errors can not be separated entirely, the measurement theory of two- probe method is simple, and the measurement equipment?s precision can be easily ensured. The data processing of symmetrical configuration two-probe method can be done directly in time-domain, which is more practicable. High accuracy can be ensured with symmetrical configuration two- probe method, especially in the case of measuring the shape errors of big parts with general precision. This method is useful in practical measurement.

