Ontology Based Collaborative City Intelligence Framework

Abstract - Long-term sustainable city development and management model is based on multifaceted ontologies, ontology resulting development studies, followed by corresponding strategy drivers, citizen focused processes, services and sets of performance indicators. Due to international, national, regional and local governance, as well as management, knowledge and data levels from one side, and integrated management requirements from another, the collaborative city intelligence model based on contemporary ICT enablers is presented. Ontologies and Semantic Web have a big role to play in government related multiple heterogeneous distributed data and documents integration.

Service-enabled data warehousing and Collaborative City Intelligence infrastructure in place will lead the way to higher level of complex and sustainable city management and democracy.



I. INTRODUCTION   The government and public sector are dealing with a  significant amount of information and knowledge resources. This knowledge has to be appropriately managed and smoothly integrated. Especially in policy formulation, the activities and results of action are of information and knowledge by nature.

The design, implementation and evaluation of public policies for the big and complex problems that modern societies face is the critical government function. It usually necessitates extensive interaction and collaboration among many heterogeneous public and government organizations with different backgrounds, mentalities, values, interests and expectations, so it can greatly benefit from the use onontologies[1] for electronically supporting and structuring the highest-level function of government: the design, evaluation and implementation of public policies based on complex problems that modern societies face.

Ontologies are an extremely useful tool for expressing the meaning of distributed data and documents, allowing the creation of documents machine interpretable and not only machine readable[2]. This is the vision of the Semantic Web that envisages the Web enriched with several domain ontologies, which specify formal semantics  of data for different intelligent agents and services for information sharing, search, retrieval and transformation[3]  City Intelligence serves the complex long term sustainable development requirements, as well as intelligent improvement and innovation of service delivery systems. The fundamental bases for both of components are contextual dynamic collaborative ontologies.



II. COLLABORATIVE DECISION MAKING  The explosion of social and government related data  and the growing number of disparate data sources are exposing researchers and decision-makers to a new challenge - how to acquire, maintain and share knowledge from large and distributed databases in the context of rapidly evolving research.

Steps for collaborative decision making are based on goal description ontology, goal focused strategies, context driven management ontology, collaboration ontology, city collaboration domains, performance indicator ontology.

A. Goal description ontology  Goals are defined by declarative descriptions that  present user objectives[4]. The concept of goals has been introduced for request formulation as a declarative objective description that abstracts from concrete service invocation1. A Goal represents a formal, machine- processable knowledge level specification of a client objective that needs to satisfy the requirements as: abstracting from technical details to the highest possible extent; support all possible kind of objectives that clients may have; carry all information needed for automated resolution.

1 The concept and motivation for goal-driven architectures is allocated within Problem Solving with its theoretical- philosophical basics originating from the interdisciplinary research field of Cognitive Science.

MIPRO 2010, May 24-28, 2010, Opatija, Croatia    Goals are based on different ontologies and knowledge domains, stakeholder-side goals and goal resolution plans, and goal oriented service detection, composition and usage on the service side along with functional and behavioral service implementations (Figure 1.).

Figure 1: Structure of Goal-Driven Architecture   B. Goal focused strategies  Goal focused strategies are expressed in an abstract  form, such as[5]: ? The competitive economy and accessible  workplaces contributed by the strong connection within the City, local government and the University.

? Reliable and modern communal infrastructure which include the high level of environmental energy sources and modern technologies.

? The comprehensive social welfare policy and investments in improving the quality of and to achieve the safety and satisfaction for all generations.

? Plenty of cultural events, sport and recreational contents, landscaped public areas, in order to increase and sustain the overall city attraction and attractivity.

C. Context driven management ontology  In order to transform the goals and policies to  measured results, a context driven management ontology is given (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Context driven management ontology  Context, service related or policy related, determinates corresponding data sources, performance strengthened analysis and prediction by fact-driven, directive, time estimated, optimized, semantically descripted and action supportive elaborated actions, focused to support decision-making process for the micro, mezzo and macro levels.  Context driven management ontology involves the Government Enterprise Architecture - GEA public policy formulation objects model (Figure 3.) and public administration service provision object model[6].

Figure 3: The GEA public policy formulation object model ? strategic view  Context driven management requires clear definition and regulated orchestration of all involved stakeholders ? organization ontology.

D. Collaboration ontology  One of the most critical processes in business and  government is collaboration. Be it e-mail, instant messaging, virtual workspaces, videoconferencing, collaborative text edition, shared white boards or case tools, technology dramatically shortens distances among people and frees up the flow of intellectual capital, enabling employees to work, to capture and to share knowledge more quickly[7].

Organizations use collaboration as a method to exchange goals and information inside and across their boundaries. It is crucial to conceptualize and formalize a common vocabulary to represent collaboration.

A collaboration session (CS) is a kind of event that represents a period of time in which some agents collaborate with each other for a given purpose. There are some important concepts related to a CS, such as:  uc Compounded City Intelligence  Data  Context  Analysis and prediction  Decision  Action  Micro-level action Mezo-lev el action Macro-lev el action  Fact-driv en  Directiv e  Hours, minutes, seconds  Constituent Related Serv ices  Applied semantics  Action support  Optimizes  Remote-sensing data  Gov ernment originating data  Economy related data  Personal relating data  Performance indicators  ?extend??extend?  ?extend?  ?extend?  ?SequenceFlow?  ?extend?  ?SequenceFlow??extend?  ?SequenceFlow?  ?extend?  ?SequenceFlow?  ?extend? ?extend? ?extend?  ?extend?  ?extend?  ?extend?  ?extend?  ?extend?     participants, objectives, artifacts, coordination and communication. Abstract and low level collaboration patterns and related services are presented in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Ontology of collaboration patterns (excerpt)  To collaborate, the individuals have to exchange information (communication) and to organize themselves (coordination) to work together in a same workspace (cooperation). Collaboration ontology is comprised of communication, coordination and cooperation ontologies.

E. City collaboration domains  City collaboration domains cover the spectrum of city  life ? from local government (LG) domains, LG owned utility companies and institutions, up to regional and central government institutions and agencies having their representatives in the city. Municipal/city ontologies and domains have been presented in previous papers[8],[9].

F. Performance indicators ontology  Government use performance information for decision  making processes in order to improve results, demonstrating leadership commitment, aligning agency, program, and individual performance goals, improving the usefulness of performance information, building analytic capacity, and communicating performance information frequently and effectively[10].

Figure 5: Framework on indicators for sustainable development  Best value performance indicators[11] for government services (Figure 6.).

Figure 6: Service performance indicators  High level Strategic City Performance indicators[12] cover the aspects of sustainable development as Environment aspects, Social aspects, Economic aspects and Institutional aspects (Figure 7).

Figure 7: High level performance indicator categories   Performance indicator ontology combines  sustainability development set of indicators and government related service indicators.

III GOVERNMENT RELATED BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE   The objective of building a Business Intelligence (BI)  system is to equip its users with ability of making decisions in realistic business production and operations scientifically and systematically[13].

Government related Business Intelligence (g-BI) refers to any information that pertains to the history, current status or future projections of a government and public organizations. g-BI technologies provide historical, current, and predictive views of government and public operations. It refers to skills, processes, technologies, applications and practices used to support decision making.

Along with the use of BI in human resources management, in budgeting and planning, for financial analysis, and in constituent support, g-BI focuses on mission support, program performance management, policy, and public welfare.

Semantic integration mechanisms can assist in friendly and adaptive interaction and deployment of BI[14].

Ontology-based semantic integration involves domain knowledge, semantic understanding, aggregation, mapping, query and discovery of ontological items.

Terminologies in BI system are mapped to ontological items (Fig. 8.).

Figure 8: Interaction in an ontology-based BI system   IV COLLABORATIVE CITY INTELLIGENCE   Collaborative city intelligence is compounded by Local  Government BI ontology, ontology of data sources, data warehouse and data mining ontologies, and knowledge management wrapped up by collaborative decision making.

A. Local Government BI ontology  Local government (LG) BI ontology (Figure 9.)  collaborates with:  ? LG process, service and transactional data ontologies supported with legal/regulatory ontologies, relaying on LG functional domains  ? Utility companies and public institutions process, service and transactional data and supporting ontologies  ? LG goals/drivers and collaboration ontology (vision and goals, strategies, development programs and projects)  ? Performance indicators ontology derived from processes, services, and operations.

Figure 9: Local government BI ontology   B. Ontology of data sources   Scientific approach to the city as a system requires,  along with local data sources, significant statistical data sources.  A great amount of statistical data is scattered in official national and international statistical databases (Figure 10). Government related data, in some extent, relies in government institutions agencies. Statistical dissemination is rarely dimensioned by local government dimensions (city related statistical data). In order to bring the clear picture on all facets of city life in and over time, data source ontology has to be designed and maintained.

Figure 10: Data Source Ontology  class LG BI Ontology  LG ERP Ontology  GIS Ontology  Document Management  Ontology  Object Ontology  Party Ontology  Application Ontology LG Data Ontology  LG Process Ontology  LG Serv ice Ontology  LG Legal/regulatory Ontology  LG Intelligent Traffic Ontology  LG Intelligent Systems  LG Intelligent health  Location Ontology  Performance Indicators Ontology  LG Driv ers Ontology  Vision and Goals Strategies Development Program and  Project Ontology  Domain Ontologies  (from Ontologies)  Datasource Ontology  Context-Enriched Domain Ontology  Collaboration Ontology  Collaborative Business  Intelligence  class Registri i podaci  Registar branitelja  Registri i  baze podataka (Data  Sources Ontology)  Ministarstvo branitelja  Sudski registar trgov a?kih  dru?tav a u RH  Ministarstvo pravosu?a  Ministarstvo gospodarstva  Registar obrtnika (obrtni registar)  Ministarstvo unutra?njih  poslova  Osobni dokumenti  Osobna iskaznica  Domov nica  Putov nica  Dozv ole za uprav ljanje  v ozilima Voza?ka dozv ola  Me?unarodna v oza?ka dozv ola  Prebiv ali?te  Borav i?te  Inv alidi domov inskog rata  Ministarstvo znanosti,  obrazovanja i sporta  Dje?j i v rti?i  Dr?avna geodetska  uprava Katastarski operat  Ministarstvo za?tite okoli?a,  prostornog ure?enja i  graditeljstva  Osnov ne ?kole  Srednje ?kole  Visoko?kolske ustanov e  Gra?ev ine  Zemlj i?ne knj ige  Gradovi/?upanije Rje?enja o  uv jetima gradnje  Hrvatski zavod za zdravstveno  osiguranje Registar  osiguranika zdrav stv enog  osiguranja  FINA Registar godi?nj ih  financijskih izv je?taja  Bonitetne informacije  BONPLUS  BON-1  BON-1/IN  BON-2  Jedinstv eni registar ra?una  (JRR)  Dr?avna uprava u  ?upanijama  Registar udruga RH  Radne knj i?iceUpisnik polj opriv rednih gospodarstav a  Upisnik proizv o?a?a gro??a i v ina  Podaci o one?i??iv a?u  Ministarstvo uprave  Hrvatski zavod za  zapo?ljavanje  Ministarstvo financija  Porezi  Carina  Registar poreznih obv eznika  Registracija v ozila  O?ev idnik brodica  Ministarstvo pomorstva ...

Dr?avne matice  Ro?eni Vjen?ani  Umrli  Registar uv oznika/izv oznika  Ministarstvo kulture  Muzejski dokumentacijski centar MDC  Registar muzeja, galerij a i zbirki u  RH  Registar udruga (doma?ih, stranih)  Ev idencija v jerskih  zajednica u RH  Registar politi?kih stranaka u RH  Registar v ije?a nacionalnih  manj ina  Zakladna knj iga  Fundacijska knj iga  Prav ne osobe katoli?ke crkv e  Popisi bira?a  Knj iga dr?av ljana  Hrv atski registar obv eza po  kreditima HROK  Hrvatska narodna banka  Registar koncesija  Hrvatski registar brodova  Registar jav nih cesta  Transportne dozv ole  Agencija za za?titu okoli?a  Kakv o?a mora za kupanje na  morskim pla?ama  Institut za oceanografi ju i  ribarstvo  Hrvatske vode  Dr?avni hidrometerolo?ki  zavod Hrvatski  hidrografski institut  Ministarstvo poljoprivrede      C. Data Warehouse Ontology  One of the challenges of scientifically based decision-  making is the diversity of identifiers for the same social and/or government entities across different data sources.

Any attempt at data integration should start with identifying the ?atoms of information? and creating solutions to resolve the names. XML is a useful technology for creating such identity-mappings across multiple data sources[15]. Ontology-based approaches to this problem show promise by resolving heterogeneity, if the participating data owners agree to use a common ontology (i.e., a set of common attributes). Such common ontologies offer the capability to work with distributed data as if it were located in a central repository[16].

Therefore, ontologies can be used in an integration task to describe the semantics of the information sources and to make the contents explicit.

Data Warehouse (DW) ontology is organized as an analytical ontology directory representing DW ontological items. Ontology based data integration involves the use of ontology(s) and effectively combine data and/or information from multiple heterogeneous sources[17]. It is one of the multiple data integration approaches and may be classified as Local-As-View (LAV)[18]. The effectiveness of ontology based data integration is closely tied to the consistency and expressivity of the ontology used in the integration process.

An essential component of DW data consolidation is the Extract, Transform, and Load (ETL) process[19] based on conceptual model of ETL processes and on the Business Process Model Notation (BPMN[20]) standard.

Such a conceptual model can be implemented using Business Process Execution Language (BPEL[21]), a standard executable language for specifying interactions with web services.

BPEL based approaches such as Service Oriented Architecture (SOA Data Services[22])  promise to greatly enhance data warehousing by providing more real-time data and new ways of delivering data where it's needed employing an abstraction layer that can expose key data warehouse and BI application functions as standardized services. Once a service-enabled data warehouse and BI infrastructure is in place, this opens the door to complex event processing2.

2 Event-Driven Architecture (EDA) extends SOA capabilities to manage real-time event processing.

The concept of Data as a Service (DaaS3), with the emergence of SOA, advocates using standardized processes for accessing data where it lives and does not bother about where and which platform the data resides.

With DaaS, any government process can access data wherever it resides.

D. Data mining ontology  Data mining uses artificial intelligence techniques,  neural networks, and advanced statistical tools (such as cluster analysis) to reveal trends, patterns and relationships, which might otherwise have remained undetected[23]. Data Mining Ontology (DMO) for algorithm/model selection relies on the 4-tuple of concepts (Task, Dataset, Method, Model)[24] is presented in Figure 11.

Figure 11: Data Mining Ontology concepts  E. Collaborative Knowledge Management  Knowledge management (KM)[25] is concerned with  theories, tools and methodologies that help individuals, groups and organizations manage the knowledge they use on a daily basis.

Under mutual agreement, organizations are permitted to retrieve inter-organization knowledge and the retrieved knowledge can be reused to support the knowledge management (KM) processes, which include create, store, disseminate, use, and evaluate knowledge[26]. An ontology merging tool can provide a practical way to create   3 Data as a Service (DaaS) is a model of delivering dynamic data direct to the end user whereby a provider licenses access via a web based server as a service on demand model.

knowledge by combining two or more ontologies semi- or fully-automatically in the network.

From a technological perspective, Knowledge Management means integrating and managing information from heterogeneous information sources (databases, websites, and documents) to help individuals, groups and organizations in their daily work.



V. CONCLUSION   Collaborative city intelligence framework is based on  group of ontologies relating to collaborative decision making such as goal description ontology, context driven management ontology, collaborating ontology, ontology of performance indicators. Coupled by local government business intelligence ontology, ontology of data sources, data warehouse and data mining ontology as well as collaborative knowledge management, framework gives potentials of making decisions in evidence-based and realistic long term city sustainability development and service deliveries scientifically and systematically.

Coordination ontology requires establishment of appropriate organization, technological and human network.

LIST OF REFERENCES    ?1? Loukis, Euripidis: An Ontology for G2G Collaboration in Public Policy Making, Implementation and Evaluation, Artificial Intelligence and Law, Volume 15. Number 1, Springer, 2007, ?2? A. Maeche and S. Staab. Ontology Learning for the Semantic Web. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 13, 2001.

?3? T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler and O. Lassila. The Semantic Web. Scientific American,May 2001.

?4? Michael Stollberg, Martin Hepp: Data, Information and Process Integration with Semantic Web Services, FP6 507483, D3.10 Goal Description Ontology, DIP, 2006 ?5? City of Rijeka strategic priorities for 2009-2013, http://www.rijeka.hr/lgs.axd?t=16&id=32927 ?6? Vassilios Peristeras, Konstantinos Tarabanis: Governance enterprise architecture (GEA): domain models for e-governance, Digital Government Society of North America, Proceedings of research, dg.o; Vol. 289, 2008 ?7? Felipe F. Oliveira, Julio C. P. Antunes, Renata S. S.

Guizzardi: Towards a Collaboration Ontology, http://www.inf.ufes.br/~rguizzardi/publications/frechiani- antunes-guizzardi-WOMSDE07.pdf ?8? Mauher, M, V. Smokvina: Municipal Asset and Property Management System for the Web Collaborative Environment, Proceedings Vol.V., p. 200.,MIPRO 2008, Opatija, Croatia ?9? Mauher, M., V.Smokvina: Collaborative Municipal Ontologies for Inventive Local Government Services, MIPRO 2009, Opatija, Croatia   ?10? United States Government Accountability Office: Strategies for Building a Results-Oriented and Collaborative Culture in the Federal Government, USA, 2009 ?11? Communities nad local government http://www.communities.gov.uk/localgovernment/performancefr ameworkpartnerships/bestvalue/bestvalueperformance/ ?12? Mauher,M, Vojko Obeersnel: Intelligent City Balanced Scorecard for the City of Rijeka, MIPRO 2007, Opatija, Croatia ?13? Longbing Cao, Chao Luo, Dan Luo, Chengqi Zhang: Integration of Business Intelligence Based on Three-Level Web Intelligence, 2004 ?14? Cao,L., C. Zhang, J. Liu: Ontology-Based Integration of Business Intelligence, Web Intelligence and Agent Systems: An International Journal, vol. 4, no. 3, 2006 ?15? Peddinti V. Gopalacharyulu; Erno Lindfors; Catherine Bounsaythip; Winnie Wefelmeyer; Matej Ore?i?: Ontology based data integration and context-based mining for life sciences, W3C Workshop on Semantic Web for Life Sciences, October 2004 (Cambridge, MA, USA) ?16? Mark T. Elmore Thomas E. Potok and Frederick T. Sheldon: Dynamic Data Fusion Using An Ontology-Based Software Agent System, http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.118.59 14&rep=rep1&type=pdf ?17? H. Wache, T. V?gele, U. Visser, H. Stuckenschmidt, G.

Schuster, H. Neumann, S. H?bner. "Ontology-Based Integration of Information A Survey of Existing Approaches", in IJCAI-01 Workshop: Ontologies and Information Sharing (A. G. P?rez, M.

Gr?ninger, H. Stuckenschmidt, and M. Uschold, eds.), (Seattle, WA), pp. 108?117, 2001 http://www.let.uu.nl/~Paola.Monachesi/personal/papers/wache.p df ?18? Maurizio Lenzerini: "Data Integration: A Theoretical Perspective?, Proceedings of the twenty-first ACM SIGMOD- SIGACT-SIGART symposium on Principles of database systems, Madison, Wisconsin, 2002 ?19? Zineb El Akkaoui, Esteban Zim?nyi: Defining ETL Worfklows using BPMN and BPEL, Proceeding of the ACM twelfth international workshop on Data warehousing and OLAP, Hong Kong, China, 2009 ?20? Business Process Modeling Notation: http://www.bpmn.org/ ?21?Web Services Business Process Execution Language Version 2.0 http://docs.oasis-open.org/wsbpel/2.0/OS/wsbpel-v2.0- OS.html ?22? Enterprise Data Services in SOA using ODI Suite,  An Oracle whitepaper, 2009 ?23? http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/data- mining.html ?24? Data Mining Ontology (DMO) for Algorithm/Model Selection and Meta-Mining, http://www.e-lico.eu/?q=dmo, 2009 ?25? Mylopoulos John, Conceptual Modeling for Knowledge Management, Conceptual Modeling - ER 2009, 28th Proceedings,Gramado, Brazil, November 2009 ?26? Nelson K. Y. Leung, Seung Hwan Kang: Ontology-based Collaborative Inter-organizational Knowledge Management Network, Interdisciplinary Journal of Information, Knowledge, and Management, V.4., 2009.

