2010 International Conferenc e On Computer Design And Appliations (ICCDA 2010)

Abstract--Qntology learning is from a given area document sets automatic or semi-automatic extraction terms to construct a domain ontology. Area concept extraction is one of the most important aspects in building ontology. In this paper, we proposed an improved area concept extraction algorithm. In the algorithm, we firstly employed association rule algorithm to obtain the similarity between the sememes, and then used the similarity between the sememes to find the similarity between area concepts. Finally our paper achieves the whole area concepts extraction process. By analyzing the experimental results shows the effectiveness and correctness of the algorithm.

Keywords: area concept extraction; association rule; sememe

I. INTRODUCTION  Ontology learning is a technology that automatically or semi-automatically obtains terms from existing data sources to build ontology, including extraction concepts, obtaining constraints and properties. Among them, concept extraction in ontology building is the one of the most important aspects. At present, at abroad and home concept extraction is mainly three ways: linguistics-based approach, statistical? based methods and hybrid methods. Linguistics-based approach is mainly based on area concept having special lexical structures or templates. In this method searches for strings that meet specific template is very important; statistical-based method to identify area concept is mainly based on area concepts and common words having different statistical characteristics; hybrid approach is often combined linguistics-based approaches and statistical-based methods.

Most of them use single similarity calculation method and are not conducive to improving the accuracy of calculation.

In this paper, we have employed a new way to extraction concepts.

According to HowNet, concept is composed of sememe, and thus calculating the similarity between concepts could be by calculating the similarity between sememes. In this paper, using area concept extraction in Open Dictionary as an example introduced the conception of the area concept extraction and of association rule, and on this we proposed a new area concept extraction algorithm. The idea of our algorithm is to use multi-valued attribute association rules algorithm to calculate the similarity between sememes, and thus introduces the similarity between the area concepts.

Through analysis the result s in the experiment, this paper achieves the correct and efficient extraction of domain concepts.

Rui-qing Liu2 20verseas Chinese College, Capital University of  Economics and Business, Beijing, China E-mail: yangq@mail.ccnu.edu.cn

II. AREA CONCEPT EXTRACTION BASED ON ASSOCIATION RULES  A. Area Concept Extraction  Ontology Learning is from a given area of the document sets automatic or semi-automatic extraction area concepts, attributes and relationships between concepts to achieve ontology building. In general, ontology learning model has three modules: concept extraction module, relationship extraction module, and domain ontology library. Concept extraction module is the most important part in ontology building and the efficiency and correctness of the concept extraction directly impacts the efficiency of ontology building. At present, there are three main ways to extraction concept: (1) linguistics-based approach; (2) statistical-based method; (3)hybrid methods. The connection between area relevance degree and area accordance degree receives a nice effectrt 1. But there are still inadequate: too much reliance on filtering documents; the filter document quality has significant impacts to the accuracy of the area concept extraction. If the differentiation is not high many irrelevant concepts will be treated as the area concept to be chosen out.

According to How Net r21, we can see that sememes constitute concept. HowNet is an on-line common-sense knowledge base that describes o?iects with Chinese words and English words and reveals the relationships between the concepts as well as between attributes and attribute. As a knowledge system that it describes relations between concepts. HowNet attempts to construct a graph structure of its knowledge base from the concept relations and attribute relations. This is the fundamental distinction between How Net and other tree-structure lexical databases. In HowNet, there are two center terms: concept and sememe.

Sememe can be understood as the smallest unit meaning which is the most fundamental and difficult to be re? partitioned. In HowNet, a concept is described by a group of sememe and the similarity between the concepts is based upon the sememe meaning. there has defined a total of more than 1,500 sememes and all the Chinese and English words can be explain by one or more 1500 sememes. More than 1,500 sememes have been divided into 10 categories, each expressed by a tree structure. The sememe in each tree is superior-subordinate relationship, and the sememes in different trees form a network structure, associated each other by explaining the sememes [3].

2010 International Conferenc e On Computer Design And Appliations (ICCDA 2010)  In order to calculating the similarity between area concepts, our paper at first calculates the sememes which constitute of the concept.

B. The Basic Conceptions of Association Rules  Association rule mining is R.Agrawal who first proposed in the literature in 1993. Data mining association rule is one of the current main research modes. It focuses on identifying the data relationship between the different areas to find content the multiple dependencies between the fields under the given conditions. It describes a potential relationship rules between a set of data items in the database.

In general, association rule mining is from a large data set to find some association or relationship, that is, from the data sets identifying attribute values sets frequently appears, also known as frequent item sets, and then using these frequent sets create and describe association rules. It describes the models of the law between attributes occurred at same time [4].

Set 1= { I1,/z, ... ' In} is a collection of items, items known as the individual elements; the relevant data set D={ r;,r;, ... , Tm} is a transaction database, each of which is a collection of items made I ?T. Each transaction has a unique identifier denoted by TID.

Definition 1: If A, B is an item set, A c I, Bel and A n B= <P , then the expression of the form A ? B is called association rule.

Definition 2: The task-related items in the percentage of the total item is called the support MinSup, expression: MinSup(A?B) =P CAUB) .

Definition 3: Rules A ? B has credible C, that is the percentage of D contains A also contains an item B, expression: MinConf (A ? B)=P(AIB)  Definition 4: Supposed the minimum degree of support is MinSup, then in the D, k-frequent pattern set and the k non-frequent pattern set are defined as:  Lk ={ Al n ? n ... n Ak I Ai E I ,S( Al n ? n ... n AklD) ?MinSup; L=1-4. k  The rules which at the same time satisfy the minimum support threshold and minimum confidence MinSup threshold are called strong rules. Mining association rules is from a given data set D finding out association rules which satisfy the minimum support threshold and minimum confidence threshold. Supposed A,B is the item set in the data set D, if B c A then the support degree of A is greater than the support degree of B; if A c Band B is a non? frequent pattern set, then A is a non-frequent pattern set; if A c Band B is frequent pattern set, then A is a frequent pattern set.

C. An Association Rule Algorithm Based on Multi-Valued attribute clustering  In the ontology study, area concept extraction is extraction concepts which have field association with the given concept in the existing data source.

The task to find strong association rules can be divided into two sub-tasks: (1) finding out all frequent item sets in the data set D. (2) finding out strong association rules generated on the basis of the frequent item sets. The second step is the key to the algorithm which includes two steps: (1) generating association rules; (2) finding out a strong association rules. The way to find frequent item sets is mainly through determining the occurrence number of item sets in the data set D. The more the number of occurrences, the greater the possibility of frequent item set is selected.

Association rules mining can be divided into Boolean mining and multi-valued attributes mining. Multi-valued attribute can be divided into category attribute and number attribute and so on. Weather or not the relation between Multi-valued attributes exists mainly convert it to Boolean: " I " is yes and "0" is no. Clustering data mining algorithms is a non-supervised learning algorithm, that is, according to some similarity measure makes the samples with the same characteristics as a class. There is a smaller difference in similarity within class and biggest difference between classes rSl. The clustering algorithm includes division-based, level-based, density-based, grid-based and model-based and so on. Among them, the K-means algorithm based on division method is used widely.

The algorithm idea of K-means is as follows: Firstly, from n data objects selects arbitrary k data O1:>iects as initial cluster centers; according to the other o1:>iects similarity with cluster centers, assign them to their most similar clustering.

Then calculate cluster centers of each new clustering formed in the last step. Continuously repeats the processes until the standard measure function begins convergence. Generally use the Euclidean formula as a standard measure function.

Mining association rule algorithm based on k-means as follows: a) Conversion multi-valued attribute value in the data set D  according to the needs of cluster; Selecting m samples from D and assigning them to initial cluster  centers?j(j =1,2 ... m).

b) Using the Euclidean formula calculating the distance  between!, ( i= 1 , ... , n) in the D and the cluster center.

The formula is: d(li';) = ?(li - ;j)Z (1) c) Find out the distance between I; andCj , and move I; to  the corresponding clusters in which each item to c- has J  close distance. And form k results meets distance convergence.

d) According to formula (1) calculate the square error E(t) of all items in the D and compare with last square error E(t-l). If E(t)-E(t-l)<O, then tum b); Otherwise tum e).

e) Forming association rules; j) Extracting association rules.

V3-563 Volume 3    2010 International Conferenc e On Computer Design And Appliations (ICCDA 2010)  D. Area Concept Extraction Algorithm Based on Multi? value Attribute Association Rule  Algorithm Description: The user at first inputs area ontology concept sets; and then how to from existing data source efficiently and correctly extract area sets interested by the user is a core question we must solve.

The idea of the algorithm and steps as follows:  a) Supposed the candidate set of area concept D={ DI'D2, ? ? ?  , Dn }, D; ={ dl'd2 , ? ? ?  , dm } is the sememe set of the concept i;  b) User inputs area concept set G. Delete the same concepts from G which are similar with the concepts in D, gain G ' ;  c) Isolating sememe set named S; of concepts from G '  and given to cluster centers?j(j =1,2 ... m); d) Does association rule algorithm based on K-means on  S;, and gain association rule set based on sememe S; '.

e) Separation the source and target of the association rule in the set S; " and diverting sememes to concept.

Supposed concept set D; ={ dl, d2 , ? ? ?  , dm land G j =  {gl' g2 , ... , gm} are arbitrary concept node; Sim( D; , G . ) is the semantic similarity between D and G . . If } , } D and G. are the same node, then Sim=l; if D,. and , } Gj have no relations each other, then Sim=O. The formula of Sim as follows:  Sim( D,G)= 2xMax(depth(c,d )) (2)  I J Sim(c,d )  In the formula (2), C ED , dE G ( j=I,2, ... ,m; , ) i= 1,2, ... ,n ) , depth (c, d) is the depth of c and d in the sememe tree; Max(depth(c, d? is the maximum of depth (c)and depth (d); The sim(c,d) can be calculated by the association rule algorithm which we have listed in above.



III. EXPERIMENT ANALYSES  We at first input the area concept set GI = {grammar, language, automata, compilation},G2={Internet, software, hardware}, and convert the concepts in G into sememe. The Compiler Principle tutorial and the Computer domain in the Open Directory are used to candidate area concept set. We use Precision, Recall and FI test value as our testing tool to test the experimental results. The formula of Precision, Recall and FI test value is as follows:  Recall-rate=accurate concept number/ total number of tested concept (3) Precision-rate=accurate concept number/total number of extracted concept (4) Fl-test value = 2*Precision-rate*Recall-rate/(Precision-rate + Recall-rate) (5) For concept set GI we run the algorithm to extract area concept from the Compiler Principle tutorial. For concept set G2 we extract area concept from the Open Directory.

Partial experimental data is showed in the table.

In this table, UIA represents the area concept set user inputs; CDS represents the candidate data source. HEC represents extraction area concepts with hand. OLC represents extraction concepts with our algorithm.

T hI Ida ta a e 1 some expenmenta  VIA/CDS GlI Compiler Principle HEC 271  OLC/total 314/320  Precision 86.3  Recall 84.7  F I test val ue 85.5

IV. CONCLUSIONS  G2/0pen Director   73/76  90.4  86.8  90.0  Ontology learning is a technology that automatically or semi-automatically obtains terms from existing data sources to build ontology. The technology of extraction area concepts is one of most hot research in these days. Other area technologies such as Data Mining, Artificial Intelligence are used to concept extraction. In our paper, the algorithm is a method that association rule is applied to the area extraction. Combined with the sememe in the HowNet the algorithm largely improves the accuracy of the concept extraction and the stability. Due to the specificity of ontology learning task in this area there still have many issues to be resolved.

