The Technology for Automatically Generating Circuit-Debug Document Based On

Abstract- As many kinds of EDA tools are used in electronic circuit design, a technology for automatically generating circuit-debug document based on association rules is presented, for a variety of disadvantages existing in producing debug document. By automatically extracting the debug information of heterogeneous EDA design data, in depth mining the association rules among the different information while using the Apriori model, knowledge base is formed. When  intelligently reusing the debug information and utilizing the relevance among multiple debug document libraries, various types of circuit-debug document are generated automatically and quickly. The system with the presented technology has been already applied to electronic circuit design, which shows that the technology not only optimizes the circuit-debug process, but also improves the automaticity, accuracy, intellegence and normalization for generating document.

Keywords- association rules; Apriori algorithm; inteUigently reuse; heterogeneous EDA; automatic generation

I. INTRODUCTION  The most general design process includes integrated circuit chip design, electronic circuit design, PCB design and circuit simulation analysis [1-2], while various EDA softwares are used in electronic circuit design. Circuit-debug technical requirement and the related document preparation is the last work to do in electronic product designing, and it is an important step to decide whether the product finally meets the design requirement. However, the generation of the circuit-debug prepared documents is mainly completed by designers and technologists, who depend on their personal experience and common word processing softwares. The form and content of these documents vary badly from different workers, and it is hard to achieve efficiency, integrality, normalization and intelligence. When a large number of EDA design information can not be shared and reused, it will likely occurs the situation that the generated circuit-debug document disaccord with its standard, thus affects the debug effectiveness of electronic products. So how to rely on the specification for generating debug document, extract useful data from a mass of debug information, rapidly and normatively generating circuit? debug document such as circuit-debug syllabus, circuit? debug rules, circuit-debug process files, has become an important research area for the variety, changeful electronic products.

Currently, the research on automatically generating circuit-debug document is not perfect. There are some technologies for syllabus generation, but they have disadvantages of imperfect process, slow rate, without reusability and inheritability [1]. For the mass information of circuit-debug process, there is no effective method to dig out the implicate association and potential knowledge, being lack of intelligence.

After a deep study of mining algorithms and automatic generation technologies, a model for automatically generating circuit-debug document based on Apriori association rules algorithm is presented, and the model is validated in the end. The system with the presented technology has been already applied to the national defense research undertaken by the author, and attained remarkable achievements.



II. MODEL FOR AUTOMA TICALL Y GENERATING DOCUMENT  In the process of electronic circuit design, the designers use various EDA softwares to produce a series of design files, from the schematic, PCB layout, to the waveform, functional verification simulation diagram, BOM file and so on. These data files contain a large amount of designing, processing, debugging and assembling information, condensing the designers' skill and wisdom [3-4], which are supporting data for automatically generating document. The model for automatically generating circuit-debug document is shown in Figure 1. It mainly consists of three parts, automatically extracting and transforming heterogeneous EDA design data, mining debug information and forming knowledge base, module for automatically generating circuit-debug document.

By fusing a variety of heterogeneous EDA design files, automatically extracting the necessary design parameters, process parameters and debug information, the data is deposited into debug information database. Association rules are mined based on the Apriori algorithm, by retrieving valuable rules of the debug information and forming knowledge base. The related information is imported to document template, updating and expanding the knowledge base. To quickly and accurately generate the circuit-debug syllabus, rules, and process files, the relevance among multiple debug document libraries is utilized and the circuit? debug information is intelligently reused. Finally, the generating circuit-debug documents are normatively      managed and automatically stored, without manual intervention.

Import debug  mfonnatJOn expand and  update  knowledge base  store  syllabus  extract Heterogeneous  EDA design e+------? files  data  mining  update  import debug infonnation  expand and  update  knowledge base store rules  Technologist  * 9?------.J rapidly generating  circuit?debug rules  Technologist  quickly edit ruels  Figure I. Model of automatically generating circuit?debug document

III. TECHNOLOGY FOR AUTOMA TICALL Y GENERATING DOCUMENT  The circuit-debug document automatic generation is in support of heterogeneous EDA design data, in according with the debug document specification, making use of the Apriori algorithm for mining association rules, adopting intelligent reuse method. The specific steps of design and implementation are as follows.

3.1 Automatically extract and transform heterogeneous EDA design data  In electronic circuit design process, a variety of mainstream EDA design softwares are used, such as ProteI, Mentor and Power PCB. However, the design data is independent and closed, showing heterogeneous characteristics. Their file structures, data formats and parameter overview are different from each other, and "information islands" are formed. If the debug information can not be automatically extracted from the design file and be built into a uniform, complete debug document, the efficiency of generating document will be reduced. Therefore,  a variety of EDA design softwares are needed to be preprocessed, that is, fusing the heterogeneous EDA design data and automatically converting to the kind of data and format which the system can identify and manipulate. Then the data for the debug process is extracted as supporting data.

The process of fusing and extracting heterogeneous EDA design data is shown in Figure 2.

First of all, according to the reading heterogeneous EDA design files, distinguish the file type, in detail analyzing its document structure and specific data format. Develop heterogeneous conversion interface for each software, fuse the various files into a uniform intermediate file format and integrate the heterogeneous EDA design data. Then, automatically obtain and share design data from the intermediate file, such as circuit schematics, printed circuit board, the simulation waveform diagram, wiring diagram, BOM file and other information. That is, provide the original reference for quickly generating various debug documents, in order to uniformly deal with the data during the preparation of various documents, and they are automatically saved into the debug information database.

V3-532 Volume 3     Figure 2. The process of fusing and extracting heterogeneous EDA design data  3.2 Intelligently reuse debug iriformation The debug information database stores a lot of design  data automatically extracted by EDA, including debug project, debug equipments, equipment composition and inspection methods, and so on, and the inner relation between these data are hidden. When users generate documents under the wizard assistant, the computer need retrieval information in the huge database, which is very time-consuming [5-6]. Therefore, with the mass data stored in the historical database, the association rules between different debug information are needed to dig out, and then intelligently reusing them. In this paper, the Apriori mining algorithm is used to find out the association rules between different debug information.

3.2.1 Apriori algorithm  Set collection I = {iI, i2, ... , im} , the element is called item. Set D as a set of transaction T (T is a collection of items and T ? I). Each transaction has the corresponding identification, such as the transaction number is denoted as  TID. Suppose X is a collection of items in I , if X ? T, called transaction T including X .

An association rule is an implication shaped like X ---t Y , where X ? I , Y ? I and X (l Y = 0 .

The support of the rule X ---t Y in the transaction database D is the number of transactions including X and Y divide all transactions, denoted by sup port(X ---t Y) ,  namely sup port(X ---t Y) = IX (l YI / IDI The confidence of the rule X ---t Y in the transaction database D is the number of transactions including X and Y divide the number of transactions including X , denoted by confidence(X ---t Y)  namely confidence(X ---t Y) = IX (l YI / IDI. Given a transaction set D, the association rule mining is generated the association rules of which the support and confidence is bigger than minimum support and minimum confidence given by user [7-8].

In this paper, the Apriori algorithm is used for scanning debug information database, querying and traversing the previous data, finding out the association rules between different debug information, storing in the knowledge base.

Through repeatedly scans the transaction database, uses frequent (k -1 )-itemsets to find frequent k -itemsets, which is the association rules.

3.2.2 Generate knowledge base  There is vast debug information in the database which looks like irrelevant. According to the Apriori algorithm, the system makes correct analysis and decision on association between debug information, effectively discovery association rules and stores in the knowledge base, guide users to generate circuit-debug document rapidly and intellectually. There are about 200000 records in the debug information database, which means the size of transaction  is IDI =200000 , mainly includes six candidate itemsets, the project name (hereinafter referred to as A), equipment (hereinafter referred to as B), debug device (hereinafter referred to as C), debug method (hereinafter referred to as D), test method (hereinafter referred to as E), technical index (hereinafter referred to as F), etc. According to the different items in these itemsets, find out the association rules. The specific steps are as follows:  1. Looking for frequent itemsets from candidates According to the number of the item's records, first  determine the maximum number of frequent itemsets, and  then specifies the minimum support S . Set S=25% in this system.

(1). Generating I-dimensional frequent itemset Ll . All the candidate itemsets in this system are members of the  candidates C1, scanning the database and calculating the support of each item, the candidates belong to I-itemset  frequent itemsets if it is greater than S .

(2). Generating 2-dimensional frequent itemset L2 .

Join: C2 = L1ooLI. By scanning the database, calculating  V3-533 Volume 3     the support of each item in C2 ' 2-dimensional frequent  itemset L2 is determined, which is composed by the  itemsets with minimum support in C2 ?  (3). Generating k-dimensional frequent itemset Lk .

Join: CK = LK_looLK_1 ? By scanning the database, calculating the support of each item in, k-dimensional  frequent itemset Lk is determined, which is composed by  the itemsets with minimum support in CK .

(4). Algorithm is not terminated until Cn = <p(n > k), and find out all frequent itemsets.

TABLE I.

Rule ID Former I Capacitance (B)  2 Digital Oscilloscope (C)  3 Impact resistance tester (C)  4 Resistance (B) and digital multimeter (C)  5 Distributed debug (0) and system test (E)  . . .  . . .

In table 1 ,  accordmg to rule 1, CapacItance (the Item of equipment) and Digital capacitance meter (the item of debug devices) often appear at the same time in debug information database. Therefore, when a user inputs "Capacitance", we can directly hint the user inputs "Digital capacitance meter" in the corresponding debug device location. According to rule 5, Distributed debug (the item of debug method), System test (the item of test method) and Bare board technology (the item of technical index) often appear at the same time in debug information database, therefore, when a user input "Distributed debug" and "System test", we can directly hint the user inputs " Bare board technology " in the corresponding technical index location  The association rules found by the Apriori model will be automatically stored in the knowledge base. Using this knowledge, the system guides the users to select associated debug information quickly, intelligently reuse the independent debug information and improve the speed of generating circuit-debug document.

3.2.3 Intelligently reuse information  In this paper, through intelligently searching, regularly mining, adaptively expanding and updating the database, achieves information reused. The process of intelligently retrieving and reusing information is shown in Figure 3.

2. Generating association rules by frequent itemsets (1). In this system, specify the minimum  confidence C=40% ; (2). For each frequent itemset L , generate its all non?  empty subset;  (3). For the non-empty subset Q of L if Confidence (Q ? L -Q) ? C , then generate rule Q?L-Q  The specific association rules generated by this system are shown in table 1.

Association Rules  Later  Digital capacitance meter (C)  SMDdiode (B)  Impact resistance (E)  Denso requirements  Bare board technology  Is it the first time?

. . .

(C)  (F)  y  Support Confidence 0. 30 0.41  0. 36 0.62  0. 43 0. 56  0.29 0.44  0.45 0.71  . . .  . . .

Figure 3. The process of intelligently searching and reusing information  By mining debug information database through the Apriori algorithm, the system automatically store association rules in the knowledge base. According to the information  V3-534 Volume 3     inputted in the guide, the system dynamically executing intelligent retrieval, matching and extracting in the knowledge base. Then transfer the debug information to the template according to the association rules, and authentically reflect the data to the process of generating circuit-debug document. This method makes full use of association rules in large database, quickly generates circuit-debug file and maximally improves the users' input speed. If the debug information appears in the database the first time, it will be automatically stored in the database and adaptively expand the debug information. The system mines the debug information database periodically to find out the new association rules to update and expand the knowledge base, enhancing the system's intelligence and adaptability.

3.3 Automatic generation for circuit-debug documentation The document template is a shared file that presents on  the local host [9]. The process of automatic generation for a document is shown in Figure 4. The debug document template is customized relying on EDA design data, and then the designers and technologists query and select the document template in the database. The association rules stored in the knowledge base are imported into the template by the computer' auxiliary, dynamically modifY the inputted parts content of the document template.

Figure 4. the automatically generating process for circuit-debug document  According to the relationship between various documents in the process of debugging, the circuit-debug syllabus and interactive information are the basis of generating circuit? debug rules and circuit-debug process files, all kinds of debug documents under the same debug project debugger can linkage generated. The circuit-debug syllabus are quickly generated in the support of the knowledge base, and be made into the formal one by the designers' interactive modification and validation. Technologists use the relevant information of debug syllabus library and knowledge base, combine the debug process requirements, and generate the circuit-debug rules and circuit-debug process files automatically.

The circuit-debug document is automatically stored into the database after its generation, and managed normatively without manual intervention. Users can acquire the debug  information through accessing the document in the database.

Also they can edit and amend it by the simple and convenient word-processing environment.



IV. CONCLUSION  For a variety of disadvantages existing in producing circuit-debug document, such as low automation and poor standardization, a model for automatically generating circuit? debug document based on association rules is presented in this paper. By fusing heterogeneous EDA design files, design data is automatically extracted and stored in the debug information database, reusing the skill and experience of designers and technologists. The association rules among the debug information are mined by making use of the Apriori model, forming knowledge base. The circuit-debug information is intelligently imported into the document template. Various types of circuit-debug documents are generated automatically and quickly, utilizing the relevance among multiple debug document libraries.

The system with the presented technology has been already applied to the practical electronic circuit design, which shows that the model is efficient, practical compact and transplantable. The automatic technology is reasonably used for the traditional debug process which completed artificially, not only optimizes the circuit-debug process, achieves the automaticity, inheritance and normalization for generating document, but also greatly improves the accuracy and efficiency.

