Support driven opportunistic aggregation

Abstract?Association rule extraction is a widely used ex- ploratory technique which has been exploited in different contexts (e.g., biological data, medical images). However, association rule extraction, driven by support and confidence constraints, entails (i) generating a huge number of rules which are difficult to analyze, or (ii) pruning rare itemsets, even if their hidden knowledge might be relevant. To address the above issues, this paper presents a novel frequent itemset mining algorithm, called GENIO (GENeralized Itemset DiscOverer), to analyze correlation among data by means of generalized itemsets, which provide a powerful tool to efficiently extract hidden knowledge, discarded by previous approaches. The proposed technique exploits a (user provided) taxonomy to drive the pruning phase of the extraction process. Instead of extracting itemsets for all levels of the taxonomy and post-pruning them, the GenIO algorithm performs a support driven opportunistic aggregation of itemsets.

Generalized itemsets are extracted only if itemsets at a lower level in the taxonomy are below the support threshold. Experiments performed in the network traffic domain show the efficiency and the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

Index Terms?Generalized itemset mining, knowledge discov- ery, data mining techniques, network traffic data analysis.



I. INTRODUCTION  Association rule extraction [1] is a powerful data mining  technique to effectively discover correlation among data. As-  sociation rules are usually represented in the form A ? B , where A and B are itemsets, i.e., sets of data items. Each  rule is usually characterized by the support and confidence  quality indices [1]. The support is the probability of A and B  (i.e., its observed frequency in the dataset). The confidence is  the conditional probability of B given A and characterizes the  ?strength? of a rule. Since association rules identify pairs of  itemsets that are statistically related (i.e., frequently together in  transactions), they find application in a wide range of different  domains, including medical images [3], and biological data [6].

Association rule mining [1] is a two-step process: (i) Frequent  itemset extraction and (ii) association rule generation from fre-  quent itemsets. Research activity usually focuses on defining  efficient algorithms for itemset extraction, which represents  the most computationally intensive knowledge extraction task  in association rule mining [2].

The traditional itemset mining problem can be described  as follows. Given a dataset of transactions and a minimum  support threshold, find all itemsets whose support is above  the given threshold. However, such a threshold may prevent  E. Baralis, L. Cagliero, T. Cerquitelli, V. D?Elia, and P. Garza are with the Dipartimento di Automatica e Informatica, Politecnico di Torino, Italy {elena.baralis, luca.cagliero, tania.cerquitelli, vincenzo.delia, paolo.garza}@polito.it  infrequent, but potentially relevant, itemsets from being ex-  tracted, while enforcing a very low threshold makes the task  computationally expensive and the mined knowledge too large  to be analyzed.

This paper proposes a novel algorithm, called GENIO  (GENeralized Itemset DiscOverer) to support data analysis by  automatically extracting higher level, more abstract correla-  tions from data. GENIO extends the concept of multiple-level  itemsets [7], [10], [13] by performing an opportunistic extrac-  tion of generalized itemsets. The proposed algorithm exploits  a (user provided) taxonomy to drive the pruning phase of the  extraction process and efficiently extract generalized itemsets.

Instead of extracting itemsets for all levels of the taxonomy  and post-pruning them [7], the proposed generalization tech-  nique over the taxonomy is support driven, i.e., it generalizes  an itemset only if the itemsets at a lower level in the taxonomy  are below the support threshold. Thus, GENIO automatically  performs generalization only when needed to exceed the  support threshold. Furthermore, the proposed approach should  be exploited in every application context in which meaningful  taxonomies might be inferred from structured data sources  (e.g., network traffic analysis, context-aware applications).

GENIO has been designed by customizing the Apriori  algorithm [2] to efficiently extract generalized itemsets, with  variable support thresholds, from structured data. It has been  tested on network traffic data for two reasons: (i) A huge  amount of data may be collected in a short time, (ii) in very  large traffic network traces it is hard to detect correlations  among data and identify anomalies because of the excessively  detailed granularity of information (e.g., IP addresses). In  this context, the proposed generalization approach proves to  be particularly effective. Experiments, performed on different  network dumps, show the efficiency and the effectiveness of  the proposed algorithm.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II defines the  problem statement addressed in this paper. Section III de-  scribes the proposed approach for generalized frequent itemset  mining, where taxonomies are lazily evaluated to effectively  handle rare itemsets. Section IV discusses the experiments per-  formed to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm  in discovering frequent generalized itemsets in network traffic  domain. Section V compares our approach with previous  works. Finally, Section VI draws conclusions and presents  future developments of the proposed approach.

A. Motivating example  Consider an ftp server on port 21 having address  130.192.15.17. To describe the activity of a client     (154.125.3.2) connecting to this server, an itemset in  the form  (i) (source-IP-address = 154.125.3.2,  destination-IP-address = 130.192.15.17,  destination-port = 21) (sup = 1.15%)  should be extracted. Since such triplet is infrequent in a  very large traffic network trace, extracting this itemset would  require enforcing a very low support threshold, which makes  the task unfeasible. However, an opportunistic taxonomy eval-  uation may be more effective in mining valuable knowledge.

Suppose to set the minimum support threshold at 2%. A higher  level view of the network may be provided by the following  generalized itemset  (ii) (source-IP-address = 154.125.3.0/17,  destination-IP-address = 130.192.15.17,  destination-port = 21) (sup = 2.4%)  which shows a generalization of the source-IP-address at-  tribute (i.e., a subnet including IP addresses 154.125.3.0/17).

This itemset is characterized by a larger support which fulfills  the support constraint and shows that the subnet detected  by the generalization process is actually generating most of  the traffic. Thus, it provides valuable knowledge for network  monitoring. Furthermore, the number of different items (e.g.,  source-IP-address = 154.125.3.2) in network traffic may be  very large. Hence, itemsets at this detail level may provide  hardly interpretable knowledge. Our generalization approach  allows preserving a detailed view of frequent items (e.g.,  destination-IP-address = 130.192.15.17), while generalizing  at a higher taxonomy level infrequent items (e.g. source-IP-  address = 154.125.3.2).

Consider again itemset (i). If it would have support 2.15% instead of 1.15%, by enforcing the same minimum support threshold equal to 2%, the itemset becomes frequent, thus,  it is extracted since it provides valuable knowledge. Further  generalization steps to generate itemset (ii) are prevented  because they do not enrich the actual mined set anymore.



II. PROBLEM STATEMENT  Let T ={t1, t2, . . . , tn} be a set of labels, called attributes, which describe data features, and ?={?1,?2, . . . ,?n} be the correspondent attribute domains. An item is a pair ti = valuei which assigns value valuei ? ?i to attribute ti. The attributes may have either a categorical or a continuous domain. In the  case of continuous attributes, the value range is discretized into  intervals, and the intervals are also mapped into consecutive  positive integers.

In the network traffic domain, valuei are values captured  from the net (e.g., the IP address 130.192.15.17), and ti are the descriptions of the represented information.

A structured dataset D (e.g., network trace) is a collection  of records (e.g., network flows), where each record r is a set  of items and contains at most one item for each attribute in T .

Let I be the enumeration of all items in D, an itemset X ? I is a set of items. Each attribute ti may occur at most once in  X .

Fig. 1. A rewriting rule tree RRport for the source and destination port attributes  Over each attribute ti it is defined at most one pre-  determined hierarchy of aggregations over values in ?i. Each hierarchy is called a rewriting rule tree RRi. RRi is a tree  whose leaves are values in ?i, while each non-leaf node in the tree is an aggregation of its children, which may be further  generalized by its father. The root node aggregates all values  for attribute ti. The set of rewriting rules RRi defined over  the attributes of D is called taxonomy (?).

Consider, for example, the destination-port address at-  tribute. A simple rewriting rule tree RRport, defined over  the destination-port address attribute, is shown in Figure 1.

The RRport assigns well known if the destination-port value  is lower than 1024, registered if in the range 1024-49151,  dynamic otherwise.

A generalized item is a pair ti = expressioni, where ti is an attribute, ?i the correspondent domain, and expressioni a not-leaf node in RRi defining an aggregation value over  values in ?i. leaves(expressioni) ? ?i defines the set of leaf nodes descendants of expressioni in RRi. Usually the  quality of a generalized item ti = expressioni is measured by its support, which is the sum of the (observed) frequency  in D of leaves(expressioni).

A generalized itemset X is a set of items and/or generalized  items. Each attribute ti ? T may occur at most once in X . Its support is the (observed) frequency of X in D.

Given a structured dataset D, a minimum support threshold  min sup, and a taxonomy ?, the GENIO algorithm extracts: (i) All itemsets whose support exceeds min sup and (ii) all  generalized itemsets whose (a) descendants include at least an  infrequent itemset (i.e., a descendant whose support is lower  than min sup) and (b) support exceeds min sup.



III. THE GENIO ALGORITHM  GENIO discovers all frequent itemsets and all generalized  itemsets having at least an infrequent descendant. The gener-  alization process, driven by the taxonomy ?, is support driven, i.e., it generalizes an itemset only if it is infrequent with  respect to the mininum support threshold. The pseudo-code of  GENIO is given by Algorithm 1. GENIO implementation is  based on Apriori [2]. Apriori is a level-wise algorithm, which,  at each iteration, generates all frequent itemsets of a given  length. At arbitrary iteration k, two steps are performed: (i)  Candidate generation, the most computationally and memory    Algorithm 1 Generalized Itemset Discoverer Input: minimum support min sup, taxonomy ?, dataset D  Output: L, set of generalized frequent itemsets  1: k = 1, L = ? 2: C1 = set of items in D 3: repeat 4: scan D and count support for each c ? Ck 5: Gen = ? // generalized itemset container 6: for all c in Ck do 7: if support of c <min sup then 8: new gen itemset = taxonomy evaluation( ?, c ) 9: update Gen with new gen itemset  10: end if 11: end for 12: if Gen 6= ? then 13: scan D and count support for each itemset in Gen 14: end if 15: Lk = { itemsets in {Ck ? Gen} whose support ? min sup } 16: k = k + 1 17: Ck = candidate generation( Lk?1 ) 18: until Ck 6= ? 19: return L  intensive step, in which all possible k-itemsets are generated  from (k-1)-itemsets, (ii) candidate pruning, which is based  on the property that all subsets of frequent itemsets must  also be frequent, to discard candidate itemsets which cannot  be frequent. Finally, actual candidate support is counted by  reading the dataset.

GENIO approach follows the same level-wise pattern. How-  ever, it (i) manages rare itemsets by lazily evaluating the  taxonomy ? (lines 6-11), and (ii) exploits the characteristics of the structured datasets to effectively prune candidates (line 17).

Once the support of each candidate itemset in Ck has been  computed (line 4), generalized versions of infrequent ones are  generated by evaluating the taxonomy (line 8) and inserted in  the Gen set (line 9). In particular, by applying on each item  tj = valuej in itemset c the corresponding rewriting rule tree RRj , the generalized versions of each item in c is generated  (line 8). All the itemsets obtained by replacing one or more  items in c with their generalized versions are generalized  itemsets of c. Hence, the taxonomy evaluation on itemset c  potentially generates a set of generalized itemsets. The gener-  alization process of c is triggered if and only if c is infrequent  with respect to the mininum support threshold (line 7). Once  triggered, the generalization process is repeated until a com-  plete taxonomy evaluation has been performed. For example,  let (destination-IP-address = 130.192.15.17, destination-port =  21) be an infrequent itemset in Ck. By applying on destination  port the rewriting rule tree RRport shown in Figure 1 and on  destination IP address RRIP?address shown in Figure 2, the  following generalized itemsets are generated:  ? (destination-IP-address = 130.192.15.0/24, destination-  port = 21)  ? (destination-IP-address = 130.192.15.17, destination-port  = Well-known)  ? (destination-IP-address = 130.192.15.0/24, destination-  port = Well-known)  The insertion of redundant generalized itemsets (i.e., gen-  eralized itemsets previously generated by different infrequent  descendants) in Gen is prevented by the update procedure  in line 9. If the Gen set is not empty, the support of each  generalized itemset in Gen is computed by performing a  ID Number of records Number of different items  D1 18051 32143  D2 17374 30617  D3 16783 30072  D4 3802 9350  D5 2074 5825  TABLE I CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DATASETS  Fig. 2. A rewriting rule tree RRIP?address for the source and destination IP address attributes  further scan of the dataset (line 13).

During the candidate generation step (line 17), GENIO  exploits the uniqueness of attributes in a given record of a  structured dataset to further prune candidate itemsets (e.g., in  the traffic network domain a flow, i.e., a record of the network  trace, with multiple destination-IP-address cannot be defined).

For example, suppose that after the first dataset traversal, we  have m frequent 1-itemsets tagged source-IP-address and n  tagged destination-IP-address. Apriori exhaustive candidate  generation would produce (  m+n  )  possible combinations. Since  each attribute could appear only once in each record, only m?n 2-itemsets (obtained by combining one item tagged source-  IP-address and one item tagged destination-IP-address) are  relevant combinations. Hence, GENIO generates only this  subset of candidates. Thus, the required computational and  memory cost is reduced.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  We evaluated the performance of the GENIO algorithm by  means of a significant set of experiments which analyze (i)  the performance of the proposed frequent generalized itemset  miner, (ii) the number and relevance of the extracted itemsets,  and (iii) the algorithm scalability by varying the number of  transactions.

A. Experimental setting  Experiments have been performed on an AMD Sempron TM  2400+ PC with 1666 MHz CPU and 512 Mb main mem-  ory, Linux operating system. Five real datasets have been  exploited to validate the efficiency and effectiveness of the    (a) Execution time (b) Number of extracted itemsets        0  0.25  0.5  0.75  1  1.25  1.5  1.75  2  It e  m s e  ts c  o n  ta in  in g  g e  n e  ra li z e  d i te  m s (  % )  Minimum support threshold (%)  D1 D2 D3 D4 D5  (c) Aggregation impact factor  Fig. 3. Performance of the GENIO algorithm  GENIO algorithm. These datasets were obtained by perform-  ing different capture sessions using the open-source Network  Analyzer tool [11] on a backbone link of the campus network.

Captured traffic has been aggregated in traffic flows, i.e.,  records which summarize a group of similar and temporally  contiguous packets. Each flow is a transaction characterized  by six attributes: Source IP address, destination IP address,  source port, destination port, flow size (i.e., the size of the  flow expressed in byte), and number of IP packets aggregated  in that flow. We will refer to each dataset using the ID shown  in the first column of Table I. Table I reports the number of  records and the number of different items for each dataset.

The used datasets have significantly different characteristics  in terms of cardinality and number of different items. Dataset  ids are sorted by decreasing cardinality.

The taxonomy used in the experiments aggregates infre-  quent items according to the following rewriting rule trees. (1)  Source and destination ports are aggregated by exploiting the  rewriting rule tree shown in Figure 1, which introduces three  aggregation values (i.e., well known, registered, dynamic).

(2) Source and destination IP addresses are aggregated by  exploiting the rewriting rule tree shown in Figure 2. IP  addresses are aggregated in subnet if they are local to the  campus network. IP addresses which do not belong to the  campus network are aggregated in a more general external  address node. Furthermore, both the flow size (bytes) and  number of IP packets attributes are uniformly discretized in 4 bins, whose intervals are [1,1000), [1000, 2000), [2000, 3000),  and equal or greater than 3000.

B. Frequent generalized itemset extraction performance  To evaluate the proposed algorithm, the following issues  have been addressed: (i) Performance of the proposed gener-  alized itemset miner, in terms of execution time, number of  extracted itemsets, and aggregation impact factor, (ii) compar-  ison between GENIO and an optimized version of the well-  known multiple-level algorithm, namely Cumulate, proposed  in [13], in terms of time reduction and pruning selectivity.

1) The GENIO algorithm performance: Figure 3 shows the  execution time (Figure 3(a)), the number of extracted gener-  alized itemsets (see Figure 3(b)), and the aggregation impact  factor (see Figure 3(c)) yielded by the GENIO algorithm by  enforcing different support thresholds. GENIO execution time,  shown in Figure 3(a), is mainly due to the generalization  process and the dataset scans. While the first factor depends  on taxonomy features (e.g., number of aggregation levels),  the latter is proportional to the number of transactions. Since  the taxonomy exploited in the network traffic analysis is  characterized by few aggregation levels, the time spent for  dataset scans is dominant. Furthermore, the execution time  increases for larger datasets and lower support thresholds, for  which dataset scans require much more time.

Figure 3(b) shows the number of extracted generalized  itemsets by enforcing different support thresholds. When  support threshold decreases the number of mined itemsets  increases. For high support thresholds, the number of extracted  generalized itemsets is quite constant. When low support  thresholds are enforced, the number of generalized itemsets  significantly increases especially when the data distribution  becomes sparser (see datasets D4 and D5 in Figure 3(b)). This  effect is given by the high number of low frequency items  characterizing a sparse dataset. These items become frequent  when the mining process is performed by enforcing a low  support threshold.

We also analyzed the impact of the aggregation process on  the number of mined itemsets for each dataset. In particular,  Figure 3(c) reports the percentage of itemsets arising from  the generalization process with respect to the total number of  extracted itemsets by varying the minimum support threshold.

Since generalization is a support driven process, the number  of itemsets containing terms at higher level of the taxonomy  increases by enforcing higher support thresholds.

2) Comparison between GENIO and Cumulate: We com-  pared GENIO with our optimized implementation of Cu-  mulate [13], a traditional well-known generalized itemset  mining algorithm. Figure 4 shows the time reduction for  generalized itemset extraction yielded by GENIO with respect  to Cumulate. Experiments, on all considered datasets, have  been performed by enforcing different support thresholds.

Cumulate did not correctly terminate the extraction task on  datasets D1, D2, D3 for the lowest considered support (see  Figure 4). GENIO algorithm yields a significant reduction of          0  0.25  0.5  0.75  1  1.25  1.5  1.75  2  T im  e r  e d  u c ti o  n (  % )  Minimum support threshold (%)  D1 D2 D3 D4 D5  Fig. 4. GENIO w.r.t. Cumulate: Time reduction (%)          0  0.25  0.5  0.75  1  1.25  1.5  1.75  2  P ru  n e  d g  e n  e ra  liz e  d i te  m s e  ts (  % )  Minimum support threshold (%)  D1 D2 D3 D4 D5  Fig. 5. GENIO w.r.t. Cumulate: Pruned generalized itemsets (%)  the execution time for any considered datasets and for all  support thresholds. The reduction is mainly due to the support  driven opportunistic aggregation, which reduces the number  of extracted generalized itemsets (as shown in Figure 5), and  to the exploited strategy to further prune candidate itemsets  (see Section III).

To evaluate the pruning selectivity of our approach, we have  analyzed the corresponding percentage of pruned generalized  itemsets with respect to Cumulate. Since the GENIO algo-  rithm performs a support driven opportunistic aggregation of  itemsets, it extracts a smaller number of generalized itemsets  than Cumulate. Figure 5 shows the percentage of pruned  generalized itemsets for all datasets. GENIO yields a good  percentage of pruned itemsets for any considered support  thresholds. For high support thresholds, since the absolute  number of generalized itemsets is small (see Figure 3(b))  the corresponding percentage of pruned generalized itemset  is about 4%-6% (see Figure 5). For low support thresholds,  a high number of low frequency items become frequent.

Thus, the absolute number of generalized itemsets significantly  increases (see Figure 3(b)), while the percentage of pruned  generalized itemsets (see Figure 5) preserves its trend. Hence,  the GENIO algorithm significantly reduces the cardinality of  the extracted knowledge. The Cumulate algorithm could obtain  the same knowledge mined by GENIO only through a very  expensive post-processing analysis over a very large set of  itemsets.

C. Analysis of the extracted generalized itemsets  In the following we analyze the meaning of the extracted  generalized itemsets in the network traffic domain.

.1   .A .*   .1   .A .a   .1   .B .*   .1   .B .b   .1   .C .*   .1   .D .*   .1   .E .*   .1   .F .*   .1   .G .*   .1   .H .*   .1   .I .*   .1   .J .*   .1   .J .j   .1   .K .*   .1   .L .*   .1   .M .*   .1   .N .*   .1   .O .o   .1   .P .*   .1   .Q .q   .1   .R .*   .1   .S .*   .1   .T .*   .1   .U .*   .1   .V .*   .1   .W .w   .1   .X .*   .1   .X .x   .1   .Y .*   .1   .Z .*   .1   .A A  .*  S u  p p  o rt  ( %  )  Destination-IP-address  destination-port:well-known destination-port:registered  destination-port:dynamic destination-port:57403  Fig. 6. Support of extracted 2-itemsets for different destination IP addresses and ports  Figure 6 shows the support of the generalized 2-itemsets  in the form (destination-IP-address, destination-port) obtained  from dataset D1. For better visualization, results have been  restricted to addresses of the campus network. Thus, no  external IP address has been considered. The address is  automatically aggregated to the subnet when the single IP  address support is under the minimum support threshold (set  to 1%). Figure 6 provides a characterization of the traffic  on the campus network. Many extracted itemsets describe  general network features. For example, the first top supported  generalized itemset identifies the VPN concentrator of the  campus network.

Larger generalized itemsets (i.e., itemsets with more than 2  items) can be exploited to focus the analysis on specific traffic  behaviors. For example, the 4-itemsets (destination-IP-address  = 130.192.O.o, destination-port = 57403, source-IP-address  = x.x.x.x, source-port = registered-port), having support equal  to 2.3%, highlights an unconventional high-volume traffic  towards a specific host of the campus network, whereas the  4-itemsets (destination-IP-address = 130.192.A.a, destination-  port = registered-port, source-IP-address = y.y.y.y, source-  port = well-known), having support equal to 2%, identifies  connections to the VPN concentrator by means of a client  using well-known source ports.

D. Scalability  We analyzed the scalability of the GENIO algorithm with  respect to the cardinality of records on synthetic datasets gen-  erated by means of the TPC-H generator [15]. By varying the  scale factor parameter, tables with different cardinalities are  generated. We generated datasets of size ranging from 30,000  to 210,000 records with 12 categorical attributes. We mined  generalized itemsets from the lineitem table and we exploited  the part, nation, and region tables to define taxonomies on  line items.

Figure 7, which plots the extraction time for various sup-  ports, shows that the proposed algorithm scales well also for  large datasets. Since the number of extracted itemsets grows  for low supports (e.g., 1%), the process becomes computation-  ally more expensive. However, the overall CPU time is still  low, less than 7600 s for the lowest considered support and  largest dataset.

30  60  90  120  150  180  210  E x e  c u  ti o  n t  im e  ( s )  Number of records (x 1000)  minsup=1% minsup=2% minsup=5%  Fig. 7. Scalability on TPC-H datasets

V. RELATED WORK  The problem of generalized association rules was firstly  introduced in [13]. Given a dataset, where each transaction  is a set of items, and a taxonomy defined on the items,  generalized association rule mining consists in finding associ-  ations between items at any level of the taxonomy. Proposed  algorithms [13] generate generalized itemsets by considering,  for each item, its parents in the hierarchy. Hence, candidate  frequent itemsets are exhaustively generated by producing a  large amount of unnecessary item combinations.

One step towards a more efficient extraction process for  generalized itemset extraction have been proposed in [7],  [9], [12], [14]. [7] firstly proposes a top-down hierarchy  traversal, based on the Apriori principle, to efficiently identify  infrequent itemsets. When a more general term is infrequent  its descendants are ignored during the candidate generation.

However, appopriate support thresholds have to be enforced  to properly handle different data granularity in the taxonomy.

A more efficient approach, based on the FP-tree struc-  ture [8], has been proposed in [12]. First the FP-tree containing  all frequent multiple-level items is built. Then, frequent gen-  eralized itemsets are generated by using a divide-an-conquer  strategy as in FP-growth algorithm [8]. An ancestor list for  the items belonging to the currently mined itemset is exploited  to efficiently prune itemsets containing both an item and its  ancestor.

All the state-of-the-art approaches perform a similar exhaus-  tive taxonomy evaluation by extracting most of all possible  itemsets at all levels of abstraction. A huge amount of itemsets  is mined and valuable pattern discovery is, often, left as  post-processing step, limiting support threshold enforcement  effectiveness. GENIO aims at overcoming such an issue by  performing an opportunistic extraction of generalized itemsets.

It exploits a user provided taxonomy to drive the pruning phase  of the extraction process. Instead of extracting itemsets for all  levels of the taxonomy and post-pruning them, the proposed  generalization technique over the taxonomy is support driven,  i.e., it generalizes an itemset only if it is below the support  threshold. Thus, GENIO automatically performs generalization  only when needed.

A preliminary version of the GENIO algorithm was ex-  ploited in context-aware [5] and network traffic [4] domains.

The focus in [5] is on profiling users and services in a mobile  context-aware application, while in [4] is on the characteriza-  tion of stream network data. Both in [4] and [5], the GENIO  algorithm is shortly introduced as a tool to extract generalized  itemsets, while this paper thoroughly describes the GENIO  algorithm and extensively analyzes its performance both on  synthetic and real datasets.



VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  In this paper, we proposed the GENIO algorithm to effi-  ciently address generalized itemset extraction. An user pro-  vided taxonomy is exploited to merge rare patterns in more  general expressions. The behavior of the GENIO algorithm  has been tested on real network traffic data. The experimental  results show the effectiveness of the proposed approach in  discovering unexpected and generalized hidden knowledge in  network traffic data.

Future works will address (i) the extention of GENIO to  incrementally update the extracted knowledge when new data  become available, (ii) the exploitation of multiple taxonomies  over a single attribute, and (iii) the application of the op-  portunistic generalization approach to more efficient itemset  extraction algorithms (e.g., LCM v.2 [16]).

