Design of Software Security Detection System Based  on System Call Sequences

Abstract- The sequences of system calls can indicate the running  behavior feature of application software, so it can be used in software security detection. In this paper, by researching and analyzing system call sequences in the process of software execution, a software security detection system based on system call sequences is designed. Basic system call sequences are mined by association rules, and then they are transformed to equivalent call sequence set to build knowledge base for software security detection. The experiment shows detection capability of the detection system is better by sufficient training data.

Key words- Software Security, System Calls, Association Rules, Detection System

I. INTRODUCTION With the application of all kinds of software in various fields, security problem of software is more and more important. The purpose of software security detection is to detect security problem in software, and improve security performance of software. [1]  There are two detection approaches: dynamic detection and static detection. In dynamic detection, outside appearance of software execution is used to detect security problem. In static detection, the code of software and its inner structure are concerned more.

In dynamic detection, it is necessary to identify whether running features of a software, e.g. execution process, resource usage, authority variety etc., are uniform with those in the normal situation. [2] There are two types of information generated in the process of software running: one is the published information by operation system or software, e.g.

system running statistical information, program log, operation system log; the other is the information from interface of operation system, e.g. system calls, library function calls. [3]  It is usually easy to get the published information by reading log files or other files. But the information is less and its universality is not good.

On the contrary, it is complex to get the information from interface of operation system because some codes or module need to be added to the kernel of operation system. But the acquired data are accurate. There are two kinds of research methods in this field: analyzing system call sequences or library function call sequences. Researchers found that analyzing system call sequences to detect software security is  more available than analyzing library function call sequences.

[4]  In this paper, system call sequences in the process of software execution are researched and software security detection system (SSDS) based on system call sequences is designed. Moreover, we construct a detection knowledge base which can help the detection system to achieve detection function.



II. SYSTEM STRUCTURE Software security detection method in this paper is based on system call sequences and need to obtain system call sequences in the process of software execution. Only in kernel mode of operation system, system call sequences can be obtained, so we must modify kernel of operation system.

Linux is a open platform and its performance is better, so we designed software security detection system based on Linux 2.4.

The software security detection system (SSDS) consists of Data Collection Unit (DCU), Data Analysis Unit (DAU), Response Unit (RU), Management Unit (MU) and Knowledge Base (KB). System structure is shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Structure of software security detection system  A. Data Collection Unit Data Collection Unit is used to obtain information of application software calling system calls, so it will run as a part of kernel. There are two tables, IDT and sys_call_table, in Linux kernel based on X86. IDT is called interrupt vector table. IDT records the address of interrupt processing function and it is managed by operation system. When an interrupt appears, CPU will find corresponding processing function by IDT and execute it. In the computer based on X86, abnormal     and nonmaskable interrupt processing function are recorded in item 0 ? 31 of IDT, maskable interrupt processing function is recorded in item 32 ? 47, and software interrupt processing function is recorded in item 48 ? 255. In Linux, only item 0x80 is entrance of system calls and function system_call is put in. This function finds out actual system call processing function by another table sys_call_table. For example, when function open is called by a program of C Language, actual call process is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Process of application software calling system calls  In order to get information of system calls before function is processed, Data Collection Unit need to be inserted in IDT or sys_call_table. We modify all address of processing functions in sys_call_table to the address of data collection function.

Thus, when a system call is called by application software, data collection function will be executed firstly by kernel and then original processing functions are executed. So, data collection is finished. For example, when function open is called by a program of C Language, renewed call process is shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3. Process of application software calling system calls with data collection function  Data Collection Unit is designed as Linux Kernel Module (LKM). When the module is loaded, functions which need to be finished includes: backuping table sys_call_table, modifying table sys_call_table and renewing all item by ssds_collect, adding support /dev/ids. When the module is unloaded, functions which need to be finished includes: canceling support /dev/ids, restoring table sys_call_table.

There is a monitoring program table in Data Collection Unit which records process number of all program which be monitored.

B. Data Analysis Unit In order to make the software security detection system works normally, we need to train it firstly to generate the knowledge to knowledge base. In training mode, no detection is done by Data Analysis Unit. Data Analysis Unit read system call records from /dev/ids directly and write them to data file to generate detection knowledge for use.

When the software security detection system is used practically, the knowledge base is not empty. Data Analysis Unit will match system call records from /dev/ids and the knowledge in knowledge base. If mismatch degree is greater than a threshold, it will send alarm to Response Unit.

Data Analysis Unit must read data from device /dev/ids as soon as possible because storage space of the kernel is limited and Data Collection Unit can only save recent generated call records. Data Analysis Unit runs in user space and its storage space is relatively large, so reading data takes precedence of analyzing data.

C. Management Unit The software security detection system can finish software security detection function independently. Management Unit is used to manage and config the system and its management function includes: reading configuration file, starting and closing the system.

D. Response Unit The software security detection system can responses security events by Response Unit. Possible response includes: sending alarm to manager, restarting or closing software automatically, recording log, etc. Actually response method is configed in advance by manager according to essentiality and characteristic of monitored software. For example, when the detection system detect out abnormal FTP service software, it can restarting or closing the software directly. But for a Web or database service software, the system should keep it run unceasingly and inform the event to manager to treat with it.



III. CONSTRUCTING KNOWLEDGE BASE In order to construct knowledge base, basic system call sequences in program must be found firstly. Basic sequence is sub call sequence which appears frequently in the process of software execution. [5]  For the following codes:  f1; if(bar1){ f2; f3; } else { f4; f5; } f6;  Two system call sequences, ?f1, f2, f3, f6? and ?f1, f4, f5, f6?, can be generated. When the code segment is executed repeatedly, these two call sequences will appear frequently.

They represent two execution branch of the program, so they are basic system call sequences.

A. Obtaining Basic Sequence by Association Rule There is strong correlation among basic sequences. In order to obtain these basic sequences with strong correlation, association rules mining can be used. In this paper, we use Apriori algorithm to mine basic sequences from call sequences, and then construct knowledge base by these basic sequences.

[5]  ??1?'Constructing Call Itemset  First, by a sliding window whose size is N, system call sequences are decomposed to multiple shorter sequences whose length is N and form call sequence set. For example, when N is 3, call sequence set {abc??bcd??cde??def} can be generated by system call sequence ?abcdef?. We can obtain longer basic sequence by connecting two shorter basic sequences. Then, we combine call serial number and its position serial number for every sequence. Upon that, the sequences are transformed to item which can be used in data mining and the sequence sets are transformed to itemset. For example, call sequence ?abc? can be transformed to item ??a1,b2,c3? . Thus, the same system call in different position corresponds to different item.

??2?'Mining Association Rules by Apriori Algorithm  There are 3 steps to mine association rules by Apriori algorithm: ? Generate all frequent itemsets whose support is larger than the minimum support value. ? For each frequent itemsets, generate all rules whose confidence is larger than the minimum confidence value. E.g. for a frequent itemset L and its subset S(S ? L), if sup(L)/sup(L-S) ? the minimum confidence, the rule, L-S=>S, is an effective association rule.

? Transform the rule to basic sequence by its position information. E.g. the association rule ?a1, b2=>c4? can be transformed to basic sequence ?p1=a, p2=b, p4=c?.

??3?'Deleting Redundant and Invalid Sequence Based Axis Attribute  In call itemset, the 2nd to the Nth of a call sequence are the same with the 1st to the (N-1)st of the next call sequence. So there are some redundant basic sequences. Moreover, field knowledge has not been considered in basic Apriori algorithm, so there may be some invalid rules. Therefore, we delete redundant and invalid sequence by axis attribute and only remain those basic sequences which are relevant with axis attribute.

B. Constructing Knowledge Base by Basic Sequences Call relations can be reflected distinctly by basic call sequences. But it is not easy to perform matching operation.

So we need transform it to corresponding equivalent call sequence set. Every item in call sequence set is represented by regular expression. [5]  Call relations in Figure 4 is equivalent to 3 call sequences as follows:  Figure 4. An example of call relations  S1=?EN, C1, C2, PN, C3, EN? S2=?EN, C1, PN, PN, C3, EN? S3=[[S1]*[S2]*]+  There are several nodes and edges which record the relation of system calls in Figure 4. Each node represents a system call.

Pseudo node (PN) is single wildcard and it represents only one system call. End node (EN) is multiple wildcard and it represents 0 or more system calls. The edges represent successive call sequence. We can use serial number of system call to represent a node. [5]  The equivalent call sequence set represented by regular expression is the knowledge of the knowledge base.



IV. DETECTING PROCESS OF SOFTWARE SECURITY Firstly, we define mismatch degree as the minimum mismatch call number between actual call sequences and every sequence in equivalent call sequence set by regular expression. [5]  For example, there are call sequence set as follows:  S1=?EN, C1, C2, PN, C3, EN? S2=?EN, C1, PN, PN, C3, EN? S3=[[S1]*[S2]*]+  Suppose a call sequence, ?C1, C2, C2, C3?, is obtained in real running process. It can match either S1 or S2, so the mismatch degree is 0. If a call sequence ?C1, C2, C3, C4? is obtained. There is 1 mismatch between this sequence and S1 or S2, so the mismatch degree is 1. In normal situation, call sequences generated by software should match equivalent call sequence in knowledge base or has a very small mismatch degree. If mismatch degree is greater than a threshold, it shows software execution is not normal and security problem appears.

When the software which is detected calls system calls, system will be in kernel mode. Current system call number is obtained from kernel by Data Collection Unit and is transmitted to Data Analysis Unit. Data Analysis Unit performs match operation between current system call and call sequences in knowledge base and detect their mismatch degree. If mismatch degree is greater than certain threshold, it will inform Response Unit. After getting abnormal data, Response Unit will report to Management Unit by management interface and execute corresponding response operation.



V. CONCLUSION It is a main approach for operation system to serve for user by system calls, so there has great advantage to detect software security by analyzing system calls. In this paper, we design a software security detection system based on system     call sequences. In the system, basic sequences can be mined using system call sequences by association rules and can be transformed to equivalent call sequence set to construct knowledge base, and then software security detection function can be implemented. Experiment shows the software security detection system has better detection capability with enough training data and the veracity of detection result is higher by using appropriate mismatch threshold. So, the software security detection system is valid.

