Proceedings of the 8th

abstraction and traverse easily among different abstraction spaces [2].

The concept hierarchical structure defines a mapping sequence from low level/specifical concept sets to higher/more general level sets, from which association rules can be mined.

In philosophy, concept is defined as a thought unit composed of two parts: extension and intention. Based on this philosophical thought, Wille [3] proposed the formal concept theory to discover and disclosure concepts in 1982. Concept lattice, also called the Galois lattice, its construction is the precondition of formal concept analysis. Each node in the concept lattice is a formal concept, which is composed of two parts: external part is the instances covered by the concept; internal part is description of the concept which covers the common features of the instances.

Researchers use Hasse diagram to describe the generalization and the specialization of concepts.

Consequently, concept lattice is used in varies areas: information retrieval, software engineer and knowledge discovery, etc.

This paper is organized as follows: first introduces some definitions of concept lattice and multilevel association rules, and then compares two attribute induction methods: AOI and Concept lattice, and proposed an algorithm of construct concept lattice. In part IV, we generalized the actual medical data by concept lattice, and extract multilevel association rules from the Hasse Diagram.



II. BASIC DEFINITIONS  The basic definitions about concept lattice are introduced by many references [4, 5].

Def 1 Formal Context  Formal context is defined as a triple( U, A, I ) , U is a set of objects, A  is a set of attributes, I  is the binary relation between U and A . If ( , )x a I? , then xla  denote as object x  has attribute a .

Def 2 Concept of Formal Context }{* | , , I ,X a a A x X x a X U= ? ? ? ? }{* | , , I ,B x x U a B x a B A= ? ? ? ? If *X B? =  and *B X= , then we call ( , )X B is a Formal Concept or Concept. X  is defined as Extent  of concept, and B is defined as Intent of concept.

Def 3 Concept Lattice For Formal context, there is a unique partial-order set in relation I . This partial-order set produce a lattice structure, and this lattice L  induced by context ( U, A, I )  is called Concept Lattice.

Def 4 Super Concept and Direct Super Concept If 1 2 1 2( )X X B B? ? ? , then 2 2( , )X B  is called the Super Concept of 1 1( , )X B , or denote as 1 1 2 2( , ) ( , )X B X B? .

When 1 1 2 2( , ) ( , )X B X B? ,if 3 3( , )X B?? let 1 1( , )X B ?  3 3 2 2( , ) ( , )X B X B? , then 2 2( , )X B is called the Direct Super Concept of 1 1( , )X B . In Hasse diagram, it is presented as an edge.

Fig.1 Super Concept and Direct Super Concept  Fig.1 shows the Super Concept and Direct Super Concept, in which 4 4( , )X B is the super concept of 1 1( , )X B , but is not the direct super concept of 1 1( , )X B .

Def 5 Multilevel association rules Rules generated from association rule mining with concept hierarchies are called multiple-level or multilevel association rules, since they consider more than one concept level.



III. ATTRIBUTE INDUCTION BASED ON CONCEPT LATTICE  A. AOI method Attribute Oriented Induction (AOI), is a major method of attribute induction, which is first proposed in 1991 [6]. It is a knowledge mining method based on generalization, oriented relational database query.

The main thought of AOI is: use database query collect task-related data; then generalize each attribute by inspecting numbers of different value, construct corresponding concept hierarchy tree by relevant background knowledge. In generalization, if under the threshold, the lower level concept will be upgrade to a higher level along the concept tree and finally translate the results into logical rules. Each attribute has only one generalization path from the bottom to the top of the tree.

Medical data have the specific characteristic that some diseases have low concurrency now, but will have high concurrency after a period of time. AOI method always ignores the instances whose concurrencies are under the threshold. This can ignore new diseases concurrency instances, which may increase fast in the not too distant future.

Then it will delay the observation of association rules between these diseases.

Therefore, AOI induction method has some shortcoming when executes medical data. The obvious problems are as follow: (1) Threshold setting: improper threshold setting will not upgrade to appropriate conceptual level. High threshold may miss the meaningful association rules in low level; low threshold may get quantities uninteresting rules which are hard to understand by users.

(2) Complex multi-layer relationship and multi-potential relationship of multi-attributes, is hard to induct by AOI method.

B. Attribute induction based on the Concept Lattice In attribute induction process, concept lattice always keeps complete data information, not replacing attribute values by higher concepts [7]. Consequently, it can avoid losing useful information during the induction process; meanwhile, it can display the multi-layer or multi-potential relationship of attributes. So, it is an effective method to extract association rules from medical data.

The main strategy of the attribute induction algorithm based on concept lattice is: discretize attributes in the medical database; construct the concept lattice and Hasse diagram; users select interesting attribute set _In a  from the relational database, and then extract association rules from the Hasse diagram.

C. Construct Algorithms of Concept Lattice Different construction of concept lattice can derive a unique lattice for the same data. Many algorithms have been proposed for generating the concept lattice from a binary relation. The algorithms are generally divided into two types: batch and incremental. Bordat [8], Ganter[9] and Nourine[10] proposed different batch algorithms to construct the concept lattice.

Incremental algorithms can actively adjust the concept lattice and Hasse diagram with new objects. When a new instance is occurs, the algorithm only adjust the corresponding parts, and not reconstruct the concept lattice from scratch. So, for active data, incremental algorithms are more efficient than batch algorithms and the typical incremental algorithm is proposed by Godin[4].

