Notice of Retraction

Abstract-In this paper a method for improving potential consumption of product optimum combination is presented.

Which using association rule to analyze the historical sale data to calculate the significant association of products. And then reduce the range of associate products and find out the optimal product combinations by using markov transition matrix to analyze the customers consumption tendency. Finally, this paper raised an example to certify the theory.

Keywords-association rule; markov transfer matrix; classification;

I. INTRODUCTION  In the furious competition market, any information related to customers is very important to business managers.

In front of massive commodity transaction information, how to find out the customers' consumption tendency, and then discover and obtain customers is necessary to enterprises[l].

In recent years, Data Mining Technique is widely used in marketing area, it has became the important method in gaining customer knowledge, supporting marketing decisions. We can attain much valuable and utility information from enormous data by using Data Mining Technology[2].

In actual trade, customers will not tell you when they would leave or he/she will buy which kind of products[3].

Any enterprise will make focus on how to increase profit by using current information resource. There are many methods to increase profit. Paper [4] uses cluster analysis method to enable researchers to understand the differences of major functions of quality systems at different stages, and give the method to adopt any obstacles that they will meet. Ming? Chyuan Lin[5] et al. gives a approach combined AHP and TOPSIS to classify the the customers. ZhaoHua[6] et al. used boosting idea to optimize the decision tree algorithm and gives a reasonable data ming process to obtain potential customer.

On the basis of data mining theory, this paper puts forward a reasonable data minging method which combined association rule and markov transition probability matrix to analyze the charcatiristics of customer purchasing behavior, which can minimize the range of related products, used to determine the optimal sales combination. This method can improve potential consumption capacity of consumers and can increase companies' income.

Han Jingyao College of economics and management  Heilongjiang Institute of Science and Technology Harbin, China  hanjingyao@163.com

II. PRODUCT OPTIMAL COMBINATION MODEL  A. Sequence combination method From the view of data mining, customer consumption  behavior analyze can be assigned to classification problem.

Paper [7] gives two kinds of combination classification: sequence combination and parallel combination. Sequence combination series two or more method models, the target values of the latter classifier come from the results which former one calculated; parallel combination parallels several classifiers, parallel combination shunt several classifiers, under the condition of given input parameters, every classifiers give respective classification results, then use combinatorial algorithm obtains the final classification result.

In this paper, we combine association rules and Markov transfer matrix to classify customers.

B. Association Rule Association rule is put forward by Rakesh Agrawal first,  and it becomes a important subject in the data minimg field.

The basis of association rule is basket analysis. The products in the basket always have internal connection. Through analyzing the sale data, we can know the potential relevance in the basket. Because the sale data comes from customer relation point, so the quality of the data for market basket analysis is low usuallyl'8]. Before mining, the data should be clean, association rule just used for discover the significant correlation in the customer purchase behaviors preliminary.

In general case, the problem should be studied from two aspects: complexity and correlation. The complexity of rule is used for count the number of terms, the more the terms, the bigger of the complexity. Under the existing condition of cettain complexity, we consider the correlation of products.

The size of relevance depends on the support threshold and confidence degree of products. Assuming that  I = {ip i2 , ... , im} is the set of m different object, and given a sale database D ,  T is the subset of I, association rule can be understanded as X ? Y , where X, Yare all the subset of I, and also X n Y = ? .

(I)We define that S as the support threshold of X ,if the percentage is s% in D  (1)    m is the total trade amount, Xi is the trade amount where  i appeared in D .

(2) We define that C is the support threshold of  X ? Y , if the times Y appeared in D which is also appeared in X  c.. = Yj  lJ X. I  Yj stands for the count of j where i also appeared.

(2)  If the confidence degree of rules exceeds the min confidence degree, we can conclude that the rule has a strong association; and what we should do is to find out the strong association in the data.

In order to enhance the persuasion of analysis, we advanced some assumptions as follows:  Al Ignore the influence of climate, time and season A2 There is no once buying behavior A3 Do not think of the factor of sex, age and state A4 Ignore the influence of decision time  C. Markov process Markov process is a widely used method which takes an  important role random process. The kinetic disciplinarian of a Markov chain lies on the Markov transition matrix. Markov chain decision method appears in many fields, Zeng Yi? feng[9] et al.use Markov blanket induction algorithm to improve the classification performance.ln paper [10], Su Tao et al. give a new method to solve the proble of apital assert price, they use Markov process to decrease market risk and the result shows that the method is feasible. Yan Wei and Qian YU_yu[ll] use a.a.markov rolling forecast Method to provide a direction of the rational management in estate business. And no varying is the most notable features. In order to To facilitate the description, we cite the definition and nature of Markov as follows:  Definition 1 Given that {Xn , n  E N+} is a random  sequence, N+ = {O,1,2, ... } is a time set, and the estate set is J = {al,a2 , ??? ,} , we defines {Xn , n  E N+} is a  Markov chain, if any n E N+ and where  = P{Xn = ain I Xn_1 = ain_) Definition 2 We define {X n , n E N+} as  homogeneous Markov chain, if any k -times transition probability P J k) ( m ,  n) always independent on m ,  and  any k -times transition probability can be decided by once transition probability 0  Once transition  Pij =P{Xm + 1 =jlXm =i} ,  matrix is  probability  i,j E J .The is  transfer   P = PJk) (i,j E J) And it has a property:  i = 1,2 ... n j=1  (3)  (4)  In the Markov process, it is available that the probabilities in the similar production can transfer to each other, and it is impossible to transfer in different kinds. So we assume that:  A5 Customers always buy the relative products, and the non-relative products can be dismissed. The non-correlation product can be ignored. The correlation in independent products is O. The purpose of this article is finding out the optimum combination in different products, so we also assume that the correlation of self-dependent products is O.

A6 The correlationship of products is irreversible, e.i. the correlated value of A->B is different from B->A.



III. MARKOV ASSOCIATION MATRIX  At first, we should select and tidy the sale data. We use equation (1 ) to find out the correlationship during the products, and ascertain the target which have the high correlation. And then use equator (2) to set the value of reliability. In this paper, we use binary reaction behavior model analyse[12] to express, ie. 1 means that the products have correlation and 0 means not.

Because the cardinal number of different products is different from each other, which can't meet the demand of equation (4), so we should normalize the target data by theequation:  n i = 1,2 ... m (5)  L Cij j=1  Calculated by equation (5), the initial tranSItIon probability matrix emerged and it can meet the qualification of closed diffuse.

In order to simplify explaintion, we introduce the conception of first arrive, calculate the probability from one condition to the next one:   lij = Lit) n=1 (6)   In which 1",;; = " p .. p ..... p. . when 1". = 0, it J!, ?.oJ lJl lth In-Il J ij j,oF j I';;s';;n-I  express that from condition i can't arrive condition j; when lij = 1 , it means that from condition i do arrive condition j . And at that that time , we shoule compute the average cycle from i to j by equation (7).

flij = L nlij n  (7) n=1    Especially, when i = j, J.1i means the cycle period of i .

After calculation, the association becomes more lumped.



IV. EXAMPLE ANALYSIS  In practical commodity transaction, we should analyse the data in order to find out the correlationship during different products. We give a simple sample to explain process of calculation.

We choose 100 purchase records from sale data at random, and use equators (1) and (2) to process and find out the significant correlation. The results of support threshold and reliability is showed in table 1.

TABLE 1. TABLE I STATISTICAL RESULTS OF SUPPORT THRESHOLD AND RELIABILITY  Support Reliability(% ) threshold(% ) A B C D E F G  A 60 0 70 61 40 43 28 63 B 60 73 0 50 41 39 46 76  C 50 78 67 0 45 39 27 65  D 40 55 40 48 0 70 33 45  E 40 57 51 40 67 0 32 53  F 30 47 76 36 42 42 0 52  G 60 68 80 55 53 43 33 0  We set that Si > 50, Cij > 70 and select the objectsA,B,C,G to give a example which can meet constraint, and the estate set is I = {1,2,3,4} relatively. The sequence of number is showed as followes:  0 70 61 63  p'= 73 0 50 76  78 67 0 65  68 80 55 0  We use 0, 1 method to standardize the sequence of number, and use equator (5) to normalize the sequence and establish the initial transition probability matrix:  p=  0 1 0 0  112 0 0 112  1 0 0 0  0 1 0 0  After establishing the Markov transfer matrix, we use equator (6) to compute the probability from the initial state to the terminal state.

Take h I for example:  h', = PII = 0  2 1 1 hI = P12P21 =1x-=-  2 2   I 2 I 1 hI =h, + hI + ... + hI =-  So we can calculate that finally matrix by using the  equator (6)      1 0  1 0  o 0  1 0  o    o  From above calculation results, we can conclude that, state 12,22,21,42,34 all can arrive stable state, but after the further calculation by equator (7)  J.112 = 1  J.122 = 2  J.131 = 1  J.142 = 1 J.134 = 3  We can see that the transfer cycle of state 12, 31, 42 are all 1, the cycle of 22 is 2, and the cycle of 34 3, so state 12,31,42 can arrive the stable state more easily. So at actual market selling operation, we can binding commodities AB, A C, BD to sale together.



V. CONCLUSION  In this paper a model combined association rule and markov transition matrix has been presented. Searching over the history sale data, optimum combination of products for promote consumption has been built. The association rules used to explore the obvious association of products, and markov transition matrix is usde to estiblish the product combination. By using the new model, the income of company can be incresed quickly.

