

Proceedings of the 8th  World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation July 6-9 2010, Jinan, China                                                           A Novel Intelligent Fuzzy Agent Based on Input-Output Association    Hui Li 1, 2 and Qinfan Zhang1  Peiyong Duan1 ]School of Control Science and Engineering  1School of Information and Electrical Engineering  Shandong University Shandong Jianzhu University 2 School of Thermal Energy Engineering  Ji?nan 250101Shandong, P. R. China  Shandong Jianzhu University duanpeiyong@sdjzu.edu.cn Ji?nan 250014, Shandong, P. R. China  lhh@sdjzu.edu.cn qfzhang@sdu.edu.cn  Abstract - The inhabited environments are MIMO, uncertainly, and nonlinear complex systems. This paper presents a novel intelligent fuzzy agent(IFA) based on input-output associational algorithm for intelligent inhabited environments.

An input-output dynamic associational algorithm based on Hebb learning is proposed, which can divide a complex system into multiple simple systems and eliminate the irrelevant data from the learning data to improve the learning rate. The IFA learns the user?s preferences according to the manually operation of the user and proactively controls the environments. Initially the IFA extracts the membership functions and fuzzy rules from the data captured. After that the IFA learns the membership functions and optimizes the fuzzy rules online when the user?s preferences change. The experience results show that the proposed system is effective.

Index Terms ?Intelligent inhabited environments, Hebb rule,  Fuzzy, Learning

I.  INTRODUCTION  The inhabited environments are constituted by building objects (such as lighting, HVAC and other equipments). The intelligent inhabited environments are living spaces equipped with embedded intelligent technology that would gather information from sensors (and other computers) and make decisions according to intelligent methods. The intelligent inhabited environments have the characteristics of ubiquity, transparency and intelligence[1]. It is hard to build the mechanistic models for inhabited environments due to the fact that the inhabited environments are MIMO, uncertainly, and nonlinear complex systems. So it is vital to build the mathematical models according to the input-output data captured from the systems. This paper proposes a novel fuzzy control system which is build according to the input-output data and embedded in the intelligent agent. The system can learn the user?s preferences online according to the users? manually operation and proactively control the intelligent inhabited environments. However, if the dimensions of inputs and outputs are great, the complex of model will increase greatly.  In literature [2], the fuzzy agent learned the fuzzy rules according to all the inputs and outputs, which leaded to  larger fuzzy rules. To a really MIMO complex system, generally not all the inputs associate with the outputs. For example, the temperature information indoor is useless for light control in intelligent inhabited environments. Hence, finding the most relevant associations between inputs and outputs is very vital that will eliminate the unnecessary and redundant associations. A dynamic associational algorithm for MIMO based on Hebb[3] is proposed, which can divide the complex environment system into multiple simple sub- systems and eliminate the irrelevant data from the learning dataset to improve the learning rate. The presented intelligent fuzzy agent can learn the user?s preferences online according to the user?s manually operation and proactively control the intelligent inhabited environments. The presented methods can maximize the environment?s comfort and reduce the human machine interaction, while reducing the computational and communication complexity.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the adapting intelligent fuzzy agent. Section 3 presents the dynamic associational algorithm of input-output.

The experiments and results will be present in Section 4.

Finally, section 5 will summarize the work.

?. INTELLIGENT FUZZY AGENT  Fig. 1 is the control block diagram of the intelligent fuzzy agent (IFA). When the user manually operates the corresponding actuators that modulate the environment state variables like temperature, humidity, and intensity of  Fig. 1 The control block diagram of the IFA  X Y  Fu zz  ifi ca  tio n  D ef  uz zi  fic at  io n  Inference mechanism  Manual controller  Knowledge base  Input-output association  Actuator Environment  This work is supported by Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (Y2008G07), Science and Technology Program of Shandong Province (2009GG10001029), and Key Program of Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2009GZ004).

illumination for desired values, the IFA records the current state information, learns the user?s preference according to the operation, and then modifies or adds fuzzy rules. The IFA includes four phases: (1) Capturing and associating input- output data. (2) Extracting fuzzy rules. (3) Agent control.

(4) .Modifying fuzzy rules online.

A   Capturing and Associating Input-Output Data  The input and output vectors of the IFA can be defined as 1 2[ , , , , ]i nX x x x x=  and 1 2[ , , , ]j mY y y y y= respectively, 1, 2, ,i n= ; 1, 2, ,j m= . The states of the devices used to control the environmental comfort initially are off. When the user overrides the actuators, the agent records the data of the sensors and actuators and acquires an item learning information. The associational weights of input- output are calculated at the same time. After a period of time the IFA has captured enough input-output data  { }, , 1,2,k k kZ X Y k N= = . Due to the fact that the multi- input multi-output fuzzy rules can be divided into multiple multi-input single-output fuzzy rules, ultimately, the learning data can be divided into m learning subsets based on input- output associational algorithm   B  Extracting Fuzzy Rules  Multiple fuzzy rule sub-bases can be extracted according to the multiple data subsets. Supposing the first data subset is  { }1 1 1 1, , 1,2,k k kZ X Y k N= = , 1 1 2 1[ , , , , ]i nX x x x x=  , 1 1Y y= , which means there are 1n inputs associated with  the 1y . The extraction of one fuzzy rule sub-base is as follow.

1) Membership Function Construction: The learning of membership functions adopts fuzzy clustering method. The FCM[4] is a good fuzzy clustering method for the central value learning. Firstly confirming the domain of discourse [ximin,ximax] of the input output variables, then making normalization.

min  max min  i i i  i i  x xx x x  ?= ?  ?1?  The multidimensional space is simplified into multiple single dimensional spaces for the sake of simplifying algorithms. The clustering number of every input and output variables general is five or seven. The input-output data are clustered based on FCM fuzzy clustering method, and finally the clustering centres are acquired. The mathematical algorithms of the FCM are    1 1  ( ) c N  m m ji j i  i j  J x w? = =  = ???                  ?2?  ?  ?  =  == N  j  m ji  N  j j  m ji  j  x w    )(  )(  ?  ? ?3?  ( )  ( )  ? = ?  ?  ?  ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ?  = c  i wx  wx  ji m  ij  m  ij         ?                       ?4?  Where, mJ is the clustering criterion function. jx  is the normalized data space, 11, 2, ,j N= . iw  is the clustering centre, ci ,,2,1= . ji? is the membership function value  from jx to iw , and 1  =? =  c  i ji? . ),1( ??m is the fuzzy  index, let 2m = . After the FCM clustering, the clustering centres of every dimension are acquired. Gaussian membership functions are used to describe the fuzzy sets, so the clustering centres are the central values of the membership functions. The standard deviation i?  for each Gaussian membership function can be calculated as follows:    2 ln i j ij  ij  c c ?  ? + ?= ?  ?5?  Where, ? is the maximum overlap between two adjacent fuzzy sets.

2) Rule Construction: The fuzzy rules adopt Mamdani model[5] in the following form.

Ri:  If 1x is 1 iA  and 2x  is 2  iA and?and 1nx  is 1 i nA  then 1y  is 1 iB  Where, 1, 2, ,i l= , i is the index of rules and l  is the number of rules.

The extracting method of fuzzy rules is based on Mendal- Wang[6].

To one input-output data pair { }1 1,X Y , calculating the membership function value ( )q  i iA  x? of every input variable,  for each membership function jkq ,,2,1= .

Let * 1 2( ) max{ ( ), ( ), , ( )}q k j  i i i i i i i iA A A A  u x u x u x u x= , one  fuzzy rule is generated as follows: If 1x  is  * qA  and?and 1nx is 1  q nA  * then y is y .

If the number of data pairs is 1N , then the 1N  fuzzy rules  will be generated. However, some of them are redundant, and some of them are contrary. Here the fuzzy rules are divided into multiple groups. One group includes the fuzzy rules that     have the same antecedent. We assume that there are l groups, and group P has pN  rules in the following form:  If 1x  is *  qA  and?and 1nx is 1  q nA  * then 1y is  1y If 1x  is  * qA and?and 1nx is 1  q nA  * then 1y is  1y   If 1x  is *  qA and?and 1nx is 1  q nA  * then 1y is 1 pNy  The weights of the rules are computed as  *   ( )q i  n j j  iA i  w u x =  = ? , 1, 2, , pj N= . Then      p  p  N j j  jp N  j  j  w y y  w  =  =  = ?  ? ?6?  py is the output of the p group. Let  * 1 21 1 1 1( ) max{ ( ), ( ), , ( )}q k j p p p p  B B B B u y u y u y u y= ,  *qB is the selected Linguistic variable. Then the p group fuzzy rules can be combined into a single fuzzy rule.

If 1x  is *  qA  and?and 1nx is 1  q nA  * then 1y is *qB  Ultimately the 1N  fuzzy rules can be combined into l fuzzy rules.

C  Agent Fuzzy Control As mentioned above, the IFA has learned the user?s preference and extracted the fuzzy rules according to the input-output data pairs captured. Next the IFA can proactively control the environment based on the user?s desires. The fuzzy control adopts singleton fuzzification, max-product composition, product implication, and height defuzzification.

The relation of input-output is as follow:   *  1 1  *  1 1  * ( ) ( )  ( )  nl p q  i i p i  nl q i i  p i  y A x y x  A x  = =  = =  = ? ?  ?? ?7?  Where, *py is the maximal value of the corresponding fuzzy membership function.

D  Online Adaptive Learning Algorithm The user?s preferences usually change over time, so the IFA needs to continually learn the changes of the user?s preferences. If the IFA does not meet the user?s desires, the user will manually operate the corresponding devices. At the moment, the agent records the states ),( yx  of sensors and actuators. For the sake of avoiding the impulsion or the wrong action, the agent begins the learning process when the same  records are twice. The weight of every rule is calculated based on the membership function values of the input linguistic variables. If 0iw > , the rule is fired. If the user?s manual operation is y , let  * 1 2( ) max{ ( ), ( ), , ( )}q kjB BB Bu y u y u y u y= .

The online adaptive learning algorithm is as follows:  (1) If manual operation = 1, record the input-output data P and fuzzificate them.

(2) For each fired rule R, compared with the rule P, if the rule R = rule P, then increase the degree of R. If the antecedents of rule are the same as the consequents of rule are different, then decrease the degree of the rule.

If the degree of R is zero, then remove the rule R.

(3) If all the fired rules are different with the rule P, then add a new rule. Calculating the maximal membership function values * ( )q  i iA  u x and * ( )q j  jB u y  of the input-  output variables, then the new fuzzy rule is as follow.

If 1x  is  * qA  and 2x is  * qA and?and 1nx is 1  q nA  *  then 1y is *  qB .

If the degree of one rule decreases to zero, the rule has no effect on the system and is removed. This keeps the rule base small and simple.

III   DYNAMIC ASSOCIATIONAL ALGORITHM  Here, taking the environment system as a black box, the inputs of the system are the states of the environment. The outputs of the system are the inhabitants? actions. Conforming all the input variables and output variables in intelligent inhabited environments, let ],,[ 21 nxxxX = and ],,[ 21 myyyY = . Here, X  is the input vector.Y  is the output vector.

On the basis of the Hebb network, the intelligent associational weight matrix algorithm is as follows.

Step1: Initiate the associational weight matrix w , set 11 12 1  21 22 2  1 2   m  m  n n nm  w w w w w w  w  w w w  ? ? ? ? ? ?= = ? ? ? ? ? ?  .

Step2: Initiate the input association flag vector 0],,[ 21 == nxxxX ???? , initiate the output association flag vector 0],,[  ==  nyyyY ???? , and  initiate the learning rate 1.0=? .

Step3: In the occasion of generating one event, updating the  flag bits of inputs changed from 0 to 1. For example, if ix  and  jx  changed while the others remain consistently, then     0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  TI  TO  PB  LI  LOPC  Fig 2 Association curves of  the different inputs to AC  set 1=xi? , 1=xj?  and the other bits remain 0. At the same time, updating the flag bits of outputs changed from 0 to 1.

Step 4: Calculate the new associational weight values, the formula is as follow:  Y T  X kk ww ???? +?= ?1)1(                   (8)  Here, 1?kw  is the associational weight matrix of last time.

0 1?< <  is the forgetting factor. If the value of?  is great, it is easy to forget the old information and remember the new information. Adding forgetting factor in algorithm can prevent the associational weights calculated to increase endlessly.

When an association are strong at the beginning and decrease over time, the corresponding associational weight value might decrease over time.

Step 5: Reset 0=X? , 0=Y? , return to step 3 and wait for one new event.

The frequencies of events are different. It is obvious that the frequency of light adjusting is higher than the frequency of the air-condition adjusting. The lower the frequencies of events are, the less the associational weights are. To overcome the defects, the associational weight matrix is normalized according to horizontal direction.

Step1: calculate the base vectors of associational weights matrix:  T1 2[ , , ]nQ q q q= ,  ? =  = m  j iji wq   (9)  Here, iq is the weights sum of input jx  to all outputs.

Step2: Normalize the associational weights matrix:    ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  =  nmnn  m  m  www  www www  w  ,,, ,,,,  ,,, ,,,     , i  ij ij q  w w =             (10)  Here, the sum of weights in every line of the matrix is 1, and the influence of different frequencies to matrix is eliminated. The weight of matrix really means the influence degree of one input to one output. Set a threshold ? , if the ijw ?? , then the input ix  is associated with the jy . On the other hand if the ijw ?< , then the input ix  is irrelevant or redundant with the jy  and would become a candidate to be removed.



IV. EXPERIMENT AND RESULT  In the experiment room, there are one desk and one bed, and there are a light in the ceiling, a lamp on the desk, and a lamp beside the bed. Moreover, there are air-condition, auto window, and auto curtain. Wireless sensor networks[7] are distributed in the room. The inputs include temperature sensor  indoor(TI), temperature sensor outdoor(TO), luminance sensor indoor(LI), luminance sensor outdoor(LO), chair pressure sensor(PC), and bed pressure sensor(PB). There are six output control devices. Besides the three lights( respectively, ceiling light L1, table lamp L2, bed lamp L3), there are an air condition(AC), an auto curtain(ACur), and an auto window(AW). The three lights are all adjustable. The air condition is variable frequency. Auto curtain and auto window are on-off control. Under different environment conditions, the experimenter operates the corresponding devices according to his preferences. The experiment was executed five successive days and acquired 280 leaning data. The input vector is  [ , , , , , ]X LI LO PC PB TI TO=  and the output vector is [ , , , 1, 2, 3]Y AC AW ACur L L L= .

The experiment included six inputs and six outputs. The  associational weight matrix can be derived according to the above algorithms. Calculating the associational weight matrix w  and normalizing it.

0.1027 0.0772 0.2527 0.2072 0.1288 0.1948 0.1109 0.0868 0.3209 0.1945 0.2128 0.0657 0.1027 0.0858 0.0743 0.1952 0.3856 0.0812 0.0514 0.0644 0.1486 0.2027 0.0789 0.5681 0.3677 0.2879 0.0887 0.1075 0.0627 0.0484 0.2646 0.3979 0.1149  w =  0.0928 0.0813 0.0418  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?    Let threshold 0.15? = . According to the control devices and the associational matrix, ultimately the system was divided into multiple groups.

{ },TI TO AC? ,            { },TI TO AW? , { },LI LO ACur? ,       { }, , , 1LI LO PC PB L? , { }, , 2LI LO PC L? ,     { }, 3LI PB L? .

Fig. 2 is the association curves of the different inputs to AC  over the time. The x-coordinate is time and the unit is day.

From the fig. 2, the weights of TI, TO are improved quickly over time and are greater than the weights of the other inputs.

The AC learning data subset has 167 data, which includes six inputs and one output under no association.

{ }, , , , ,LI LO PC PB TI TO AC? . According to the fuzzy rules extracting methods, 56 fuzzy rules are derived. The learning error RMS (Root Mean Square) is 0.1214. After association, the AC learning data decrease to 86, which only include two inputs (TI, TO).  12 fuzzy rules are derived. The learning error RMS is 0.1147. Moreover, the total rule numbers are cut down and the leaning efficiency is improved tremendously.

Now, adopting the same 280 learning data, the novel IFA method compared with the multilayer perception (MLP) neural network without input-output association. We tested our IFA learning method with different numbers of fuzzy sets, which generates MIMO Mamdani FLCs that represent the rules in a more descriptive human readable form. The MLP back-propagation neural network was tested with different numbers of hidden nodes in a single hidden layer. Table 1 illustrates the RMS for the two methods over the sample data.

The results show that the optimum number of fuzzy sets for IFA is 7. From the table 1, the MLP method gives a higher scaled RMS than the IFA methods. It is particular importance that the MLP method can not be adapted online as it needs to repeat its time-consuming learning cycles if a new behavior is to be added. Our method does not need to calculate iteratively which can then be adapted online in a life-long mode in a non intrusive manner.

TABLE I RMS FOR IFA AND MLP  IFA MLP Num of fuzzy  sets RMS Num of  hidden nodes RMS  2 0.2014 2 0.2312 3 0.1643 4 0.1843 4 0.1425 6 0.1822 5 0.1312 8 0.1678 6 0.1247 10 0.1616 7 0.1121 15 0.1741 8 0.1305 20 0.1689 9 0.1528 30 0.1777  10 0.1849 40 0.1790  V  CONCLUSION  This paper presents a novel IFA system based on intelligent dynamical association algorithm which can be used to learn  the user?s preferences and proactively control the environment. The weights between the inputs and outputs are continuously computed and updated in the occurrence of an event. The weights will increase when both the corresponding inputs and outputs simultaneously change. In contrast the weights will decrease over time when the corresponding inputs and outputs do not simultaneously changed and become irrelevant. The adaptive fuzzy system of IFA includes four phases, respectively, capturing and associating input-output data, extracting fuzzy rules, agent control, and online modifying fuzzy rules. The proposed fuzzy learning method can lean the use?s behaviours in a life-long mode and proactively control the inhabited environments. The proposed intelligent dynamical associational algorithm can result in decreasing the rule base which can lead to fewer memory requirements and faster processing, and reducing the computational and processing complexity while not decreasing the quality of the system.

