The Design of a P2P Video-on-Demand Prototype System

Abstract-this paper designs a P2P video-on-demand prototype system. A hybrid push-pull scheduling mechanism  with random linear network coding in Galois field 2 and a weight function based caching strategy are adopted in the  design. After careful and suitable segment and block division  on video, random linear network coding in Galois field 2 is carried out on the blocks within a segment, and then the push?  pull hybrid solution is used to schedule the blocks and segments. In the weight function of the caching strategy not  only the emergency degree, rare level but also the association  rules mining results of user jump behavior is considered. And a prefetching algorithm and caching algorithm are  constructed according to the weight function. Based on these design idea, a prototype system design is given out including a  system topology design, system architecture design and peer's  module structure design.

Keywords- P2P; Video-on-Demand; Prototype System design

I. INTRODUCTION  The P2P video-on-demand (VoD) system, because of its good interactivity, excellent system scalability and low deployment cost, is preferred by more and more Internet users and has become the major direction of Internet video application. At present, designing and deploying a peer-to? peer video-on-demand streaming system with better user experience, guaranteed quality of service and less server stress still face some open problems which are requiring further research. After deeply researching of the P2P video? on-demand system, this paper designs a P2P VoD prototype system. The system adopts a hybrid push-pull scheduling mechanism with random linear network coding in Galois field 2 and a weight function based caching strategy. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. we discuss the related work in Section II; The data scheduling mechanism and caching strategy used in our prototype system are proposed in Section III. The prototype system design is given in Section IV; the system topology design is described in Subsection IV.A; the system architecture design is presented in Subsection IV.B, followed by the peer's module structure design in Subsection IV.e. Finally we conclude this paper and discuss the future work in Section V;

II. RELATED WORK  With many P2P streaming protocols being proposed, the current data scheduling mechanisms can be divided into    three categories: pull strategy[11, push strategy[21, and push? pull strategy[31. The pull strategy has better fault tolerance for peers' dynamics. The system based it is more robust and more easy to implement. But pull strategy will cause large delay. On the other hand, because it need exchange buffer information between peers periodically, if the period is too big, the system will generate too much expired buffer information and the system delay will be increased. If the period is too small, the control overhead will raise significantly. However, because of the simplicity of implementation, many of existing real systems still adopt this strategy such as PPlive[41.

The push strategy can reduce the playback delay, but the peer may receive too many redundant data from multiple peers which it doesn't need. Consequently, the redundancy in the system is increased remarkably, which will cause large system overhead.

In order to reduce the data redundancy caused by push strategy and the playback delay caused by pull strategy, a hybrid push-pull strategy is proposed in [3]. The main idea of this strategy is that when the streaming server generates a new data block, firstly, it pushes the new bock to some predefined peers directly. The other peers which have not received the block in the push step will pull the data from its neighbors. This strategy put more emphasis on push operation. Its typical drawback still is that a large number of peers will receive much data that it is not interested in, which will cause large waste of resources. A hybrid push? pull strategy is also proposed in [5]. In [5], the stream is divided into many sub streams. If a peer pulled the first packet in a sub stream, it believes that the peer will request the following packets in the same sub steam. So the sender will directly push the following packets in the sub stream to the request peer. However, this strategy is designed for live streaming system. For the VoD streaming system, it is not sure that after requesting a packet, a peer will request the next packet of it because peer may jump to another destination packet to watch.

Caching mechanism is another aspect which has significant impact on system performance as same as the scheduling mechanism. Most of early P2P streaming systems are live streaming systems. These systems mainly adopt the cache-relay strategy[6-81. The main idea of this strategy is that the receiver caches the contents played recently, and supplies them to the requiring peers whose playing offset is within the sliding-window. Now, the    Cache-Relay strategy which only caches the pla?ed parts is expanded to the prefetching and cache strategy[9, 01 that uses some extra bandwidth to prefetch some part of stream before the playing offset. In the prefetching and cache strategy, the peer prefetches and caches different parts of the video, which ensures that the peer can overcome the sudden packet loss and the source peer departure to realize smooth play.

And some of the pre fetching contents can be used to serve other peers, thus alleviate the pressure of the content distribution[111.



III. THE SCHEDULING MECHANISM AND CACHING STRATEGY ADOPTED IN OUR PROTOTYPE SYSTEM  Because of the limitations of existing scheduling mechanism in P2P VoD system, this paper adopts a network coding based hybrid push-pull strategy to maximize system throughput and minimize system delay and redundancy, as well as reducing system overhead. The objective and the most essential advantage of introducing network coding is that multiple peers can perfectly collaborate with each other to serve one peer in the case of no coordination. In our design, the block is basic unit of coding and transporting.

The coding is carried out on the blocks within a segment, not across segment so as to limit the coding dimension and reduce the coding complexity. In this paper, we use the random linear network coding in Galois field 2, GF(2iI21.

The network coding in GF(2) has lower coding complexity and faster operation speed than that in GF(28). But it will generate a larger number of dependent encoded blocks.

However, literature [ 13] points out that though the number of defendent encoded blocks in GF(2) is larger than that in GF(2 ), it is still very limited. If a codeword is uniformly selected, the average number of dependent packets received before a peer can successfully decode the segment is upper bounded by a constant value of 2 in GF(2) random linear network coding. Moreover, the upper bound of the average number of dependent packets is independent to the coding dimension. So the extra communication overhead and delay due to the dependent packets become negligible when the coding dimension is large. Thus, for the 100-500 coding dimension in our design, the number of dependent blocks is very small. It will not cause the system overhead and delay significantly.

In our strategy, a peer actively requests the first encoded block in a segment from multiple neighbors in a pull manner. And then multiple sender peers will push the following encoded blocks to the request peers until receiving the stop signal. After receiving the stop signal, if the senders have surplus capacity to serve the request peer, it will randomly select a segment from the same data chunk which just segment belongs to, and directly push to the request peers without coding. Through our scheduling mechanism, multiple peers can perfectly collaborate with each other to serve one peer in the case of no coordination. So the utilization rate of upload bandwidth will be improved, and the system throughput will be improved, too. Moreover, because the use of a hybrid push-pull strategy, the scheme can relatively well adapt to the jitter of the peers and it can   reduce not only the system delay but also the system redundancy.

In this paper, a weight function based caching mechanism is adopted. It also belongs to the prefetching and cache strategy. Our caching strategy considers not only the emergency degree, rare level but also the association rules mining results of user jump behavior. The association rules mining of user jump behavior is introduced to reveal the characteristics of the video itself to some extent. And a pre fetching algorithm and caching algorithm are proposed according to the weight function. In this strategy, both the individual requirements of single peer and the impact on the overall performance of the system are considered. So the limited buffer space can be better used and the system performance can be improved.



IV. THE DESIGN OF THE PROTOTYPE SYSTEM  A P2P V oD prototype system will be designed in this section according to the data scheduling mechanism and caching strategy mentioned above.

A. The Design of System Topology Similarly to much of the existing P2P streaming  systems[4,14.161 such as PPlive[4], thousands of videos is supported in the system. And the user can select the preferred video to watch. Here we call each video as "channel". A tracker server is used to maintain the information about participating peers. The information includes peer identities, such as IP address and port number, current caching information, the mining result of video object and so on. The system organizes the peers into a mesh topology in which each peer can provide service for several peers and each peer can acquire service from several peers according to its own needs at the same time. The system topological diagram is shown as Fig. 1. In the topological diagram, we demonstrate the situation of two channels. In the system, when a peer selects a channel to watch, firstly it contacts with the tracker server. The tracker server randomly selects a part of peers which buffers some beginning data of the channel to construct the neighbor list and sends it to the require peer. The peer joins in these peers, acquires the caching map from these peers and requests the beginning data from these peers to finish the startup initialization. This process is described as the process 1 in the diagram. The process 2 in the diagram denotes the peer is leaving the system and sends the mining result to the tracker server. The situation that the streaming server pushes data to a peer is demonstrated as process 3. And the process 4 presents that peer "pulls" data from the server when the weight value of the segment is larger than the system threshold. More over we design a log server to collect the system's log information. The Log information can include the basic information of peers, the network coding information, the user behavior information and the playback information and so on. The basic information of peers can consist of the channel ID playing currently, the upload and download bandwidth and so on. The network coding information can be the number of the encoded blocks acquired from neighbors in a period, the number of the dependent blocks in    it and the number of the redundant blocks received after includes the information of peer joining in the system, sending out the stop signal. The user behavior information departing from the system and VCR  ?------  I I  I I  I ,  ,  , ,  , I  \  \  \  \  \ \  \ \  \ \  ... --- ...

/Channel '>: ' ... ...'"  " "2" Is '-I \ I , I _ ... " ,  \ \  \  ... _--_ ....

I I  I I  I  Just joined , , , ,  , , I , , I ", ',: Peer I "  I',  ',? , I  \ \  \ \  \ ,  (5'\ Report Log ... -!

\ \  \ \  \  I I  ,  I I  I I  \ \  \ \  \  I  I  I  I  I  I  ,  ,  Figure I. The system topological diagram  jumping signal. The playback information can be startup latency, jump latency and playback continuity and so on.

B. The Design of System Architecture Now we will give out the system architecture diagram, as  Fig. 2 shows. Here we adopt hierarchical design ideas. The top is streaming service layer which mainly provide the service about the VoD streaming such as video dividing service, the video characteristic extracting service, i.e.,  mining of relation rule of user jump behavior on video segments, the selection of streaming transport protocol such as RTP or RSTP, the streaming transporting of the media server and playing of channel in media player. The middle is P2P layer. The P2P VoD system, in the fIrst step, should organize a high effIcient P2P network. In this layer including the overlay constructing, the data scheduling and delivery in the P2P network, network coding and caching mechanism  VoD Streaming Server/Media Player } Streaming r=  I Streaming division/Weight Calc. Association rule Mining  Data schedule I Network Codec I Buffer Manage  Overlay Construction/Neighbor Peers selection Data Transmission  TCP UDP  IP  Figure 2. the system architecture diagram   ?J  I?  J  service  } Underlying Network    implementation. That is to say this layer should solve these problems: how to construct the P2P overlay network, how to schedule the data, what network coding manner will be adopted and how to organize and manage the buffer, how to decide the prefething and replacing strategy. The bottom is underlying network layer. It decides which transport protocol will be adopt, which depends on the actual needs of the application. Here we adopt UDP protocol to transport the streaming data and TCP to transport the separate control messages.

C. The Design of Peer's Module Structure At last, we give out the peer's module structure design as  Fig. 3 shows. In our system, a peer include neighbor management module "Neighbor Manager", data scheduling module "Schedule Manager", buffer management module "Buffer Manager", network coding module "Network Codec", data mining module, and media player module. In the system, a peer will act as both the provider of the streaming service and the receiver of the streaming service.

The neighbor management module is in charge of the neighbor peer discovery and selection to construct a mesh overlay network. The buffer management module calculates weight value of the missing segments according to the current caching content and the mining result of the data mining module, and then submits the segment requests according to the prefetching algorithm. The data scheduling module determined which segments should be requested and from which peers to request. Once a peer received neighbors'  data requests, the data scheduling module, based on its local buffer content, decides to which peers it will provide service and which segments it will provide to a particular peer and then after network coding module generates the coding coefficients and encoding the blocks, the data scheduling module adopts the UDP protocol to transport the encoded block (UDP is used by default. If UDP is unreachable, The TCP will be chosen). Once received a encoded block from underlying network, the peer puts the encoded block into the decoding zone of the buffer, and then the decoding module of the coding codec will decode the encoded blocks aggressively with aggressive Gauss-Jordan elimination.

When all the blocks in the segment is decoding, the peer will, by "pre-braking" manner, randomly picks out some peers in the data providers to send the stop signal. Once received the stop signal, these peers will stop sending the data to the downstream peers immediately. And then the downstream peer continues to decode the blocks until all the blocks in the segment is decoded and sends the stop signal to the remaining data providing peers. After the decoding is finished, the decoded blocks will be inserted into the playback zone of the buffer and the buffer management module will provide data to the media player according to the playback request. The media player implements the play operation once received the streaming data. Because the network coding is adopted and a peer could request data from multiple peers, the UDP transport manner without guaranteed quality of service can be used to delivery the  Media Player  Neighbor  Manager  D Data Mining  ?:::::::> M odul e  Network Codec  Encoder Module  TCP ( UDP IP  u  Figure 3. the peer's module structure design diagram  streaming data and the TCP protocol is not a must. Only if the UDP protocol is unreachable, the TCP transportation will be used. What's more, for the separate control messages, the TCP Transportation will be used in order to reduce the control signal loss.



V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  In this paper, a P2P Video-on-Demand prototype system IS designed. In our design, a hybrid push-pull scheduling    mechanism with random linear network coding in Galois field 2 and a weight function based caching strategy are adopted. The system topology design, system architecture design and peer's module structure design is given out.

Beyond this work there are still many problems requiring further study. Firstly, the caching mechanism of a P2P VOD system should be integrated with overlay network constructing mechanism and data scheduling strategy to achieve better performance. Secondly, a proper incentive structure should be created to avoid the selfish behaviors.

Thirdly, a realistic system should be developed and deployed to testifY the system performance. We will be interested in these areas and do that in our future work.

