

Abstract?Discovering global frequent subtrees from ordered labeled trees in distribute environment is an attractive research problem in data mining. In this paper, a new algorithm FAMDFS(Fast Algorithm for Mining Global Frequent Subtree) was proposed. This algorithm transfer local projected branch frequent nodes, can decrease network traffic, improve the efficiency of the algorithm. Theoretical analysis and experimental results show that FAMDFS algorithm is efficient and effective.

Keywords-global frequent subtree; projected branch; induced subtree; tree mining

I.  INTRODUCTION As the development of network and application of WWW,  the size of Internet data increase rapidly, and has been the hugest distribute data source. How to discovery the knowledge if data in Internet to utilize the huge data resource of Internet has been attract much interest. But most data structure of Internet data is semi-structured data, such as XML, HTML, Web log etc, mining these data with tree structure use frequent itemset method can mining frequent itemset but will ignore the structure information of data[1, 2]. Therefore, tree mining algorithm can solve this problem, so research of tree mining is an important task for data mining.

In distribute environment, mining global frequent itemset have got many progresses, and how to decrease the cost of network transformation is the main aim of global frequent itemset mining algorithm. There is many algorithm for mining global frequent itemset, such as PDM, CD, FDM, DDDM, FPM[3-7], but there has not research for mining global frequent subtrees in distribute environment. According to the algorithm for mining frequent subtrees and mining global frequent itemset, we can get a simple method for mining global frequent subtrees(GFS), and the main idea of this method is: First generate local candidate frequent subtrees at each site, then test if each candidate frequent subtree were global frequent subtree, if it were ,add it to global frequent subtrees set. But because of huge memory use and high network traffic, this method is not so efficient.

In this paper, we propose a fast algorithm for mining global frequent subtree ? FAMDFS, this algorithm generate local projected branch at each site first, then generate global projected branch through transfer local projected node, and compute global projected branch frequent node, at last get the global frequent subtrees from global projected branch frequent node. This algorithm uses the strategy of dividing mining task  into many sub-task, so can utilize the parallel computation in distribute environment to decrease the network traffic and improve efficiency of mining global frequent subtrees.



II. BASIC CONCEPTS AND PROBLEM DEFINITION  A. Tree and Subtree The definition of tree, subtree, labeled ordered tree,  frequent subtree, matching and occurrence have been defined in previous papers, and in this paper we adopt the definitions in ref. [7].

For example, pattern tree T is subtree of data tree D in Figure 1.

A  B  E  C D  G  E  F  G H  A  DC  Pattern Tree T  Data Tree D   2 3          Figure 1.  Subtree Example.

B. Global Frequent Subtree and Local Frequent Subtree Let TDB be a database of ordered labeled tree. every tuple  of database recorded by (TID, Ti), Ti is a labeled ordered tree, and TID is ID of Ti in TDB. Every tree on labeled set L in database TDB called data tree. We denote by ? the class of all labeled ordered trees on L, every labeled ordered tree T?? is called pattern tree.

In the model of this paper, distribute multi-database is divided horizontally. There are n site called S1, S2, ?, Sn, corresponding each local database called TDB1, TDB2, ?,  TDBn? ? n  i  iTDBTDB 1=  = , D and Di denote number of tuple  in TDB and TDBi respectively. To a pattern tree T, T.count and T.counti denote as the number of tuple which include T.

Defination 1. if T.sup(T.count/D) and T.supi(T.counti/D) is support of T in TDB and TDBi, then T.sup is global support of T, T.supi is local support of T at site Si.

*Supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (60874075)     Defination 2. if T.sup?minisup(minimum support thresh- old), then T is an global frequent subtrees; if T.supi?minisup, then T is local frequent subtrees at site Si.

Throughout of this paper, a global frequent subtree of size k called global frequent k-subtree, the node included by global frequent 1-subtree called global frequent node. a local frequent subtree of size k called local frequent k-subtree, the node included by local l frequent 1-subtree called global frequent node. GFST(TDB) denoted as set of global frequent subtrees mining from TDB.

C. Problem Defination Lemma 1. If T is a local frequent subtree at site Si, then all  non-empty subtrees of T are local frequent subtree at site Si.

Proof: Suppose T' is non-empty subtree of T, according to property of anti-monotony for subtree, T'.counti?T.counti, then T'.supi?T.supi. T' is local frequent subtree at site Si.

Lemma 2. If pattern tree T is not a local frequent subtree, then all supertrees of T can not be local frequent subtree.

Property 1. If Pattern tree T is a global frequent tree, then there is a site Si(1?i?n) at which T and all non-empty subtree of T are local frequent subtrees.

Proof: Suppose n sites be regarded as n pigeonhole, and the occurrence times of pattern tree T in TDB is number of pigeon, then T.count?(D1+D2+?+Dn)?minisup. According to pigeonhole principle, there are at least one site at which T.counti?Di?minisup, so T is a local frequent subtree at site Si, according to lemma 1, all non-empty subtree of T are local frequent subtrees at site Si.

In summary, the task of mining global frequent subtrees can be described as: Given n local database TDB1, TDB2, ?, TDBn  at site S1, S2, ?, Sn. Global database ? n  i  iTDBTDB 1=  = ,  Mining all global frequent subtrees from TDB.



III. ALGORITHM FOR MINING GLOBAL FREQUENT SUBTREES  A. Main Idea of Algorithm We propose a fast algorithm for mining frequent embedded  subtrees in single machine environment (FTPB)[8], How to decrease the network traffic through projected node is main research direction of this paper.

For a pattern tree T, if it?s node vT?RMB(T), then set of projected branch of vT in TDB denoted as PBTDB(vT), called global frequent projected branch; It?s projected branch in TDBi denoted as PBTDB(vT)i, called local frequent branch. The set of all global frequent subtrees denoted as FST. To give minimum support threshold minisup, the task of mining global frequent subtree can be divided into two steps:  ? Generate set of projected branch PBTDB(vT) i  at each site.

? Mining global frequent subtrees from PBTDB(vT) i.

The process of first step has been studied in ref.[8], this paper study the method how to mining global frequent subtrees from PBTDB(vT) i.

Theorem 1. If L(PBTDB(vT)) is the set of frequent subtree got through the method of join the new rightmost node at node vT(vT?RMB(T)), L(T) is the set of frequent subtrees got from rightmost expansion on frequent subtrees T, then L(T)=  )(TRMBvT ? ?  L(PBTDB(VT)).

Proof: Because L(T) is the set of frequent subtrees got from rightmost expansion on frequent subtrees T. The rightmost expansion of T is generator a new tree through the method of join a new rightmost node on the node of rightmost branch, so L(T)=  )(TRMBvT ? ?  L(PBTDB(VT)).

According to theorem q, to current frequent subtree T, all successor frequent subtree can be got from join a global projected node on each node of rightmost branch of T, this method can generator frequent subtree directly.

Theorem 2. To node vT?RMB(T) on pattern tree T, it?s set of projected branch in TDB denoted as PBTDB(vT), it?s set of projected branch in TDBi at site Si denoted as PBTDB(vT)i. then  PBTDB(vT)=? n  i 1=  PBTDB(vT)i, where n is the number of sites.

Proof: It is easy to prove according to the relation of global  database and local databases ? n  i  iTDBTDB 1=  = .

Lemma 3. Given a frequent subtree T, if F(PBTDB(vT)) is the set of global projected branch frequent nodes of vT(vT? RMB(T))in TDB, F(PBTDB(vT)i)is the set of local projected branch frequent nodes of vT(vT ? RMB(T))in TDBi. then F(PBTDB(vT)) ?  )(TRMBvT ?  ?  F(PBTDB(vT)i).

According to lemma 3, to the node vT on the rightmost branch of current frequent subtree T, it?s global projected frequent node can be get by the method of union all local projected frequent node.

Lemma 4. Given a frequent subtree T , PBTDB(vT) the set of global projected branch frequent nodes of vT(vT?RMB(T)) in TDB, label l?PBTDB(vT), if l isn?t a global frequent label, and T' is a pattern tree which was got through joint l to vT, T' can?t be a global frequent subtree.

According to lemma 4, there is a set of label in witch each label is an element of global frequent and included by set of local projected, the set also is the set of label in which each label can give a rightmost expansion on T to generator a new global frequent subtree directly.

B. FAMDFS Algorightm To sum up the above arguments, we can get the main idea  of mining global frequent subtrees: Firstly, scan each local     database to get all local frequent single node subtrees, transfer all frequent single node subtrees to one site, get all global frequent single node subtrees. Secondly, scan each local database to get local projected branch frequent nodes of current frequent subtrees, transfer to one site and compute the global projected branch frequent nodes, then generator new global frequent subtree thorough the method of join the global projected branch frequent nodes to the nodes on the rightmost branch of current subtrees. Repeat above steps until there are no global projected branch frequent nodes for all projected nodes, all global frequent subtrees have been found.

Similar to algorithm FDM[5], we adopt polling site to optimize the network traffic, this method make the cost of network traffic is O(n) in distribute multiple database environment with n sites. According to the above main idea of algorithm, FAMDFS Algorithm described as follows.

Algorithm 1 FAMDFS Algorithm Input: (1) Local database TDBi at site Si, i=1,2, ?, n; (2) Minimum support threshold minisup ? and  Minimum support threshold of each site Si, are minisup? i=1,2, ?, n;  Output: The set of global frequent subtrees GFS(TDB).

Method: //step 1      collect the set of Global frequent subtrees with  one node.

For i=1 to n do { scan the local database TDBi once; Collect the set of local frequent labels Li and their supports } Collect the set of Global frequent labels L from all Li; //step 2 generate projected branch of pattern tree T.

For each l in L do { form the 1-pattern tree T use l; T.count=l.count; output 1-pattern tree T and T.count/N; //output  singlenode pattern tree and its support for i=1 to n do {  generate PBTDB(vT)i; } For j=1 to n do compute PBTDB(T)i; GPB-Expand(minisup, T); }  //Given projected branch DB?minimum support threshold  minisup?Pattern tree T?mining all global frequent subtree which are successor of T.

GPB-Expand(minisup, T); { for i =1 to n do { for each tree D in TDBi do { if T is a sub tree of D then { for each node vT in RMB(T) do { if vT.Mark then continue; For each label l in PBD(vT)i do { if l in L then  record every occurrence of node label of l and l.count in PBD(vT)i into NO(vT)i;  } for j=1 to n do if polling-site(NO(vT)i)=Sj then Generate NO(vT)ij; for j=1 to n do send NO(vT)ij to site Sj; NO(vT)=? for j=1 to n do { Receive NO(vT)ij; NO(vT)= NO(vT)?NO(vT)ij; } for each occurrence label l in NO(vT) do { if l.count/N?minisup then {  T '=add l to T as the child of vT;  //Generate new  frequent subtree.

T '.count=l.count; Output T '  and T '.count/N;  //output T ' and  support of T '.

for k=1 to n do form the projected branch PBTDB(T '); GPB-Expand(minisup, T '); Inc(vT.flCount); } if vT.flCount = =0 then vT.Mark =True; //Mark the nodes in  PBTDB(vT) which haven?t projected branch.

} } } } } }

IV. EXPERIMENTS To evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of FAMDFS,  we conducted a set of experiments. All the experiments are performed on a 2.4 GHz Pentium PC machine with 512 MB main memory, running Microsoft Windows XP. FAMDFS algorithm and GFS algorithm are coded using Microsoft Visual C ++ 6.0.

The synthetic dataset we used for our experiments is generated using the tree generation program described in Ref.

[9]. Through eight variations adjusts the distribution of data (table I).

TABLE I. variation table Variation name  Variation value  Variation meaning  S 100 Size of labeled set P 0.5 Probability of the node which  generating child node L 10 Number of base tree I 4 Height of base tree C 3 Spanning of nodes in base tree N 10000 Size of TDB H 8 The maximized height of trees in TDB F 6 Spanning of nodes in TDB     We divide database into 3 sites equally, make number of every database TDBi (i=1,2,3)of sites be equal, and running 4 experiments for algorithm GFS, FAMDFS as follows:  1. We compare the network traffic and running time of two algorithms when minisup is 10%, 5%, 1%, 0.8%, 0.4%, 0.2% respectively. Experiment results are shown in figure 2 and figure 3.

2. Compare the network traffic of two algorithms when minisup is 1% with height of base tree and spanning of node in base tree changing. Experiment results are shown in figure 4 and figure 5.

3. When minisup is 1%, compare the running time of two algorithms with data size of changing from 10k to 50k.

Experiment result is shown in figure 6.

4. When minisup is 10%, 5%, 1%, 0.8%, 0.4%, 0.2% respectively, compare the running time of distribute algorithms and single machine algorithm for mining frequent subtrees. Experiment result is shown in figure 7.

10 5 1 0.8 0.4 0.2 mi ni sup(%)  ne tw  or k  tra ffi  c( k)  GFS  FAMDFS   Figure 2.  Network traffic changing w.r.t minisup        10 5 1 0.8 0.4 0.2 mi ni sup(%)  ru nn  in g  tim e(  s)  GFS  FAMDFS   Figure 3.  Running time changing w.r.t minisup        6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9  Hei ght  of  base t r ee  ru nn  in g  ti me  (s )  GFS  FAMDFS   Figure 4.  Network traffic changing w.r.t height of base tree        4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7  spanni ng of  base t r ee  ru nn  in g  ti me  (s )  GFS  FAMDFS   Figure 5.  Network traffic changing w.r.t apnning of base tree        10000 20000 30000 40000 50000  dat a si ze  ru nn  in g  ti me  (s )  GFS  FAMDFS   Figure 6.  Running time changing w.r.t data size        10 5 1 0.8 0.4 0.2 mi ni sup (%)  ne tw  or k  tra ff  ic (k  ) GFS FAMDFS FTPB   Figure 7.  net work comparision w.r.t. three algorithms  In summary, FAMDFS algorithm can decrease network traffic of mining global frequent subtrees, improve efficiency of algorithm, so FAMDFS algorithm propose a new idea for tree mining in distribute environment and a new frame for mining global frequent subtrees. At the same time, FAMDFS algorithm mining frequent subtrees from several sites is more efficient than single machine mining algorithm, so when processing huge amount of data, we can divide data into several sites and mining frequent subtrees use distribute algorithm to improve the efficiency of mining, so FAMDFS algorithm also propose a new strategy for mining frequent subtrees from huge amount of data.



V. CONCLUSION In this paper, we study the problem of mining global  frequent subtrees, and present a method of mining global frequent subtrees based on projected branch, this method can get all nodes of new frequent subtrees which got by rightmost expansion from current frequent subtrees utilize the structure of projected branch, this method can get all global frequent     subtrees, and can include all useful information. We also propose an algorithm for fast mining global frequent subtrees FAMDFS, compare to algorithm GFS which mining global frequent subtrees, FAMDFS algorithm have lower network traffic and higher efficiency, propose a good frame for mining global frequent subtrees.

