Research and Application of CT Image Mining based on Rough Sets Theory and  Association Rules

Abstract-The function of medical image mining in computer? aided diagnoses is discussed. Aiming at the hospital of valuable  CT images, combining medical peculiar domain knowledge, a kind of association rules based on rough sets and combination  of mining method is proposed, this method can help doctors early diagnose malignant diseases and has a great significance.

Keywords: CT image, Rough set, Association rules, Image mining

I. INTRODUCTION  All kinds of disease poses a serious threat to human health, malignant lesions of cancer mortality rates are risi?g rapidly, this is a worldwide trend, and liver cancer mortaho/ accounted for all. There are many reasons of cancer, there IS no way to prevent cancer, so the early diagnosis of cancer for cancer therapy is a very important factor. Through the study, we found that the early diagnosis of hepatic fibrosis to prevent liver cirrhosis, liver cancer has important significance. CT examination is a kind of reliable to early detection methods of lesions. But because of doctor to read every hospital CT slices, a rate will be dropped, alth?ugh if .

a CT slices are two doctors diagnose, then read and dIagnosIs accuracy will be greatly improved, but it costs too much. So we need computer-aided diagnosis, hoping to achieve higher efficiency and better accuracy.

This will be divided into two categories: CT images with normal and abnormal. The normal CT image refers to the health of people, abnormal image refers to the CT image with lesions. This will be a detailed description of the mining on liver medical CT images.



II. BUILD LIVER CT IMAGE MINING DATA SETS  A. Data collection In the hospital, one patient's CT slices are more than 20  layers ,and has more than 20 CT images. In this paper we collect 10000 liver CT images from Guiyang medical hospital and Hainan medical hospital for mining.

B. liver CT image feature extraction Liver fibrosis refers to a pathologic process with liver  fiber connectie tissue hyperplasia when necrosis and inflammation of the liver cells stimulate. Liver fibrosis caused uneven surface, and Hepatic essence density change present uneven. On CT images of liver fibrosis, wavy edge    LI Fuyun  Information institute of science and technology Hainan normal university  HaiKou, china lifuyun@hainnu.edu.cn  for presenting as smooth, serrated, liver surface color slants dark gray, rough, uneven distribution, etc.

General image containing color, texture and shape, edge, shadow and time characteristics such as details. In this paper, We according to the characteristics liver CT images, extract liver texture feature. Texture can be considered a gray in the space with certain forms of design changes; is .

the real i .

m?ge  region of inherent characteristics. So QuantItatIve descnpt?on of the regional texture is an important method to descnbe area. Common texture analysis method is: the statistics, the structure, the method of spectrum method. In this paper we use based on the statistics of the gray level co-occurrence matrix method, extract the liver CT image texture feature.

According to the characteristics liver CT images, we extracted features:  Gray characteristics: Average CT (extraction in all areas of total value of regionallCT all pixel number), the lesion site in CT films is always more bright or dim, obvious difference in parts, so can extract around the characteristics as refere?ce.

The texture characteristics: liver CT films of the lesIOn site with normal texture will be different, in this paper we from the perspective of CT images statistical analysis, extraction, the maximum entropy, the probability of energy, contrast, deficit, correlation coefficient from six to excavate the texture characteristics. Concrete analysis are as follows:  Graylevel co-occurrence matrix and energy parameters reflect the regional uniformity of image and smoothness.

Entropy is presented. The randomness of image measurement Contrast reflects the neighbour pixels. For maximum probability also reflects a cyclical appear to grayscale image, i.e. the local pattern arrangement, the biggest good regularity, when the maximum probabil?ty of certain probability is lesser, can infer that local mode IS not obvious, therefore periodical, the maximum probability is rational evaluation of quality graphics grain is one of the necessary conditions. In a certain extent correlation coefficient matrix and reflects the degree of linear correlation, correlation coefficient, grayscale distribution of the uniformity of the area, which reflects the uniformity of gray distribution images.

Liver fibrosis, CT images reflect in the liver surface texture for rough, gray distribution to a range of gray image features, this change in energy and entropy for energy a?d reflects the entropy is reduced, And, because of liver fibrosIs after connectie tissue hyperplasia reduced the grain, and liver can lead to rational lowered maximum, The liver parenchyma density change, make appear uneven regional    image gray distribution, which leads to low correlation coefficient, Liver surface color darkened in contrast, rise, to reduce the deficit from bottom contrast.

C. build Liver CT image mining data sets The resulting CT images features and characteristics of  some patients data, combined with the characteristics of patients have included patient age, gender, CT images of the lesion site position (left or right), so as to form of business organization in a data set. Data from a centralized affairs below:  (CTID, LayerID, fl, f2, ???tn, gL g2, ..... gm, Class)  Among them, CTID for CT affairs Numbers, LayerID for CT slices layer, ' fl??? .fn are the seven feature extraction from the given images, include gray characteristics , energy, entropy, maximum probability, contrast, deficit, correlation coefficient of the texture characteristics etc, gl??? .. gm said patient characteristics of the original, class says this CT slices of normal and abnormal category.



III. ATTRIBUTE REDUCTION ON LIVER CT IMAGE MINING DATA SETS WITH ROUGH SETS THEORY  A. Basic knowledge of rough sets theor/2J In 1982 PawLark of rough set theory is a kind of  treatment uncertainties and fuzzy mathematical tool, its main idea is kept in the premise of classification, through knowledge reduction, export the decision or classification of problem. Attribute reduction is one core contents of rough set theory,is to keep the condition that knowledge classification is unchanged, delete not relevant or not important attribute. The following are some of the basic concepts of rough set:  Definition 1: Rough set theory define information system for a quad: S=(U,A,V,F) , Which U=(x1,x2, ... ,xn) is domain; A is the attribute set, A =C U D, andC n D= <t> , Which C for the condition attributes, D for decision attribute, V is for attribute A domain; F isU X A -- V mapping, it is only specified value for all attributes of the object in U. S has been called the decision table.

Definition 2: in information system S, attribute set I E A, can build according binary equivalent relations.

IND(I){<x, y>EUXUI v aEI, a(x)=a(y)}, Says the IND (I) is the indiscemibility relation which be build by I.

Indiscemibility relation is actually the equivalence relation on I . Therefore, with the indiscemibility relation on the attribute set I,U can be divided into several equivalence class, U can be divided into several equivalence class,  Definition 3: Reduction is defined as the minimum condition attribute sets which do not contain redundant attributes and ensure correct classification. C' is reduction of the condition attributes C, C and C' must meet the following two properties analysis:  (l)ind(C,D)=ind(C' ,D), no exit C" C:;;;C' , ind(C" ,D) =ind(C' ,D)o   (2)A decision table may also exists some reduction, C reduction set down as Red(C).

The intersection of these reductions is defined as the Core of the decision table, Core(C)= n Red(C), The property in core is the important attribute affect classification  B. The result of attribute reduction Use discemibility matrix to complete the reduction and  core, on this basis generate the reduction attribute set, as: {energy, entropy, maximum probability, contrast, deficit,  correlation coefficient} .



IV. MINING ASSOCIA nON RULES ON LIVER CT IMAGE MINING DATA SETS  A. Basic knowledge of association rules [1J In data mining association rules is one of the most widely  used technique, a lot of association rules algorithm has been proposed, such as the most famous Apriori algorithm. The basic theory of association rules are defined as follows:  Have I = {i1,i2, .. ... ,im} was set a collection. Set tasks related data collection of database transaction is D, each T is a collection of business, T belong to I. Set A is a collection contains T, affairs when, and only when A belong to T.

Association rules is shaped like A = > B, including A, B belong to I ,and the intersection of A and B is empty. A = > B simply is A condition and A result: If condition then result.

The database records reflect partial corresponding a funny behavior. For example: butter, milk = > bread (2% and 30%), This rule is the meaning of the butter and milk to buy the customer will buy bread, 2 %and 30% is support and confidence of the rule. Support and confidence are defined as follows:  Support: a project in the database transaction of probability. The rules say the butter,milk and bread in the whole database transaction of probability is 3%.

Confidence: confidence is aimed at association rules. A = >B rules With confidence C in the affairs of D means D contains A transaction also contain B percentage is C.

Namely of conditional probability in P (B I A).

While minimum support threshold and minimum confidence thresholds rules called a strong rule. Association rule mining is to find a strong rule.

B. liver CT image association rule mining  The next association rules applied to reduct data sets,we will need to focus the association rules defined as follows:  the preceding paragraph of association rules is the characters sets of database, the latter of rules is classes of CT slices(normal and abnormal)  In this paper we will set minimum confidence for 50%, Minimum support for 25%. In this paper the choice is minimum support of dynamic: First, set a high degree of support threshold for mining, By training set to detect association rules set accuracy, If we want the higher accuracy, So stop mining process, otherwise will support threshold minus 1, repeat appeals process, Until we find we need support threshold. In this paper, through the experiments of selected minimum support for 25%.

We will be recorded in CT mining database 10,000 into 10 group, establish mining model, in this model, the first group of set aside as a test data, the other nine combine into the training data to mining, and test the mining association rules in the first set aside, can get a accuracy. Above the process is repeated data in each group,can get ten accuracy, accuracy of mining model is average of 10 accuracy.

Association rules test results such as shown in figure 1 in result 1, attributes are not reducted, accuracy 67.2 % is not very good, Mining effect is not very ideal. Through the reduction of attribute again after mining, the mining result 2 in figure 1. Can see, this kind of data mining to improve accuracy result makes 98.7%.

Databue Remit 1 Remit 2  Group (beE...., red""tioD) (after red""tioD)  Rule A",,_y(%) Rule AttW'ae,y (?.)  mtmb.,.. 1IUDIb.,..

1 31 67.46 30 98.91  2 30 67.68 32 97.53  3 31 67.32 33 98.32  4 31 6M2 31 98.77  5 19 64.73 33 97.05  6 30 6&23 33 95.55  7 19 6&11 32 97.79  8 31 64.37 31 96.22  9 31 64.79 33 99.815  10 30 68.22 31 96.8)  uE!l'age: 67.23 U"I'ag": 98.7  Figure 1 Mining result  C. Rule base and the new image classification Equations Finally, input the mining and clip of rules in rule base.

Once a new image input, obtain all features of the image, classify the image using the rules in the rule base, Thus can judge the existence of CT images.

D. Rule explained Rules in the rule base can be explained to natural  language and be compared with the doctor diagnosed. Below are a few typical interpretation of the rules:  l)Rule" CT images of energy<0.2 => CT image has lesions", Analysis is as follows:  Because energy parameters of CT images reflect regional uniformity of images or smoothness, When the image of low energy, said to a gray distribution scope of gray, So the rules can be interpreted as " CT image gray distribution to a gray range, then the CT image has lesions".

On medicine, when liver fibrosis, CT images in the reflection of liver surface texture for rough, will lead to a gray distribution, the scope of gray with our mining results are consistent.

2)Rule"Contrast <0.03,Maximum probability >0.55=> CT image has no lesions" , Analysis is as follows:  "If CT images arranged partial model is good regularity, and rational grain distribution uniformity, the image has no lesions It.

Explain the rules of above can be seen, liver image gray? scale and texture features as judge whether existing lesions is consistent with doctor's clinical diagnosis, can be as an important reference for clinical judgment, is of high reference value and practical value.

E. conclusion In this paper, we put forward a kind of association rules  based on rough sets and combination of mining method, and describe the whole process of medical CT image mining in this paper. Firstly, the CT image mining process extracts CT image features and preprocess the data, and then changes the data into CT image mining database. Secondly, Mining the CT image mining database with rough sets and association rules techinique , Lastly, with the result rules we can help doctors to classify the CT image into two classes: normal and abnormal.

