

Abstract?Hailstone is one of main meteorological disasters and it is difficult to forecast effectively. In this paper, a new hail echo detection method based on time series association rules was proposed and a hail echo automatic detection system was built.

Compared to the existing methods, the test results have shown that this method eliminated hail alert failure completely and also reduced the proportion of false alarm, raising the accuracy of hail forecast. The system was able to assist forecasters to make correct hail forecasts and provide reference to other disastrous weather forecast.

Keywords-hail detection; time series; association rule; forecast

I. INTRODUCTION At present, the detection, identification and application of  the hail clouds include the following two aspects [1-2]: (1) the accurate detection of the hail cloud by collecting much more particle information using Doppler radar. This typed method include the radar echo pattern detection, radar echo parameter detection and hailstone detection based on mutual information network model, etc. (2) The application of cloud model. This is a validity check method which explores the early features of the hail cloud by using observation accompanied by numerical simulation, such as the optical information detection, energy analysis method and GMS real-time data detection, etc. The cloud model is not high accurate in detecting the hail cloud, while the application of the radar echo data can greatly improve the accuracy. However, there still exists alert failure and false alarm and the hail forecast is not satisfactory.

Based on the time series database of the hail features, a hail echo detection method with time series association rules is proposed. By applying the objective and effective association rules which are obtained from FP-tree data mining to identify and classify the hail echoes, the alert failure is eliminated completely and the false alarm is reduced. The effectiveness of this method is validated using the test results.



II. SYSTEM FRAMEWORK Fig.1 shows the whole framework of the hail echo detection  system based on the time series association rules.

The following subsections mainly introduce the formation of the time series database, hail echo detection and forecast.

The technical issues related to the system framework can be referred to [3].

Figure 1.  Hail echoes detection and forecast

III. TIME SERIES RULES DATABASE  A. Construction of Time Series Database[3-5] Generally, a process described by time series is a  combination of long-term trend changes, seasonal variations, periodic variations irregular changes and so on change factors.

However not all processes contain these four variations. For the hail echo problem, its time series variable Y describing the characteristics of radar images is a function of time t, namely Y = F(t). Time series demonstrates some characteristics varying with time by using the time series charts. The curves in Fig.2 describe the hail echo developing process (including generating period, developing period, hailing period and dying period).

The 4 curves in Figure 1, 2, 3, 4 express the characteristic quantity ??entropy variety process in 4 hails respectively.

The time series database mainly included the following three parts of attributes:  a) Static attribute: Radar image information included the imaging time (year, month, day, hour, minute, second), radar product number, elevation and so on. This unique ID could be used for queries, updates of the image database.

b) Application attribute: Radar image features database, including the typical hail echo monomers and other disturbance cloud?s intensity features, texture features, shape features and comparison before and after, etc, was the main raw data for data mining.

* Supported by Special Scientific Research of China Meteorological Administration (No.GYHY200706004) and Tianjin Natural Science Foundation (No.09JCYBJC07500)     Figure 2.  Entropy?s time series chart  c) Statistical attribute: Weather condition description corresponding to the current image. For example whether hail or not and the hail state.

The above attributes were input attributes, correspondingly whether is going to hail was taken as the objective attribute.

Attribute features in the time series feature database included: Average gray, Correlation, Energy, Entropy, Inertia, Local calm, Grads uniformity and the other more than ten kinds of features.

B. Kmowledge Discoverry Based on Time Series Database? ?Time Serises Association Rules Data Mining[6-8]  1) Frequent Pattern Tree??FP-tree Frequent pattern tree (FP-tree) shown in Fig.3 was  defined as following: ? It consisted of one root node marked as "null" and a  series of frequent item nodes, as well as a frequent item header table. Items in the table should meet the minimum support.

? In addition to root node, each node in the tree contained three fields: item name, count and node link.

Item name referred to the item represented by the node; count was used to record the number of things passed through the node; node link pointed to the next node which had the same item name, as shown in the figure.

When the dotted arrows had not a next node, its pointer was empty.

? Frequent item table was composed of three parts: item name, count and head of node link. Head of node link was a pointer which pointed to the first node with the same item name in the node chain.

Figure 3.  FP-tree examplet  FP-tree data mining was realized by FP-growth algorithm.

Firstly the condition pattern base was constructed from the frequent itemset whose length is 1. Then the condition FP-tree is built by the condition pattern base and recursively mining was performed on the FP-tree until the condition FP-tree only contained one single path. Finally the frequent itemset information could be obtained.

2) Effective Rules Generation By mining the FP-tree data mining the frequent itemsets  could be obtained and then the strong association rules could be generated if the confidence of the rule is greater than a given threshold value min_conf. The confidence calculating formula is:  support _ ( )( ) ( | ) support _ ( )  count A Bconfidence A B P A B count A  ? ? = = ,  where the support_count?A?B?is the number of things which contain item set A?B, support_count?A? is the number of things which contain itemset A. The generation process of strong association rules was as follows:  ? For each frequent itemset L, generate all non-empty subset.

? For each non-empty subset S of L, if  support _ ( ) min_ support _ ( )  count L conf count S  ? ,  then output rule ?S? (L?S)?.

The output rule's form is: If S (union input attribute) then  L-S (target attribute).

Based on the time series feature database constructed by  14 hails? Doppler radar samples provided by a city?s weather bureau (as shown in Fig. 4), the time series repository generated is shown in Tab.?.

For the meaning of rule No. 1: If Inertia= (0.393157, 1.374235) then HaiState =0, conf=1?that is, when the Inertia value was in (0.393157, 1.374235), the echo monomer was in the hail generating period and its confidence was 1.

For the meaning of rule No. 7: If Energy= (0.028399, 0.206661) then HaiState =2, conf=1?that is, when the Energy value was in (0.028399, 0.206661), the echo monomer was in the hailing period and its confidence was 1.

Figure 4.  Time series features database      09:18:27                                09:24:29                                 09:30:30  ?a?                                     ?b?                                     ?c?   09:36:30                                 09:42:30                                 09:48:31  ?d?                                     ?e?                                    ?f?  TABLE I.  PART OF RULES RESULTS  NO.

Condition Attribute Decision Attribute Confidence  Energymin Energymax Inertiamin Inertiamax GradsUnimin GradsUnimax HaiState conf  1   0.393157 1.374235   0 1  2     0.140033 0.247253 0 1  3   0.085535 2.644001   1 1 4 0.020406 0.213614     1 1 5     0.102388 0.294527 1 1 6   0.11988 1.798837   2 1 7 0.028399 0.206661     2 1 8     0.095868 0.283375 2 1 9 0.032763 0.155627     3 1  10     0.11183 0.240511 3 1 ? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??  Note: The HaiState value 0, 1, 2, 3  respectively  express  hail generating period, developing period, hailing period and dying period

IV. INFERENCE  A. Rule Activation If the features data in time series database matched the  condition part of time series repository the rule was activated.

Activated rule was not necessarily used, because there may be several rules? condition part matched. In such a case the conflict management was used to choose between them.

B. Conflict Management Because the rules were consist of input attributes and  possible objective attributes, there may be a few rules which had the same conditions while the decision part was not completely the same. This indicated that conflicts existed in these rules. The solution was:  ? Found out the conflict rules. Selected the rules which had the most joint attributes first.

? For the rules having the same joint attributes, selected the rule which had the max confidence and ignored the other rules.



V. EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND ANALYSIS  A. Hail Echo Detection and Forecast Use the rules generated by FP-tree mining algorithm to  identify radar images and classify hail echoes. The whole detection and forecast process are as follows:  a) Image pre-processing: Removed radar image? text information and geography information color and then converted the radar image to gray image.

b) Image segmentation and filtering: Selected echo area with reflectance value 40 dbz above and pixel number no less than 500 in radar images (the threshold value was set under the instruction of experienced meteorologist).

c) Feature extraction: Used black rectangle to mark  connected domains, calculate color, texture and shape features of each echo connected domain, and stored the features in time series database.

d) Hail echo classification: With the feature data in time series database (including time stamp), applied the rules we obtained to classify hail echoes, including hail generating, developing, hailing and dying four periods.

e) Detection and forecast: According to the classification result, marked out hail echoes in radar echo images. The white rectangle represents the hail generating period, the brown represents the developing and hailing period and the black represents the hail dying period.

B. Test Resulsts and Analysis Fig.5 is the detection and forecast results of a hail echo  monomer from generating to dying in a city in June 25, 2005.

(a) ~ (b) is in hail generating period, (c) ~ (d) is in developing and hailing period, (e) is in dying period and (f) shows that the hail echo has died out.

Figure 5.  Hail echo monomer detection and forecast resul     TABLE II.  ECHO MONOMERS TEST RESULTS        TABLE III.   HAIL  PROCESS TIME ADVANCE TEST RESULTS  Sample Mutual Information ?Existing method? Association Rules ?This method?  1 moment ahead 2 moment ahead detection 1 moment ahead 2 moment ahead detection  large hail 9 19 3 8 21   2  slight hail 2 6 5 2 8   3  Using the hail echo detection system we constructed based on time series association rules, total 1851 monomers of history large and slight hails in the year of 2005 and 2006 provided by a city weather bureau was tested. Compared with the detection method based on mutual information network model, the test results are shown in Tab.?. To the 44 time recorded hail processes, the time advance was tested. The results are shown in Tab.?.

The statistical results of Tab.? show that: this method eliminated hail alert failure completely and also reduced the proportion of false alarm, raising the accuracy of forecast.

Tab.? indicated that this method was slightly better than the existing methods and is to be further improved.



VI. CONCLUSION ? In this paper, the image mining technique has been  used to excavate the potential rules (objective model) of hail weather, realize the hail echo automatic detection based on time series association rules for the first time.

? A hail echo automatic detection system has been built.

Compared to existing method, it has eliminated hail alert failure completely, reduced the proportion of false alarm and raised the accuracy of forecast. This method is feasible to assist forecasters to make correct hail forecasts.

? The method has also achieved a good result on hail forecast and met the basic requirement of practical applications.

It is a challenging and promising work in the paper not only to obtain the hail echo automatic detection method, but also to provide reference to other disastrous weather forecast.

