Augmenting Rapid Clustering Method for  Social Network Analysis

Abstract-- Presently, in the data mining scenario clustering of large dataset is one of the very important techniques widely applied to many applications including social network analysis. Applying more specific pre-processing method to prepare the data for clustering algorithms is considered to be a significant step for generating meaningful segments. In this paper we propose an innovative clustering technique called the Rapid Clustering Method (RCM), which uses Subtractive Clustering combined with Fuzzy C- Means clustering along with a histogram sampling technique to provide quick and effective results for large sized datasets. Rapid Clustering Method can be used to cluster the dataset and analyze the characteristics in a social network. It can also be used to enhance the cross-selling practices using quantitative association rule mining.



I. INTRODUCTION  Analysis of social networks is heavily dependent on clustering algorithms. The existing clustering algorithms such as K-Means, Fuzzy C-Means (FCM) etc have their own pros and cons. K-Means is very fast but its center value is dependent on the initial assumptions. We obtain different centers for different initial conditions. FCM is much more consistent than K-Means and is independent of initial assumptions [1]. It is more of a probabilistic approach, but its convergence rate to a center is very slow. Though Subtractive Clustering Method (SCM) is used to speed up the process [2], the time taken by the combined algorithms is much higher than K-Means. We have proposed a novel method for sampling the dataset during the process of applying SCM and FCM methods together to reduce the time complexity. The following section explains how Histogram Sampling [3] is applied along with SCM-FCM.

The Histogram sampling technique is preferred as it takes lesser time for computation and also maintains the density of the original dataset [4]. Then a time comparison between K-Means, SCM-FCM and RCM is shown. For applying this method in telecom industry can improve the cross-selling of customer services which is explained with an example to the voice counts of a particular telecom network. The cross- selling efficiency is improved when quantitative association rule mining is applied to clustered data rather than the full dataset, which helps us identify the potential customers more accurately. Moreover the use of RCM effectively in  identifying overlapping nodes in social network structures is also discussed subsequently.



II. RAPID CLUSTERING METHOD  The Rapid Clustering Method (RCM) consists of three different parts. First the dataset is sampled to obtain a smaller dataset using histogram sampling technique, then SCM-FCM is applied to the sampled dataset and the cluster centers are obtained. These cluster centers are used in SCM implementation and finally FCM is applied to the larger dataset.

The purpose of reducing the dataset is that the order of execution of SCM is n2, thus larger the dataset more time it consumes to find the cluster centers. The histogram sampling technique is applied so as to maintain the density values similar to that of the original dataset so that we obtain the same cluster centers for the sample dataset.

Figure 1. Example of Histogram Sampling technique   Figure.1 illustrates the results of histogram sampling method for five ranges varies from 1 to 50. The novelty of this work is to use the sampling method to speed up cluster initialization for fuzzy c-means. On appending this technique to existing SCM-FCM produces rapid results. The original dataset is segmented into various smaller intervals and equal proportion of the data points from each interval is taken and a smaller dataset is constructed. The interval size is determined based on the data distribution. If the distribution is uniform then data can be split into larger intervals. Otherwise smaller intervals can be used to increase the accuracy level of prediction. When data is concentrated more in a particular interval compared to other intervals then that interval is subdivided into smaller intervals and equal proportion of data is taken from those smaller intervals.

DOI 10.1109/ASONAM.2010.55    DOI 10.1109/ASONAM.2010.55    DOI 10.1109/ASONAM.2010.55     SCM is applied on a sample dataset to obtain the initial cluster centers. This is further iterated to obtain consistent cluster centers. Using these cluster centers, FCM is applied to the original larger dataset to obtain the required cluster groups.



III. EVALUATION  The proposed method is applied to a dataset of 1208473  entries of voice counts for each subscriber in a huge telecom network and the time taken for clustering is calculated.

Similarly SCM-FCM and K-Means are also applied to the same dataset and their respective time of execution is noted for comparison. The cluster centers C1 and C2 obtained by both SCM-FCM and RCM are given below,  C1= 40.64427 and C2=206.3012   Figure 2. Execution Time Comparison  Figure.2 shows the comparison between the three algorithms. RCM obtains the same result as SCM-FCM but in a much quicker time, which is even faster than the K- Means method. Thus RCM rectifies the initial conditions dependency of K-Means and also increased the execution speed of SCM-FCM. Moreover, we have observed the improvement in the level of accuracy.



IV. APPLICATIONS OF RAPID CLUSTERING  METHOD  A. Cross selling using Association Rule Mining  In the current scenario of cross-selling high and low usage clusters provide optimum results with minimum complexity or overheads [5]. The Rapid clustering algorithm is applied to cluster a given set of voice usage counts into two clusters namely high and low usage clusters.

Rapid Clustering is not used only to obtain two clusters; it can be used to obtain as many clusters as required by the user. Each cluster consists of the service usage counts and the optimum time to advertise the services apart from customer ID and MSISDN of the subscriber. The cross- selling efficiency is determined by three parameters, support, confidence and lift; these parameters describe the association strength and the increase in success rates for a combination of services. Quantitative Association Rule mining is the process of applying association rules and  identifying the lift for clustered results [5]. In this case the lift values for the High and Low usage Clusters are identified and the services to be cross-sold are identified. A single service is used to check for the association strength with all the other services within the reach of usage counts.

B. Identifying community structures in Social Network Analysis  The application of RCM in social network analysis comes in the form of clustering the modularity values of nodes in two different networks and identify whether the nodes are over lapping or not. When the probabilistic analysis is made for clustering, the nodes are said to overlap if the probability pair is like (0.6, 0.4) for the two communities. In other words, if the values are one sided say (0.9, 0.1) the nodes are not allowed to overlap. This kind of analysis is very important when a subscriber is to be labeled based on the communities available in the network. RCM can also be used at regular intervals to identify the changes occurring in community structures with respect to time.

Identifying change in community structure is a very important task in social network analysis. With the help of RCM we can obtain rapid results and identify structural changes much more quickly.



V. CONCLUSION   We considered the problem of clustering data over time and proposed a rapid clustering technique so that it can be used to generate quicker results for social network analysis.?We have proved that rapid clustering algorithm works better than K-Means and SCM-FCM in a lesser time period and also by maintaining the level of accuracy. This proves that RCM is a good alternative method for segmenting large dataset on a telecom domain. RCM saves the time in clustering and is useful for identifying the changes occurring in community structures in the network very quickly and also helps in labeling the customers based on the communities they belong..

