Notice of Retraction

Abstract?The real-world data may be usually polluted by uncontrolled factors or contained with noisy. Fault-tolerant frequent pattern can overcome this problem. It may express more generalized information than frequent pattern which is absolutely matched. The present research is integrated with previous research into an integrity new method, called Top- NFTDS, to discover fault-tolerant association rules over stream. It can discover top-k true fault-tolerant rules without minimum support threshold and minimum confidence threshold specified by user. We extend the negative itemsets to fault-tolerant space and disambiguate redundant patterns by this algorithm. Experiment results show that the developed algorithm is an efficient method for mining top-k fault-tolerant association rules in data streams.

Keywords-negative itemset; top-k; fault tolerant association rule; redundant pattern; data stream

I.  INTRODUCTION A data stream is a massive, ordered sequence of data  elements continuously generation at a rapid rate.

Association rules mining in data stream environment is a major application of data stream mining. The research of mining top-k fault tolerant frequent patterns in data streams has been carried out. Here, we propose an effective algorithm, called Top-NFTDS, to disambiguate fault tolerant redundant pattern generated by Top-FTDS algorithm. The next process is constructing the fault tolerant association rule from the fault tolerant frequent patterns with confidence. There is the association rule if one has three out of four or even two out of four symptoms, coughing, fever, a headache, and a sore throat, then a doctor will diagnose one catching a cold but need not get all these symptoms at the same time [1]. It is called the fault tolerant association rule. Association rules are defined as the form X?Y where X and Y are frequent itemsets. Not all association rules with high support and confidence are significant. First, much of the information is probably inevitable, or is to be expected. Second, the information expressed by association rules may be invalid. Finally, the information expressed by association rules may be repeated. Therefore, help users to discover useful knowledge, we need to use a variety of techniques to effectively reduce the large number of redundant patterns.

Currently, most researches of the association rule mining are based on the support and confidence framework and they focus on mining positive association rule. In practice, negative association rules also hide some useful information [2]. Negative association rules are defined as the form X??Y, ?X?Y, and ?X??Y where X and Y are frequent itemsets [3]. A negative pattern  describes the negative relationships between the itemsets.

Using statistical information of negative patterns and positive patterns, Top-NFTDS negate  lots of redundant patterns. Comparing with traditional static databases, data streams are continuous, unbounded, usually flowing with high speed and the data elements are not necessarily uniformly distributed. Since complexity of time and space of the algorithm has very stringent restrictions mining in data stream. Top-NFTDS algorithm adopts discovered fault tolerant frequent patterns to calculate the negative patterns but not rediscover the negative patterns. By this strategy, we improve the efficiency of the algorithm greatly.

In preliminary work, we propose the Top-FTDS algorithm, and it consists of three phases: construction of Top-FTDS-tree phase, reconstruction of Top-FTDS-tree phase and fault-tolerant frequent pattern generation phase.

The Top-FTDS-tree is an effective data structure. It is developed for maintaining essential information and mining top-k fault-tolerance frequent patterns of data streams within the current sliding window. Implementation procedure of Top-FTDS algorithm is no more repeated here.

In this paper, an effective algorithm, called Top- NFTDS, is designed to generate the fault tolerant association rules of data stream and more importantly to disambiguate the redundant patterns at the same time.

Experiment results show the good effectiveness, the high efficiency and accuracy of the algorithm.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Problem definition is presented in Section 2. Section 3 details the whole Top-NFTDS algorithm and gives detailed algorithm design. The experiment results are shown and discussed in Section 4. In Section 5, we conclude this paper.



II. PROBLEM DEFINITION Association rules are defined as the form X?Y where  X and Y are fault tolerant frequent patterns generated by Top-FTDS algorithm. Unlike traditional association rules, in the fault tolerant association rules mining field, support of the association rule is fault tolerant support. By allowing the existence of patterns mismatch, fault tolerant pattern must be with the higher value of fault tolerant support and the lower value of confidence of fault tolerant rules. A fault tolerant association rule is an expression X FTS? FTCY, where FTS is fault tolerant support of the fault tolerant rule. It is the joint probability of a transaction fault tolerant containing both X and Y denoted as supp(X ?Y). FTC is fault tolerant confidence of the fault tolerant rule. It is the conditional probability of a transaction that   DOI 10.1109/ICICCI.2010.91     the transaction contains Y, given it contains, X denoted as conf(X?Y) [4] [5].

if the itemset X?Y is frequent, the rule is frequent, i.e., supp(X?Y)?minimum support. A rule is confident if conf(X?Y) ?  minimum confidence, where minimum confidence is a value specified by user [6]. Top-FTDS algorithm has been successfully discovered top-k fault tolerant frequent patterns in data streams without minimum support threshold specified by user. Similarly, Top-NFTDS algorithm dose not predefine the minimum support threshold and minimum confidence threshold and then does not include redundant fault tolerant rules.

Fault tolerant frequent itemsets have the following three properties, all these properties are the basis of fault tolerant association rules mining algorithm.

Property 1. Let X, Y are different fault tolerant frequent itemsets, if there exist X?Y, and then there exist supp(X)? supp(Y).

Property 2. Satisfied with prerequisite of fault tolerance parameter, superset of fault tolerant frequent itemsets may be fault tolerant frequent itemsets too.

This property is significant different from the property of frequent itemsets. It is a unique property of fault tolerant frequent itemsets.

Property 3. Satisfied with prerequisite of fault tolerance parameter, subset of fault tolerant frequent itemsets must be fault tolerant frequent itemsets too.

Definition 1. For certain frequent itemsets X and Y, if there exist X?Y=?, and then there exist following eight association rules.

X?Y, X??Y, ?X?Y, ?X??Y, and Y?X, Y?X ?, ? Y?X, ? Y?? X  The form X?Y is called positive association rule and X??Y, ?X?Y, ?X??Y are called negative association rules. A certain negative association rules must meet the following three conditions: 1. X?Y=?.

2. supp(X)? min_supp and supp(Y)? min_supp.

3. supp(X??Y) ? min_supp or supp(?X?Y) ? min_supp  or supp(?X??Y) ? min_supp.

Top-NFTDS algorithm does generate fault tolerant  association rules from fault tolerant frequent patterns which are mined by Top-FTDS algorithm. Simultaneously, it does reduce invalid rules by the technology of redundant pattern disambiguation, and Top-NFTDS algorithm need not to input minimum support threshold and minimum confidence threshold.  Description of calculating support of negative association rules is followed.

Definition 2. For certain frequent itemsets X and Y, if there exist X?Y=? and X, Y?I, and then there exist following equations.

1. supp(?X)=1-supp(X).

2. supp(X??Y)= supp(X)- supp(X?Y).

3. supp(?X?Y)= supp(Y)- supp(X?Y).

4. supp(?X??Y)= 1-supp(X)- supp(Y)+supp(X?Y).

Description of calculating confidence of negative association rules is followed.

Definition 3. For certain frequent itemsets X and Y, if there exist X?Y=? and X, Y?I, and then there exist following equations.

1. conf(X??Y)=(supp(X)- supp(X?Y))/ supp(X)=  1-conf(X?Y).

2. conf(?X?Y)=(supp(Y)- supp(X?Y))/ (1-supp(X)).

3. conf(?X??Y)=(1-supp(X) -supp(Y)+supp(X?Y))/ (1-  supp(X))=1- conf(?X?Y).

There have not only one definition of redundant  association rules.

Definition 4. For association rule X?Y and A?B, if support and confidence of rule of A?B are higher than support and confidence of rule of X?Y, one thing can be sure that rule A?B is redundant association rule of X?Y.

Definition 5. Let rule X?Y and A?B satisfy X?Y= A? B=I and X?A, that rule A?B can be called redundant association rule of rule X?Y.

Definition 6. Let rule X?Y and A?B satisfy X?Y=I and A?B=L, if there exist L?I and  X?A that rule A?B can be called redundant association rule of rule X?Y.

To illustrate redundant association rules more clearly, consider the following example [7].

TABLE I.  REDUNDANCY IN RULE GENERATION  Rule Support Confidence  X?YZ supp(X?Y?Z) supp(X?Y?Z) / supp(X)  XY?Z supp(X?Y?Z) supp(X?Y?Z) / supp(X?Y)  XZ?Y supp(X?Y?Z) supp(X?Y?Z) / supp(X?Z)  X?Y supp(X?Y) supp(X?Y) / supp(X)  X?Z supp(X?Z) supp(X?Z) / supp(X)  Consider five different rules generated from frequent itemset X, Y, and Z with given support and confidence threshold as shown in Table 1. If rule X?YZ is true at a user specified value of support and confidence, then rules such as XY?Z, XZ?Y, X?Y, and X?Z are redundant.

From Table 1, we can see that the support and confidence values of the rule X?YZ is less than the support and confidence values of those rules such as XY?Z, XZ?Y, X?Y, and X?Z.

The definition of the correlation is as follows: Definition 7.  CorrX,Y= supp(X?Y) / supp(X) supp(Y).

There are three possible cases for the values of the correlation CorrX,Y. First, if there exist CorrX,Y >1, then the association of X and Y are positive correlated. Second, if there exist CorrX,Y <1, then the association of X and Y is negative correlated. Finally, if there exist CorrX,Y =1, then the association of X and Y is interdependent.

Technology of top-k has been introduced detailedly in preliminary work, here we will not repeat.



III. MINING TOP-K FAULT-TOLERANT ASSOCIATION RULES OVER DATA STREAMS  A. Calculating Fault-Tolerant Negative Itemsets In this section, we extend the theories of negative  itemsets to fault-tolerant space. Obviously, fault-tolerant itemsets are always with higher value of support but lower     value of confidence. Top-NFTDS algorithm is designed for mining top-k fault tolerant rules that the k is not the number of fault-tolerant frequent patterns but the number of fault-tolerant association rules. Top-NFTDS algorithm need not input the minimum support threshold and minimum confidence threshold.

Property 2 shows that fault-tolerant itemsets are unlike traditional itemsets that is no anti-monotone. Here, we construct a specific example to illustrate that calculation of fault tolerant negative itemsets is different from calculation of traditional negative itemsets.

Figure 1. Transactions in sliding windows.

The transaction data stream TDS consists of two consecutive sliding windows, i.e., SW1 and SW2. Let window size W is 6 transactions [8]. Let fault tolerant factor is 1. For mining k most frequent itemsets, Top- NFTDS algorithm need not input the minimum support threshold and minimum confidence threshold. Let all generated positive itemsets and negative itemsets are frequent. In Fig.1, let itemset (a, b, c) is X and (b, c, d) is Y.

Table 2 shows the positive support, negative support, positive fault tolerant support, negative fault tolerant support, confidence, and fault tolerant confidence of X and Y.

TABLE II.  REDUNDANCY IN RULE GENERATION  Itemsets Supp Conf FT-Supp FT-Conf  X 16.7  83.3  Y 33.3  50  ?X 83.3  16.7  ?Y 66.7  50  X??Y 0 0 50 60  ?X?Y 16.7 100 0 20  ?X??Y 66.7 80 0 0  By calculating above, we can get more useful information. For negative rule ?X??Y, traditional calculation method can draw the conclusions that rule ?X??Y is true. However, by fault tolerant theory, rule ?X??Y is false, the same as rule X??Y. If we extend the theories of negative itemsets to fault-tolerant space then we can get higher value of fault tolerant support and fault tolerant confidence. More useful information can help us to judge the effectiveness of discovered rules. By means of Top-NFTDS algorithm, we may achieve the goal of redundant pattern disambiguation more effectively.

B. Mining Top-k Fault-Tolerant Association Rules In preliminary work, we has proposed Top-NFTDS  algorithm. Using this algorithm, we can acquire k fault  tolerant itemsets. Then the following work is to generate fault-tolerant association rules. We propose an efficient algorithm called Top-NFTDS to generate rules using technology of fault tolerant negative itemsets. The algorithm consists of two phases: generating fault tolerant rules phase and redundant pattern disambiguation phase.

Algorithm 1 is designed for generating fault tolerant rules phase and it is given:  Algorithm 1: Generating fault tolerant rules Input: FTI1, FTI2,?FTIk Output: fault tolerant positive rules and fault tolerant negative rules.

1 Get-FTitemsets(FTI1, FTI2,?FTIk); 2 Initialize(PFTR, NFTR); 3 For each fault tolerant itemset FTIi do 4 Calculate_Psupp(); 5 Calculate_Nsupp(); 6    For each fault tolerant itemset FTIi?FTIk=X do 7      Calculate_Psupp(); 8      Calculate_Nsupp(); 9      Calculate_Pconf(); 10      Calculate_Nconf(); 11      Sort_Psupp(); 12      Sort_Nsupp(); 13      Sort_Pconf(); 14      Sort_Nconf(); 15         If  X. Psupp >  XK. Psupp then 16              If  X. Pconf >  XK. Pconf then 17                  Creat _PFTrule(PFTR); 18              End if 19         End if 20         If  X.Nsupp >  XK. Nsupp then 21              If  X. Nconf >  XK. Nconf then 22                  Creat _NFTrule(NFTR); 23              End if 24         End if 25   End for 26 End for  In first phase, Top-NFTDS output both fault tolerant positive rules and fault tolerant negative rules with maximum value of support and confidence. Generally, these patterns must be exist invalid patterns or expression repeated patterns. Next step Top-NFTDS will prune the fault tolerant space.

C. Disambiguating redundant patterns In procedure of redundant pattern disambiguation  phase, Top-NFTDS draws the fault tolerant rules finally which express useful information and is easy to understand for users.

Algorithm 2 is designed for disambiguating redundant patterns phase and it is given:  Algorithm 2: Disambiguating redundant patterns Input: fault tolerant positive rules and fault tolerant negative rules, and K Output: k fault tolerant rule 1 For each rule X do 2    For (k? K ) do 3    Calculate_corr(FTRi?FTRk) ; 4        If X.corr=1 then 5           Remove_rule(X);     6         End if 7         If X.corr<1 then 8            Remove_rule(X); 9         End if 10             k=0 and k++; 11      End for 12 End for  In algorithm 2, line 3-9 achieve the goal of identifying and removing redundant rules. The final phase of Top- NFTDS algorithm is described as follows. First, Top- NFTDS calculates the correlation of all fault tolerant rules generated by algorithm 1. Second, according to definition 7, Top-NFTDS removes false fault tolerant rules when the value of correlation less than or equal 1. Finally, Top- NFTDS draws K fault tolerant rules with higher value both of fault tolerant support and fault tolerant confidence.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS In this section, we will describe the performance of the  proposed algorithms. Same as preliminary experiment of mining top-k fault tolerant frequent itemsets, all the programs are implemented using Microsoft Visual C++ Version 6.0 and performed on a 3.0 GHz Intel Celeron processor with 512 MB memory in a windows XP system.

In preliminary work, we used the synthetic data set T7.I4.D1000K, T10.I6.D1000K and T15.I10.D1000K generated by IBM synthetic data generator. T, I and D mean the average transaction length, the average length of the maximal frequent itemset, and the total number of transactions, respectively. In this paper, we still use three transaction sets above.

We draw the conclusion of relationship between fault tolerant factor and support or confidence when K is a determination value.

Figure 2. Relationship between ? and support.

Figure 3. Relationship between ? and confidence.

Fig.2 shows the support change of fault tolerant rules with the change of fault tolerant factor ? when K is 3000.

First, it may mean that the greater value of allowed mismatches, the higher value of support for fault tolerance rules. Second, it may mean that the longer average length of transaction, the higher value of support for fault tolerance rules. Fig.3 shows the confidence change of fault tolerant rules with the change of fault tolerant factor.

On the contrary, with the increasing of value of mismatch, the confidence of fault tolerant rules become lower. It is clear that the property of fault-tolerant rule conform to the objective fact in real-world data stream.



V. CONCLUSION In order to solve the problem of mining top-k fault-  tolerance frequent rules over data streams, this paper has developed a novel algorithm called Top-NFTDS. It is integrated with previous research of mining top-k fault- tolerant itemsets into an integrity new method. Top- NFTDS can discover the true fault-tolerant rules without minimum support threshold and minimum confidence threshold specified by user. The Top-NFTDS algorithm discovers generalized fault-tolerant rules to express more abundant information, and then by negative fault-tolerant itemsets to disambiguate redundant patterns, ensure the validity of discovered rules. The experiment shows the algorithm is effective. The theoretical analysis shows our algorithm is nice with high efficiency and scalability. At last, by the verification experiment, we prove that Top- FTDS is rational and available.

