The Improvement of Weighted Association Rules Arithmetic Based on FP-tree

Abstract-When digging association rules among items, the items are dealt in an equal way. However, it is usually not  happen in databases in the real world.Different items always  have different importance.To reflect them, The way of draw weight into items and use weight association rules can solve the  problem.But weighted association rules arithmetic of these  research based on Apriori arithmetic at the present,There are problems as these:the candidate itemsets is huge, the cost of  resources is high and the efficiency is low. In regard to these  problems, a new Weight Association Rules method(FP-WAR) was discussed. FP-WAR based on FP-tree to discover weighted  association rules,FP-WAR handle weight clipping technology  based on k-support bound of item sets to improve markedly  efficiency of arithmetic.The experiment shows that the  efficiency of FP-WAR arithmetic is much better than current way to discover weighted association rules.

Keywords-KDD; Weighted FP-tree; K-Support Bound  Association  1. INTRODCTION  Rules;Apriori;  In recent years, Association rule is an important topic in the research of KDD[I). This topic is raised by R.Agrawal and others[2][3). But these mining means actually have two assumptions: a) Items in the database have the same character and function. That means the same importance; b) The distribution of items are even, which means the frequencies of occurrence are the same or similar, and in this frame of arithmetic, items in the database will be deal in an equal way.

However, it is usually not happen in databases in the real world. When the distribution of items in the database are not even and the frequencies of occurrence are very different, it will make the setting of minimum support very hard. If the setting is too high, the association rules been found may not come down to items with low frequency of occurrence. And when the setting is too low, many nonsensical even fake association rules will be found. And it may lead to  Xiao-Li Jiang  Center of Ecology Zhejiang Forestry University  Hangzhou ,China jxI1979@126.com  Chao Luo  TIANMU College Zhejiang Forestry University  Hangzhou ,China zb@microgrid.com.cn  combination explosion, the efficiency of arithmetic will be decreased until it is infeasible.

At present, there are several research works [ 4-11] aimed at this problem. These research work discover association rules based on weight association.Paper[8] advance concept of k-support bound of items, and from this it advance weighted association rules discover arithmetic. Paper [9] advance the concept of k- minimum support to improve the original Apriori arithmetic,This arithmetic can dig items with low frequency of occurrence but win high profit. And it make the discovered weighted association rules match the requirement of decision maker and fit the actual requirement.

Paper [10] advance the problem of level weighted association rules.It gives the solution and effective arithmetic New_Apriori. Paper [11] identifY items different importance with different weights,To compare with original Apriori arithmetic, this arithmetic is much valuable.

Compare with original works of weighted association rules discovery, the weighted association rules discovery research work of paper [4-11] has made the progress of discover more valuable association rules continue.

But weighted association rules arithmetic of these papers [4-11] are based on Apriori arithmetic at present. There are problems such as candidate items is huge, the cost of resources is high, the efficiency is low. These problems of Apriori arithmetic limited their improvement to the efficiency of weighted association rules discovery research work of paper [4-11] has made the progress of discover more valuable association rules.

In regard to these problems, a new Weighted Association Rules method( FP-WAR) was discussed. This paper changes the basic arithmetic and advances FP-W AR (The Improvement of Weighted Association Rules Arithmetic Based on FP-tree) aimed at these problems based on the research [4-11). We draw FP-tree into weighted association rules discovery progress, build WFP-tree( Weighted FT-tree), and use weighted prune FP-tree node technique WFP-tree-Prune(Ck) based on k-support bound in the      building process. With the advantage that FP-tree [12] is better than Apriori arithmetic obviously, widely cut the weighted irrespective itemsets based on item's k-support bound of paper [8] can improve the efficiency of discovering usable weighted association rules a lot. The experiment shows that the efficiency of FP-W AR arithmetic is much better than current way to discover weighted association rules.



II. FP-W AR(THE IMPROVEMENT OF WEIGHTED ASSOCIA TION RULES ARITHMETIC BASED ON FP-TREE)  A. Related Definition  Similar with paper[3] [8],we observe Transaction Database 0 . Its collection of items are 1 = {if, i2, . . .  , in}, each transaction is a subset of I, and assign a transaction id TID.

Definition-I: Association rules express X ? Y among  which XcI, Y c 1 , and X n 1 = 0 .

Definition-2: Support of association rules express X ? Y  is the probability of Xu Y is included in transaction database.

Definition-3: Cofidence of association rules express X ? Y is the probability of one transaction includes X and Y in the same time.

The given itemset 1= {ij, i2, ... , in} is the importance of express , we assign weight W j to each item 0 ,which O<=w j<=I ,j= {I, 2, ... , n}.

Imitate definition 2 ,we can definite weighted support to weighted association rules.

Definition-4: Weighted support of association rules  express X?y is [ JE  ? U  ; J}SUPPORTexuY?).

Definition-5: One k-itemset will be called weighted candidate itemset if its weighted support isn't lower than min weighted support threshould value Wmin Slip which means  [ ?>J ]eSUPPORTeXUY?)?WminSUP.

ijEXUY  Definition-6: Weighted association rule X ? Y interests people the most if X u Y is weighted candidate itemset, and its support isn't lower than min weighted support threshould value min coif.

Definition-7: k-support bound.If k-itemset including Y is weighted candidate,then its mm support IS  B(y,k)= [ W;n(;::rlwe call this B(Y,k) k-support bound ofY  B. FP-WAR Arithmetic  (I) FP-WAR Arithmetic Ideology  FP-WAR arithmetic adopts FP-tree's ideology, builds  WFP-tree( Weight FP-tree) of the weight of discover  weighted candidate itemsets, and draws k-support bound  prune technique WFP-tree-Prune (Ck ) of node of tree into  the progress of building WFP-tree, prunes the Infrequent  weighted candidate item sets to further improve the  efficiency of arithmetic.

(2) The Procedure of FP-WAR Arithmetic  I) Scan Transaction Database D once to produce  candidate item sets F and its support.

2) Accumulate support of l-itemset , calculate k-support bound of each l-itemset in F.

3) Collect l-itemsets whose support are not lower than k-support bound, and produce weighted candidate item set F (l-itemsets produce by all the items x in Fw are weighted candidate item set Cl ) and weighted support of item x.

4) Build WFP-tree: a) Built root node of WFP-tree signed with  "null".

b) Do these steps to each transaction t in  Transaction Database D: chose frequent items from t by weighted frequent items list L, delete Infrequent weighted item-set, place frequent items in transaction t by the order of elements' apperence in L.Use [ pi P] to express the ordered candidate elements, p is the first element, P is the list of the rest of elements. Then invoke insert WFP-tree ( [ p i P] , T ).

c) Among which, the process of function insert WFP-tree ( [ p i P] , T) is: If T has child node N, and N. item_name = Pitem_name, then add 1 to count of N,or build new node N and count 1 ,its parent node is T, the node will be link to the next node with the same name .If P is not null, then recursion employ insert WFP-tree ( P , N).

d) Weighted prune FP-tree node technic WFP-tree-Prune(Ck) based on k-support bound. the specific way to prune is: Subsets of candidate itemsets in Ck is not in Ck_ j,estimate the upper bound of support of candidate k-itemset x. It is the min support of k different (k-I) -item subset in Ck_j.According to calculated k-support bound of all the calculated itemsets, If the estimated upper bound to support shows that itemsets x can't be a subset of any candidate itemsets in subsequence scan, then it can be pruned.

e) Print weighted candidate itemsets of  [ LWJ ]eSUPPORTeXUY))?WminSUP.

ijEXUY  5) Print weighted association rules. The precedure is: Directly produced by all the found weighted  V4-550     candidate item sets. In detail, to all the subsets a which are not null of each weighted candidate  itemset L'if [ ?>jl(SUPPORT(XUY??wmjnsup , iJEXUY  and its support isn't lower than min support treshould value min corif', than there is weighted association rule X => Y .



III. EXPERIMENT AND ANALYSIS OF RESULT  We use Visual Foxpro on Pentium II 400 with 64M ram to compare FP-WAR with DWAR(discovery of weighted association rules) of paper [8] in the same experiment enviroment as paper [8], and do the arithmetic performance test with combined data.

The way to produce combined data is similar with paper[4],produce randomly with exponential distribution while producing the weight of each item. The result of this arithmetic is fig 1 and fig 2.

?  (j 30 Q) C/J  v E 20 ? ?       U' 30 Q) ?  Q) ? ;:; 20 ::l  ?   o  I--+--FP.WAR -+-DWARI  2500 5000 7500 10000  The number of Transaction  Fig I. Compare of Diffusive Character  I--+--FP.WAR -+-DWARI ? /  ? ... -------  0.5 0.25 0.05 Minimum Weighted Support Percentage(%)  Fig2. Compare of Performance  We test diffusive character of arithmetic first in Database L We start the number of customers' transaction in the test database from 1000, and increase to 10000, Set the min  support as 2%.The diffusive character data curve of this arithmetic is fig I.

Then we test the performance change of arithmetic with different min support in in Database II. The test database is fixed to the new 5000 tuples, chan the min support to these value: 2%, 1%, 0.5%, 0.25% and 0.05%.The result is showed in fig 2. We can find that when the support decreased, the execute time arised.

From figl,2 we can find FP-WAR arithmetic's performance is highly improved compared with DWAR arithmetic in the diffusive character and efficiency of execution of arithmetics.

IV. CONCLUSION.

This paper mainly solves the problems such as efficiency of discovery weighted association rules is not high enough, Our research based on work of paper [4-11], to continue the progress of improving the efficiency of weighted association rules discovery arithmetic. From the experiment, We can find that FP-WAR can cut more Infrequent weighted candidate items compared with related research [4-11] in weighted association rules discovery process, to further improve the performance of arithmetic, and the total efficiency of execution is highly raised. The research findings "online wire and cable technical parameter and electrical performance of products association collecting analysis system" has been ploughed into industrialized application, and get good effect.

ACKNOW LEDGEMENT  The project is supported by Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Fund under grand No.Y1090603;Zhejiang Science and Technology Department Project under grand No.2009C350l2;Zhejiang Hangzhou Science and Technology Department Project under grand No.20062422B09;Zhejiang Forestry University project under grand:No.200728, YB0848 and YB0634;Zhejiang Hangzhou Education Department Project under grand N020070389.

