User Interest Modeling Based on Browsing Behavior

Abstract-Based on the combination of five user mlDImum  browsing behaviors, this paper focuses on a comprehensive  analysis of the quantitative relations between the user  browsing time and the user interest rate, and proposed a new  method of calculating degree of thematic interest, this method  is based on association rule. Obtain user's interest by fuzzy  clustering algorithm, and establish user interest model. The  experiments confirm that the method of calculating user  interest rate is reasonable and effective, the user interest model  responses user interest exactly, and have been effectively used  in personalized service.

Keywords-personalized service; the smallest combination of  browsing behavior; user interest rate; user interest model

I. INTRODUCTION  With the development of the Internet and the information  updating technologies, there are more and more network  resources and methods to acquire them. As a result, how to  get the part one needs from so large amount of network  resources becomes especially important. The personal  service has successfully dealt with the problems such as  "information overload" and "resource wonders" existing in  the present Internet.

User interest model is the key part of the personal service  system and the accuracy of user interest description directly  decides the quality of the personal service system. Supported  by the accelerators of Beijing Wanzhong Yeemu Science and  Technology Co. Ltd., this thesis collects information  including browsing behavior from the web users register  information, server diaries as well as BHO components.

After the preprocessing of the information collected and  calculated user interest rate, the thesis will analyze and  process the data and then build a user interest model.



II. USERS BROWSING BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS  Morita, and Shinoda [IJ, Konstan [2J, and Claypool [3J, and  others drew the same conclusion during their researches on  user browsing behaviors: the user browsing time is the main  symbol of user interest rate; the longer users read, the more  interested in the content. Xiaomin [4J lucubrate browsing  behaviors on the basis of previous studies, obtained the  following conclusions:  The user's browsing behavior can be classified into  three categories, namely physical behavior (eye  rotation, heart rate changes etc.), significant behavior  DongYUE XinyuZHAO  School of Control and School of Control and  computer Engineering computer Engineering  North China Electric North China Electric  Power University Power University  Beijing, China Beijing, China  e-mail: e-mail:  Eagle859653 88@163.com zxy5300763@163.com  (save the page, print page and other acts) and  indirect behaviors (browsing time, mouse keyboard  operation etc.).

Indirect behaviors are the main source to estimate  user interest rate. Significant behaviors act in the  event that the user is high degree of interest in the  corresponding page, but fewer significantly  behaviors happens, a large number of pages have no  corresponding significant acts, as a result the  significant behaviors only play a supporting role in  the estimation of user interest.

With the analysis of user's indirect behaviors, the  smallest combination of browsing behaviors draw as  follows: save a page, print a page, store a page in the  Bookmark, the number of times to visit the same  page, dwell time on a page.

The estimate of user interest in this paper is based on the  minimum combination of browsing behavior. This paper  focuses on a comprehensive analysis of the quantitative  relations between the user browsing time and the user  interest rate.



III. USER INTEREST RATE CALCULATING  During the aggregate of the browsing behaviors: Save    pages or save a page into the Bookmark-if the user is really  interested in these pages, which always be invoked for  several times to re-visit, that can be reflected in the number  of visits; Print page-we simply assume that users is very  interested on this page. The following of this paper focuses  on a comprehensive analysis of the quantitative relations  between the user browsing time and the user interest rate and  proposes a new method of calculating theme interest rate,  which is based on association rule.

A. User Interest Rate Calculating Based on Browsing  Time  Definition I: Web Interestingness- Web Interestingness  is introduced to describe user's interest on the content of a  page, represented with a real number between 0 and I, 0  means no interest on the content, while 1 means great  interest on that content.

Definition 2: UPTV(n,ij) The time matrix of user's  accessing pages(Figure 1 )-it expresses the user n accessing  time of page i during time frame j.

978-1-4244-6542-2/$26.00  2010 IEEE V5-455   Figure 1. The time matrix of user's accessing pages.

Considering user's browsing time on a page, the longer  residence time, the more interested on the page. We can  estimate the user n's interest rate on page p by Formula (1)  as follows:  In this equation, p represents all the pages that user n  have visited and 0 :S Int? er;; :S  However, there are still some inaccuracies during the  measurement which is only calculated by browsing time.

On the one hand, maybe there are two reasons for short  browsing time on the page p: 1) the user are not interested on  the page p; 2) the length of the content of page p is very short,  but the user is indeed interested on the contents of the page.

Therefore, we need to use the document's length to  standardize the browsing time; the Formula (2) gives a  method to standardize user's browsing time on the page p.

1S(;'l:,?(  = ?{ 1?<8 ? }  ( 2)  On the other hand, there exists such a situation that users  are still do other things while browsing page p, as a result the    browsing time is too long to describe interest rate accurateIy  the maximum browsing time in Formula (1) far from the  normal one, resulting in the estimated, which is close to 0  and much less than 1, are most out of user interest rate.

Therefore, in order to solve the inaccurate estimates caused  by unusual view, we preprocess browsing time with a  nonlinear method , which is shown in Figure 2.

a I  ? M?'1---------?r-------r---  /  /  /  ClIt point  Figure 2. The method of preprocessing browsing time.

We will limit browsing time's value to a maximum  browsing time Max_T When a user's browsing time on a  page is more than a certain threshold cut?oint; while we  will keep their real cost when the time is less than the  cut_point. With the formula expressed as Formula (3):  _ $ q I :r;: cu.t"YPi llt  l.rut (I1'J - t Ma.", . I x:::; ? ?ilfur 3)  In the pretreatment process, the choice of threshold  cut_point's value is very important, too big or too small will  affect the validity of the estimated degree of user interest.

As the visit time related to the page length and the speed  of the browsing, we introduce the following Formula (4) to  obtain the cut_point value of page p.

C&atlact.e11 tcO'ul'J.t!( J  <:IJ.t'p: ?int"  =  . iN.{ReadS ?edl (4)  In this equation, Cfu.at1ac;t?(coul'J.t!( ) indicates the  number of characters in page p; mm UE?adS!iI?ectl  indicates the minimum read-speed.

B. User interest Rate Calculating Decay with Time  The interest rate of all pages in the user interest model  will decline over time, in order to describe user's interest  accurately in the near future; we introduce the gradual  forgetting function, as shown in Formula 5:  ,f'o't1gettfotcr.g(t, = q,  [ t- - tt;y: ] :Il _ q, (5 ) tl,P; - tf; 'f!

In this equation, indicates the current moment, tt;p  indicates the first time to visit page p, tl,p indicates the last    time to visit page p; q is a forgetting factor, it reflects the  speed of forgetting, if q = 0 there is no forgetting, while q = I  a fully nonlinear forgotten occurs.

In summary, the user access time is pretreated by the  combination of the formula (2) (3), then with the  introduction of forgetting function as formula (5) , we reach  a algorithm which is more accurately to estimate the degree  of user's interest, as Formula (6) below.

Im.tetIer;; ."qa. = ft'l.tq ?r;;t.(a.  f'O tlg.ettt<Ng' (t. ? ?}  C. The Theme interest Calculating Based on Association  Rule  We have obtained user's interest rate of a single  accessing a single page, but using a single page to describe  user's interest is not suitable. Therefore, we should draw a  cluster analysis first before describing the user's interests, in  this paper we use a fuzzy clustering algorithm based on split  level to obtain user's interest pages clusters, and then obtain  the Theme T. As a result, user's interests could be described  by the interests of themes; this approach is high  comprehensive with great accuracy.

Reading a lot of research materials, we found that, in  calculating the degree of user interest on a theme, many  investigators are simply calculate the average rate of cluster  pages corresponding to the theme, so there is a serious  problem: during a certain period, a user visited the theme A,  only one page, but with high degree of interest, we could  draw a conclusion with previous algorithm that the user is  very interest in the topic A. Obviously, this conclusion is  V5-456   unreasonable. Faces the problem above, we propose a new  method of calculating degree of thematic interest.

First, we quote two concepts in data mining as follows:  Definition 3: Confidence Level (It.) [6]: The level of the I  rule ?, ? iF refers to "the number of transactions that both  contains X and Y in the total number of transactions  containing X percentage". In other words, confidence level is  described as the interest level in (X, V), so we define  confidence level as the user's level of interest on the subject  tj, using the following formula:  t,ltl I' u eve"fl, . a q)  ftl = ? 'nt. ...  (Inretle's,t- (n.. g} :;. 'mill) ("1) .:JjJ;ltt .e-t1e's,.. n..

In this equation, & ttl ?o:;o'uncil indicates the sum of user  interest rate of interested pages about theme ti, while  g tt. ?c;ou indicates the sum of all pages about theme ti'  Definition 4: Support Level (S'u otIt:  j i6] : The level  of the rule i{, -'t 1" refers to "the number of transactions  containing X and Y in the total number of transaction U  percentage". We consider ti. as a rule, all the pages that user  visited as transaction U, and n as the total number of pages.

The calculation of support level show as follows:  tt c;oun.t')  S'u O t1t'??I) = ...::....--.

n  Support value is a useful indicator, if the value is too  small, meaning that the access is a particular incident, results  in inaccurate estimates.

Second, we define the following three thresholds:  [min. - User interesting threshold on a page: if  Inttltles "?n.. ..;: 'tI'ln , it is indicates that the user is  not interest in page p.

?;min - User interesting threshold on a theme: if  ft"i ..;: It i Dll lI" it is indicates that the user is not interest  in theme ti '  S'up 0  (tt} ml ll. - Theme support threshold: if  S'u O Clt-(tt l ..;: S'u otlt- ttJrn1rr, it is indicates that  the user is not pay much attention on theme t; and  out of interest on theme tj .

The estimate of theme interest based on association rules  could be completed by the following steps:  Step 1: Draw a correspondence in page p and theme T;  Step2: Set threshold [ mi n , and calculate the interest rate  on the theme Itj ;  Step3: Calculate the support value of theme t, ,  S'u 0 (tt } q tl, e 1) ;  Step4: Sort with Itj and S'u otlt-ttt.) , then filter out the  pages below [tjmin. and Sup o11t ?t.I)ml lI ' finally to determine  user interests.

D. Interest Expression and Modeling User interest  After accessing some analysis above, we begin to  establish the user interest model. There are some common  methods to establish a model, such as weighted vector model,  weighted semantic network model, bookmarks and directory  structure[7] etc. In this paper, we use the weighted vector    model method to describe user interests, and then the  modeling results will be stored in the database. Weighted  vector model is defined as a vector U for each user, the  expressions ofU as follows:  = {(e'I.l lt1 ' St1), (t' ? It'? 1 St':), D<O I (til l ft'? 1 St?) (9 )  In this equation, ti indicates the categories of cluster  result, [t ; indicates user's interest rate on the subject, St;  indicates the support value on the theme.

The establishment of such a model, we can clearly  expressed user interest, and also can provide accurate and  timely recommendations for users and Web search functions.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  We have obtained user interest rates of 20 pages that the  user visited recently by Formula (6), shown as Table I.

TABLE! USER INTEREST RATE  Theme Calculate Mark Consistency  Interest Rate Interest measure  Rate  t, 0.2675 0.30 0.8917  t, o 1235 0.10 0.8097  t, 0.7143 0.6 0.8399  t" 0.2538 0.2 0.7880  t" 0.3625 OA5 0.8055  t" 0.6015 0.65 0.9254  t" 0.6820 0.8 0.8525  t" 0.7243 0.6 0.8284  tz 0.6812 0.65 0.9542  t" 0.9335 0.95 0.9826  t.:: 0.8125 0.75 0.9231  t.> 0.7315 0.85 0.8606  t., 0.2881 0.30 0.9603  t., 0.9350 0.95 0.9842  " 0.3827 OA5 0.8504  " 0.3813 0.25 0.6556  " 0.5323 0.50 0.9393  t. 0.6617 OAO 0.6045  " 0.6184 0.65 0.9513  " 0.5333 0.65 0.8205  In the table, we find that the calculated user mterest value  and user mark interest value are in a large consistency, most  of that reach to 0.8, which shows that the browser time-based  user interest calculation have good results.

Then, we get the themes by the cluster algorithm, and set  thresholds 'mI n. = 0,35 , ftlm!, = 0,7 , S'u. ort(tt;';r,!, 1l. = 0,2 ,  finally we get the user interest rate vector based on themes,  show as follows:  = (( !, -,0,g 4n I0,3) , ( ", 0,';'5 43,0,3) / ( . ? 0 ,1? 1L O,25))

V. CONCLUSIONS  In this paper, we proposed a new method of calculating  user interest rate which is based on user browsing behavior  and a new method of calculating theme interest which is  based on association rule, these two methods are proved  accurate, effective and with good comprehensive  considerations. The model of user interest has been applied  to a personal service system that relies on a network  accelerator. The results show that the system describes the  degree of user interest accurately, with high efficiency and  accuracy, which achieves the desired requirements.

