An Multi-process Association Rules Mining Algorithm Based on Message Queue

Abstract-The issue of association rules mining is deeply discussed in this paper. An association rules mining algorithm based on message queue is presented after summarizing the advantages and disadvantages of current mining algorithms.

This method firstly uses process management corn ponent to  create the processes of mining association rules and then uses the message queue to communicate the frequent itemsets of every process to im prove the parallel processing capability.

The principle and steps of this method are given, the experimental results show that the algorithm is efficient and effective.

Keywords- Message Queue; Data Mining; Association Rules; Process Management

I. INTRODUCTION  In recent years, the data mining technology has caused great interest in academia and information industry, the main reason is that mass data is widely available, and we have the urgent need to convert data into useful information and knowledge. Among them, association rules mining is an important data mining issues, and has been widely concerned.

It is mainly used for discovering the interesting association or correlation of items in large data set. Currently, with the expansion of the data scale, although the traditional serial algorithm has been made many improvements, it still can't change the times of database scanning, as well as the workload and the computing time of single-processor, which can't meet the performance requirements of the large data set.

In this case, the parallel association rules mining technology emerged.

Parallel algorithm is a set of various processes that execute simultaneously, these processes interact and collaborate to solve the given problem. At present, compared with the Serial processing model, the parallel association rules mining has considerable advantages, Literature[2] first proposed a method of parallel association rules mining, which put the sequential mining problems of association rules into parallel mining problems under the condition of multi-CPU sharing memory and external memory.

Subsequently, Agrawal et.proposed three parallel association  rules mining algorithm[3], these algorithms adopt a different strategy to calculate the frequency of the candidate set, the first is counting distribution (CD) algorithm, the second is data distribution (DD) algorithm, and the third is candidates set distribution (CaD) algorithm. These parallel processing algorithms have advantages and disadvantages, the amount of data exchanged by CD algorithm is less, and the memory is not utilized; the utilization rate of DD algorithm is higher, but there are a great deal of communication among the processors; the CaD algorithm realizes asynchronous computation, but needs to redistribute database. In order to reduce traffic between the various regional problems, D.W.Cheung proposed Fast Distributed association rules Mining(FDM) algorithm in 1996, which improved the CD algorithm, but the complexity of traffic in each scan is O(n).

Partition algorithm[  l] is a highly parallel algorithm, which can allocate each block to the same processor to generate frequency. However, the candidate itemsets generated in the second phase is decided by the size of local data set of each processor. So the number of candidate itemsets generated is lager than ones of CD algorithm.

The paper presents a multi-process parallel association rules mining algorithm based on message queue. first of all, uses process management to generate the various processes of mining association rules needed; then uses the message queue to complete the communication among the frequent item sets of the transaction database formed, and experimental analysis show that the algorithm can adapt to data mining of large data sets.



II. RELATED CONCEPTS OF ASSOCIATION RULES MINING  Association rules mining is used to excavate the implicit rules and the relation of data. The model of association rules is declarative knowledge, and the algorithm is unsupervised learning method. Let I={I1 ,I2,"',In} be a set of items, Let D be a set of database transactions, where each transaction T is a set of items such that T S; I. An association rule is an implication of the form A => B, where A, B is itemset, A S; I, B S; I and A (1 B =<1>. The attributes of association rules are described as follows.

(1) Support: in the transaction database D if s is the percentage of transactions in 0 containing A which also contains B, that is s%=Support(A? B), which expresses the frequency of the rules. A minimum support threshold is Minsup.

(2) Conjidence: in the transaction database D if c is the percentage of transaction in A containing B, that is c%= Conjidence(A ? B), which expresses the strength of the rules. A minimum confidence threshold is Minconf.

(3) Frequent itemset: An itemset satisfies minimum support if the occurrence frequency of the itemset is greater than or equal to Minsup in the transaction database D. If an itemset satisfies minmum support, then it is a frequent itemset.

Association rules mining is to find out the association rules that satisfy both a minimum support threshold(Minsup) and a minimum confidence threshold(Minconf) in the transaction database D. Association rules mining is a two-step process:  Step 1: Find all frequent itemsets in transaction database.

Step 2: Generate association rules from the frequent  itemsets that found in step 1, for each frequent itemsets A, if B ? A, B * ([J and Conjidence (B ? (A-B)) ? Minconf, then these constitute an association rule B ? (A-B).



III. ASSOCIA nON RULES MINING ALGORITHM BASED ON MESSAGE QUEUE  A. Message Queue  Unix System V provides a series of process communication mechanism that IPC(interprocess communication) mechanism, which greatly enhances the Unix interprocess communication. The IPC mechanism includes three types: message queue, semaphore and shared memory. Message queue as one way of interprocess communication that the Unix operating system kernel provides had been widely used. Algorithm realizes communication between the main process and the child process using message queue technology.

In message queue, the communication of process is an asynchronous mode that established based on message queue, the process can send or receive data of some kind of format[5l, the message queue by the order of arrival, for the same type of message, the first to reach, the first to be recevied. The length of message can be variable, and the maximum length determined by the system constant MSGMAX. So the sender of the message needn't wait the receiver to check its message.

While sending the message, the sender can engage in other work, and the recipient needn't have to wait for the arrival of the message. The principle of message queue is shown in Figure 1.

send send  Process A receive  Message Queue receive Process B  Figure I The principle of message queue  The operating system kernel, such as the creation of message queue, sending or receiving message, the control and revocation of message queue, has been achieved by the C function, but the structure of various applications is poor in usability, and the interface is more complex. Therefore, the paper will package the various operations of message queue as a public component. The component integrates the various operations, such as create and delete a message queue, receive message, the Class diagram of message queue is shown in Figure 2.

CMessage  #m_MsgKey : long  +CMessage(in IMsgKey long)  +CreateMsgO : int  +DeleteMsgO : int  +GetMsgNumO : int  +SndMsg(in data: void?, in size: int, in flag : int) : int +revMsg(in data: void?, in size: int, in flag : int) int  ? CAssociationMsg  +CAssociationMsg(in IMsgKey : long)  +sndltemMsg(in task: stltems .) : int  +revltemMsg(in task: stltems *) : int  +setMsgkey(in IMsgKey : int) : int  +sndFlagMsg(in stTaskFlag : char", in flag: int): int  +revFlagMsg(in strTaskFlag : char?, in flag: int) : int  FIgure 2 the Class dIagram of message queue Class CMessage is a basic class that provides various  public operations for message queue. It abstracts message content of message queue, which achieves to put any type of data as a message to be sent or received. Using class CAssociationMsg inherits the basic class of message queue.

The function of this class provides methods to operate the message queue, such as sending a set of frequent itemsets to message queue, receiving the frequent itemsets from message queue, receiving and sending finish or exit message, which takes "flag" as a symbol to distinguish the different types of message.

In this way, each process of the algorithm can call the message queue to send or receive message. that is, owning the message queue is equivalent to achieving the communication between the various processes.

B. Process Management  Process management is the first called module of parallel association rules mining in process. Generate all the processes needed when algorithm starts, and record the related information of each process to the process control table to monitor. Execution as follows:  Step 1: Read the number of child processes that configured in advance and the signal values from parameter table of the database.

Step 2: Judge signal of the value whether it has been created in the operating system. If not created denotes that the system hasn't been started before, need to create the signal and jump to Step 3. If the signal already exists that means the program has been launched, check the status of each process in the process control table, pad out the process(Fork operation) that has been quited according to the process status, set the corresponding process serial number and jump to Step 5.

V3-573     Step 3: Calculate the unique identifier between the child process and the main process, which is the key value of message queue. Put a pre-defined fixed value plus 1 as key value of message queue. After completing key value, call message queue component to establish the appropriate message queue.

Step 4: Set the process serial number according to the number of Fork process in order to distinguish the child processes, so that the child process can enter into their own process while handling the tasks.

Step 5: Write the related information of each process generated by Fork operation into the process control table.

including process ID, process generate time, process state and process serial number. process serial number 0 indicates the primary process.

C. Mining Algorithm  The algorithm uses the child processes generated by process management to scan the transaction database, so that it splits the candidate sets of large items. Each child process calculates Support of the candidate itemsets respectively.

The algorithm generally described as follows.

(1) Call process management, and put it into the main  process according to the process serial number, then scan the transaction database and calculate all frequent itemsets Ll that meet the minimum Support. That K = I.

(2) When K> 1, the main process is candidate frequent itemsets Ck containing K items that generated by Lk.1 the itemsets are average divided into X, where X is  ' the  number of child process, distribute the itemsets divided to each child process through message queue.

(3) According to the process serial number, access to the child process p  i through interface provided by process  management. p i get candidate itemsets Ci  k containing K  items correspondingly. Compute Support of itemsets Ci k  by scanning the transaction database, and obtain K items of frequent itemsets Li  k that the corresponding child  process i greater than minimum Support. Then send it as message to the main process through message queue.

(4) The main process get the frequent itemsets sent by each child process through message queue, merge these frequent itemsets received and obtain global K items of frequent itemsets Lb and calculate the candidate frequent itemsets Ck+]' then determine whether to terminate or continue to search for the next step to complete the whole process of association rules mining.

The pseudo-code of algorithm described below.

Input:transactions Database; minimum support threshold Output: L, frequent itemsets in D.

Method: (1  )processMgt. DeteProcess(D)I ICall  management component to process and record information  (2)LJ=find _ frequent_l-itemsets(D)  the process generate the  (3)if(processMgt.m_Msglnfo.msgNum == 0) IIEnter into the main process according to the process serial number  (4){ if(Lk_1 "* l/J)then  Ck=apriori...Een(Lk_J ,MinThreshold)  SpiltCandidateItems(Ck ,processMgt.m _ Msglnfo.pro Count)  for(x=l; x<=proCount; x++) cAssoMsg.sndItemMsg(Ch  end cAssoMsg.sndExitFlagOllsend exit sign after disposed processMgt.UpdateControIToExit(getpidO,msgNum)  (5)}else llEnter into the child process (6){ cAsso M sg.rev ItemMsg( ch  Frequent_gen(Ct,MinThreshold, Lhllgenerate frequent itemsets  cAssocMsg.sndItemMsg(Lk) (7)}

IV. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS  To verifY the effectiveness of the algorithm, the hardware environment used is the operating system Aix5.3, memory lOG, 4CPU, OraclelOg, and C++ language is used to implement the algorithm. The data used in the paper is the product ordered of mobile phone user of telecommunications industry, the number of data is 10 million, some examples of data sets are shown in TABLE 1.

The first column is user ID, the second column is the user's business, set the minimum Confidence is 40%, and compared with the Apriori algorithm in different Support, the results are shown in Figure 3, and some association rules through the parallel mining algorithm are shown in TABLE 2.

TABLE I SOME EXAMPLES OF DATA SETS userID The order business 10872 Mobile chat, Mobile purse, Mobile video 39808 WAP, GPRS, Mobile newpaper 67362 RBT, Mobile chat, Mobile newpaper 85699 RBT, MMS, Mobile chat    I1l 200 "-...

I1l 150 8 . ,.;  +-' 100    O. 5 1 2 3 4 5  Figure 3 Experimental Comparison  TABLE 2 SOME ASSOCIA nON RULES  Rule Support(% Confidence( ) %) W AP, Mobile newpaper ->GPRS 2.767 70.425.

Mobile video, W AP-> Mobile 1.132 64.444  newpaper  Mobile chat, MMS -> Mobile cartoon 1024 57.692  The expenmental results show that the algOrIthm IS feasible to mine large data sets.

V3-574

