Interaction with computers using mobile devices

Abstract?We propose a new interaction way that uses mobile devices to input and output devices of computers. The idea is simple but powerful, because 1) mobile devices are popular, 2) people can use them easily, 3) people carry them at all times, 4) two displays one of which is a big display for a computer and another is a small display of a mobile device may make new interaction and visualization and 5) a user can store parts of public data in physically independent device, that is his/her mobile device. We expect that our idea may make psychological barrier lower than now so that users can access and modify all data around the world more easily. In this paper, we show an example application based the idea we propose and discuss its possibilities.

Keywords-Mobile devices, Focus + Context, Post-WIMP in- terface, Ubiquitous computing, Data personalization, Pocketing data

I. INTRODUCTION Most people today have their own mobile phones. Current  mobile phones are actually small computers. They have enough computing power to send e-mails, show web pages, play games, and so on. Mobile phones are the most familiar computers to us.

In contrast, personal computers are still considered diffi- cult to use. Since there are many useful applications running on personal computers, making really good ways to use personal computers may be profitable. Strangely however, many people are afraid to use personal computers even though they fully utilize their mobile phones which have almost the same ability as personal computers.

Our idea is to use a mobile device as the input and output device of a personal computer. By making use of a familiar device, that is, a mobile phone, people may find it much easier to use a personal computer. In addition, we think that mobile devices for input and output may provide a new human computer path.

We expect that the advantages of our idea are: 1) Most people have their own mobile devices. There is  no need to buy a mobile device for a proposed system.

2) The proposed system is easy-to-use because users can  use their favorite mobile devices.

3) Since users carry around their mobile devices at any  time, they can use the proposed system everywhere.

4) To use two displays physically, which are a display for  a personal computer and a display of a mobile device, may allow users easy to recognize the difference of  data displayed in the personal computer display and the mobile device display. It may make new interaction and visualization methods.

5) Users can store parts of public data in their mobile devices. They can be the owner of the data. We call it as pocketing data. They can browse, investigate or modify the pocketed data freely, without any distur- bance, because the pocketed data is stored in their mobile devices locally.

We expect that our system may make psychological barrier to use computers lower than now so that users can access and modify all data around the world more easily.

In a way, pocketing data we mentioned in 5) is already achieved by the World Wide Web. In the Web, users can access data around the world by their mobile devices.

However, the Web is closed in electronic virtual world. We think that it is possible for the users to interact both of the virtual and real world by using mobile devices. Our idea may contribute it.

In Section II, we set out our requirements and problems clearly. In Section III, we explain how we have solved the problems mentioned in Section II, and show an example application which uses the interaction we propose. The logical aspects of the proposed interaction are mentioned in Section IV. Our discussion is in Section V and conclusions in Section VI.



II. SYSTEM SPECIFICATION  A. Architecture  Our idea is to use mobile devices as input and output de- vices of personal computers. Figure 1 shows the architecture which realizes our idea. There are several computers and mo- bile devices. Personal computers and mobile devices which have sharable data can communicate with any computers or mobile devices in a local network. Mobile devices which do not have sharable data can communicate with computers or mobile devices which have sharable data. Two personal computers and one mobile device in Figure 1 have sharable data.

In this architecture, data in a personal computer can be shared. The computer sends data to mobile devices when they request it. The computer receives data from the mobile devices when they send it. All data flows are controlled   DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.27   Information Visualisation  DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.27    DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.27     by the mobile devices. The computers are passive. This architecture means that we use mobile devices as both the input and the output devices of computers.

Each mobile device can request computers to send data, modify the data and resend the data to the computers. We assume that the mobile devices keep data temporarily, and send back the data to the computer if necessary. We can consider this ability of the mobile devices as a function application.

B. Technical Problems  To realize our idea shown in Figure 1, two problems must be solved.

1) How do machines (personal computers and mobile devices) communicate with each other?

In terms of convenience, the most important point is that we can put mobile devices in the network of our system without special operations. If someone goes to a room in which our system is running, his/her mobile device can join our network without any operation. We have to find the way to achieve this environment.

2) How do we design interaction with mobile devices?

For example, how does a mobile device specify the machine to connect to?

We would like to design intuitive interaction for our system. Some mobile devices have acceleration sen- sors so that we can use them to achieve intuitive interaction.

We describe our ideas for solving these problems in the next section.



III. SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION  A. Communication between machines  To solve problem 1 mentioned in Section II, we use Bonjour as the communication protocol, which is a zero- configuration networking. Bonjour1 is developed by Apple Inc. for Mac OS X and Windows. Therefore, only machines which use Bonjour can use our system.

The salient characteristic of Bonjour is that there is no server machine but all machines in a subnet broadcast their services. Without any registration action, a machine in the subnet searches the available service by itself. Therefore, we can construct a system which satisfies the condition we mentioned in Section II.

In our system, all personal computers and certain mobile devices whose data we would like to share with other mobile devices are registered to sharing the data machine service. Certain operations are needed to register the service.

However, for most mobile devices which don?t share their data with other devices, no operations for receiving and sending data to/with other computers are needed.

1http://developer.apple.com/mac/library/documentation/Cocoa/ Concep- tual/NetServices/Introduction.html  B. Interaction  For intuitive interaction, we plan to use acceleration sensors in mobile devices. We interpret movement of a mobile device as input for personal computers. For example, if we wave a mobile device back and forth or tip it, a computer interprets the movement as some command.

In an example application reported in this paper, we plan to implement the function which selects a machine to be connected by the movement of a mobile device, but we have not yet implemented it. A machine to be connected is selected by a menu in the example application. What we can do, however, is select which part of an image to get from a personal computer to a mobile device by movement of the mobile device. We can zoom the image up or down by using a touch panel or buttons on the mobile device.

C. An example application  We have developed an example application which can send one part of an image from a machine (a personal computer or a mobile device) to another mobile device and zoom it up and down in the mobile device. The exam- ple application consists of several personal computers and several mobile devices. These machines must be supported by Bonjour, and the mobile devices must have acceleration sensors. Therefore, we use Mac PC as a personal computer and iPod touch or iPhone as a mobile device.

We have developed an example application which can send and receive images between a personal computer and a mobile device, or between a mobile device and another mobile device. The functions of personal computers and mobile devices are as follows.

The functions of personal computers  ? A personal computer can capture a current desktop image and send part of it to mobile devices, if a mobile device requests the image.

? A personal computer can receive an image from a mobile device, and put it on the current desktop image, if the mobile device sends the image to the computer.

The functions of mobile devices ? A mobile device can select the partner of the connec-  tion, that is, a personal computer or a mobile device.

In the current test system, the selection is done by selecting a button with the machine?s name. In future, we would like to design a more intuitive interaction way.

? A mobile device can specify the part of the desktop image of a personal computer by acceleration sensors, and receive that part of the image.

? A mobile device can send or receive one part of the original image to/from another mobile device.

? A mobile device can modify the received image. In the current test system, we can only add a new line to the image. In future, we would like to develop other     sharable  data  sharable  data  sharable  data  Mobile Device  Mobile Device  Mobile Device  Mobile Device  Figure 1. System Architecture  complex functions to change an image with a touch panel on a mobile device.

? A mobile device can zoom the received image up and down. If a mobile device does not have the data on a region which is needed in scaling the image down too much, the region is displayed as blank.

? A mobile device can send the image on it to a personal computer.

? A mobile device can send the image on it to another mobile device if the mobile device requests it.

Figure 2 shows an example application we developed.

In this figure, a personal computer, which is the bigger dis-  play in this figure, shows a wikipedia page which describes ?kimono?. When you want to look a picture of this page on mobile device A, you send a request from mobile device A to the personal computer. Then the personal computer captures  its display. You move the mobile device A up, down, right or left, and decide the area which to be sent from the personal computer to mobile device A. In Figure 2, the mobile device A shows the picture sent from the personal computer. On the mobile device, you can zoom the picture up or down.

In Figure 2, we also use mobile device B which shows the zoomed up picture of mobile device A. In this example, mobile device A sends the picture to mobile device B because mobile device B have requested the picture. This is the connection between mobile devices. In the case of low-resolution images, the zoomed up image may be blurry.

We plan to use various resolution images for this system in future.



IV. LOGICAL BACKGROUND The system we have proposed has a logical background  which is based on ? calculus.

Figure 2. An example application  Index-added term (extended ?-terms, term, for short) is defined:  (i) If x is a variable, then x is a term.

(ii) If M, N are terms, then (M N) is a term.

(iii) If x is a variable and M is a term, then (?x.M) is a term.

(iv) If i is an index and M is a term, then (i : M) is a term.

The term has three conversion rules of ? calculus which are ?, ? and ? conversions. In addition, there are two conversion rules.

(?1) (i : M j : N) i . j j : (M N)  (?2) ?x.i : M i : ?x.M  where . is a relation.

If the term M has a normal form, it is unique up to ?  conversion. Because we assume: M ?? M1 ?? Mnormal N ?? N1 ?? Nnormal  Then, (1)  i : M ?? i : M1 j : N ?? j : N1 (i : M1 j : N1) i . j  j : (M1 N1) j : (Mnormal Nnormal)  (2) ?x.i : M i : M ?? i : M1  ?x.i : M1 i : ?x.M1  i : ?x.Mnormal In the example application, index i denotes a personal  computer or mobile device. Relation i . j holds when i can send a image to j, that is, when i is registered as a sharing data machine.



V. DISCUSSION  The studies of interaction using mobile devices, especially iPhone or iPod touch are among those of post-WIMP (Window, Icon, Menu, Pointing device) interfaces [1], [4], [10]. Our study is another one of them. The feature of our study is that we propose a system which uses a combination of personal computers and mobile devices.

From the point of view of information visualization, the proposed system is an application of the focus+context method [3], [5]. Most focus+context methods present an overview impression and detailed information in the same image, but some represent them in different windows on the same display. Our proposed system can show them in different displays, on a personal computer and on a mobile device, or on different mobile devices. We can consider the proposed system as a new method of focus + context. With this method, we hope to decrease mental gaps of users who deal with information at different levels of abstraction, but we have not verified the effect yet. This is work for the future.

As we mentioned in Section IV, the example application we developed is an application of distributed lambda cal- culus which is a model of concurrent systems. ?-calculus is a popular model of concurrent process[8], [9]. There are some studies on models of concurrent process based on ?- calculus [2], [6], [7]. The ?-calculus is a model based on functions. In our developed system, consists of distributed environments which can apply functions to data, personal computers and mobile devices. We can regard the system as a realistic model of concurrent process.



VI. CONCLUSIONS  We propose a new interaction method that uses mobile de- vices for input and output to/from computers. We present an example application we developed and show the possibility of our method. We expect to decrease mental gaps of users who deal with information at different levels of abstraction by using physically-separated devices.

We think the advantages of this system are: ? A user can access a personal computer by his/her  favorite mobile device instead of a keyboard and mouse.

? He/she can use a touch panel and/or acceleration sen-  sors if the mobile device has them. The touch panel and/or acceleration sensors may provide intuitive inter- action.

? A user can get a distributed environment easily, since the system sends data from a personal computer to a mobile device if the mobile device requests them.

In the environment, the user can carry the data by the mobile device, or divide data editing work among several persons.

In the application we introduced in this paper, we can use a touch panel and movements of a mobile device for  interaction. Now, we are developing other version which use tilting a mobile device for interaction.

Applications we are planning to develop are: 1) Presentation system  In the system, a user who is a listener of a presentation can see the slide by his/her mobile device, zoom up an arbitrary part of the slide, and read supplemental explanations prepared by the presenter at any time.

2) Computer supported co-operative work system This system provides big physical electronic bulletin board to which members can access. The members can get data displayed on the bulletin board and modify the data on their mobile device, and send the modified data to the bulletin board. The data on the bulletin board are updated when it receives the data from the mobile devices.

3) 3D visualizer system In this system, a user can see a surface appearance of a 3D graphical object in a display of a personal computer. If the user specifies a cross-section surface by a mobile device, the image of the inside of the object is displayed on the mobile device. If the user uses several mobile devices, he/she can see several cross-section surface and the surface appearance of the object at the same time.

The next problems we have to solve are: ? To check that processing speed, amount of memories,  and transfer speed of mobile devices are enough or not for our applications.

? To examine which movements can be recognized by acceleration sensors of mobile devices and to design interaction commands by using the movements.

