Dynamically updating the knowledge regular library  for BBS public opinion analysis system with Apriori

Abstract?An important element of BBS public opinion analysis system is to update the contents of knowledge regular library dynamically adding sensitive words constantly to knowledge regular library. Apriori algorithm is classical algorithm of mining association rules. This paper presents a new method of adding the contents of knowledge regular automatically using association rule models. Experimental results show that the system obviously improves the accuracy of monitoring BBS public opinion by means of this algorithm.

Keywords-Knowledge regular library; Association rules; BBS public opinion analysis.



I.  INTRODUCTION As a convenient, simple, direct method of communication,  BBS has been used by more and more people to express their views on certain events and attitudes with the increasing development of the Internet. Because of the anonymity of speaking, the freedom of speech and the immediacy of information on the BBS, the relevant departments must monitor and filter the BBS information on real-time. Most of the BBS Web sites are based on manual monitoring methods, such as browsing and downloading from Internet, or directly copying and pasting the data from the database then analyzing it. Meanwhile, some scholars use vector space model, clustering and BP neural network algorithm to analyze the hot topics. However, few specifical application systems are developed to monitor the contents of BBS [1].

BBS public opinion intelligent analysis systems use a minimum of manpower and material resources to achieve optimal effectiveness of public opinion analysis via automatically acquiring and classifying data, extracting keywords, analyzing hot topic and forecasting the trends of the view. BBS public opinion analysis systems, by which  monitoring work is completed, achieve intelligent analysis of BBS public opinion efficiently. Ultimately, user, who need not track and monitor individual BBS manually, will be able to grasp the information which user need on the BBS timely, accurately, comprehensively and objectively.

The system needs to build a knowledge regular library to determine the sensitive words which can constitute some unscrupulous persons? provocative words while monitoring posts on the BBS. Due to the diversity and real-time of emergencies, system demands of the knowledge regular library not only to detect illegal post itself, but also be able to include those frequently used words, that is, the system requires the knowledge regular library to increase in a certain condition dynamically, and only in this way, the systems can detect sensitive posts more accurately. This paper obtained a period of posts about a topic from Netease BBS. Since the system updates knowledge regular library using Apriori algorithm, accuracy has been greatly improved compared with the method that all key words of each sensitive posts were added to the knowledge regular library directly.



II. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION BBS public opinion refers to the collection of emotions,  attitudes and opinions, which the public hold to the public things through BBS expression and dissemination. Because of the anonymity of speaking and the freedom of speech, there are plenty of reactionary remarks and pseudo information on the BBS. In order to create a clean and pure environment for the netizens, the relevant departments need to monitor, screen and filter the information on the BBS for processing the illegal acts and events in a timely manner to ensure social stability and unity of the people.

The work of BBS public opinion monitoring, filtering and analysis is difficult to be completed by hand because of BBS diversity and complexity of information. The relevant departments need special software which can analyze and filter information automatically to accomplish these tasks to save manpower costs. BBS public opinion intelligent analysis system can achieve the functions including BBS information automatic acquisition, automatic classification, automatically extract keywords and automatic analysis. The system requires a knowledge regular library to determine the sensitive words to further determine sensitive posts, and dynamically updating the knowledge regular library can enhance the accuracy of determining and the efficiency of matching.



III. APRIORI ALGORITHM INTRODUCTION The itemset refers to a collection of items. The support of  itemset in a transaction database is the fraction of all transactions containing the itemset. The confidence of the rule is the fraction of all transactions containing X that also contain Y [2].

Association rules is rules that have support and confidence greater or equal to user-specified threshold respectively. An itemset is called frequent if its support is greater or equal to user-specified support threshold [2]. Discovering association rules need to find all the frequent itemsets and generate the rule that the confidence of frequent itemsets is greater or equal to confidence threshold. Apriori algorithm is classical algorithm of discovering association rules. The Apriori algorithm, introduced by Agrawal, has been widely used to mine useful knowledge in large transaction database.

Knowledge is derived in terms of a list of association rules [3].

One of Apriori algorithm natures is that a subset of frequent itemset must be a frequent itemset. Apriori algorithm finds potential frequent itemsets through frequent itemsets known. Potential frequent itemset is composed by the set which is likely to be a frequent itemset. Hence systems only need to calculate the support of the potential frequent itemsets instead of the support of all the different items to reduce the computational complexity [4].



IV. APPLYING APRIORI ALGORITHM TO BBS PUBLIC OPINION ANALYSIS SYSTEM  To apply association rule mining to the problem of updating knowledge regular library of BBS public opinion analysis system intelligently, system assumes that each post can be seen as a transaction while each key word of post can also be seen as item. Applying Apriori algorithm to a forum or some forums with specified support and confidence, and the system can determine a sensitive post if the post includes sensitive words. Simultaneously, examining the other key words of the post, the system adds the words of which the support and confidence are greater or equal to the specified threshold to the knowledge regular library to automatically update knowledge regular library.

Assuming that a post has n key words, Fig.1 gives the specific process of automatically updating knowledge regular library with Apriori algorithm.

Figure 1.  The process of automatically updating knowledge regular library  with Apriori algorithm.



V. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENT AND RESULT System accessed recent posts about the topic ?Tibetan  separatist remarks? on the BBS. Assuming that the key words of a post include ?Tibetan separatist?, ?America?, ?incite defection? and ?the EU?, the words ?Tibetan separatist? and ?incite defection? which exist knowledge regular library are sensitive words. So the post is judged as sensitive post, then system examines the other key words of this post, the words ?America? and ?the EU? are not in the knowledge regular library. Through system calculating, the supports of these two key words were 38% and 17%. Assuming the system-specified support threshold is 30%, and the confidences of these words are greater to the system-specified confidence threshold respectively. So the word ?America? is sensitive word which needs to be added to the knowledge regular library, but ?the EU? is not sensitive word temporarily.

If the system adds all the key words of each post to the knowledge regular library directly without analyzing the key words of post in advance, the knowledge regular library will become very large, and the accuracy rate and the speed of the matching of the key words will be reduced. Suppose in the previous example, the system added all the words of the post to the knowledge regular library without analyzing the words ?America? and ?the EU? using Apriori algorithm, it would bring error to the judgment   whether the other posts are sensitive. Only the system analyzes the key words of posts based on the empirical knowledge, and then adds words which meet certain conditions to the knowledge regular library, can we identify the sensitive posts more accurately and efficiently.

Fig.2 gives some results of the experiments. The system acquired the posts about ?Tibetan separatist? from November 20, 2009 to December 22 on the Netease BBS. The duplicate posts have been deleted. Library 1 was obtained through the Apriori algorithm and library 2 was obtained through adding all the key words of each sensitive post to the knowledge regular library. The X-Coordinate stands for support while the Y-Coordinate stands for the accuracy in Fig.2. The system identifies sensitive posts using the two libraries respectively.

Fig.2 below gives some results of the accuracy of the judgment.

Figure 2.  Accuracy of identifying posts under the different support  conditions  From Fig.2, it is not difficult to see that, compared with the accuracy rate of the method of adding all the key words of each sensitive post to the knowledge regular library, the accuracy rate of the method of using Apriori algorithm to  generate knowledge regular library is higher, while the choice of different support will affect the accuracy rate.



VI. CONCLUSION The system updates knowledge regular library dynamically  with Apriori algorithm to improve the method that knowledge regular library depends on manual input and mechanically adding new words, so the system can determine the sensitive posts more accurately from a mount of posts. Meanwhile, the system decreases the contents of the knowledge regular library, reduces the capacity of the library and improves the efficiency of identification and the accuracy rate of identifying sensitive posts.

