Mining Biomedical Knowledge Using Chi-Square Association Rule

Abstract   This paper presents a Mining Biomedical Knowledge method Using Chi-Square Association Rule ABC?it significantly reduces irrelevant connections.

The experiment result shows that compared to chi- square, and mutual info ABC approach, Chi-Square Association Rule ABC method generates much fewer rules and a lot of computation time is saved.

1. Introduction   The huge volume of the biomedical literature provides a nice opportunity and challenge to induce novel knowledge by finding novel connections among logically-related medical concepts. For example, in 1986,Swanson stated a theory that the disclosure of open knowledge people never discovered between documents with no literal relationship inside can be realized after the setup of logical recurrence relation among documents, based on which he discovered the connections of Raynaud disease and fish oil, which was clinically confirmed[1,2] afterwards. In 1988, using the same method, Swanson discovered eleven connections of migraine and magnesium[3].

One of the drawbacks of  Swanson?s method is that the method requires large amount of manual intervention and very strong domain knowledge, especially in the process of qualifying the intermediate concepts Swanson call the ?B? concepts. In order to reduce the dependence of domain knowledge and human intervention and to automate the whole process as much as possible, several approaches [4,5,6,7] have been developed to automate this discovery process based on Swanson?s method. They have successfully not only replicated the Raynaud disease/fish-oil and migraine/magnesium discovery but also discovered new treatments for other diseases such as thalidomide [7]. Even though these research works have produced valuable insights into new hypothesis, however, substantial manual intervention has been required to  reduce the number of possible connections. Specially, for association rule approaches [5,8], they all did not utilize semantic information to automatically reduce the huge number of possible connections among the biomedical concepts.. This will be very time consuming and produce a lot of spurious/meaningless hypothesis. This paper presents a Mining Biomedical Knowledge method Using Chi-Square Association Rule ABC ? it significantly reduces irrelevant connection and saves a lot of computation time.

2. Method description  2.1Information Measures   1) Chi-Square: we adopt chi-square as information  measure to measure the dependency between variables.

This is the first attempt to discover implicit connections between concepts. For a term co- occurrence matrix, let O be the observed frequency and E be the expected frequency, then the formula of chi-  square is ( )? ?= E  EOX   . Chi square is more likely to establish significance to the extent that (1) the relationship is strong, (2) the sample size is large, and/or (3) the number of values of the two associated variables is large. A chi-square probability of .05 or less is commonly interpreted as justification for rejecting the null hypothesis that the two terms are independent of each other. The null hypothesis is very useful when filtering out those terms that are statistically independent of given term. In this chapter, for chi-square, the alpha value is set to 1% and accordingly the critical value is 6.63.

2)  Association Rule: Association rule is frequently used in data mining applications [8, 9]. An association rule is of the form A B where B and A are disjoint conjunctions of term pairs. The confidence of the rule is the conditional probability of B given A, Pr(B|A), and the support of the rule is the prior probability of A   DOI 10.1109/GrC.2010.131     and B, Pr(A and B). The mining procedure can be described as follows: Given a document collection, a minimal confidence threshold and a minimal support threshold, find all association rules whose confidence and support are above the corresponding thresholds.

Here A concept is taken as input, and then all A B rules are found out in one data set. Then, from a separate data set, B C rules are found out. Last, a transitive law is applied to get the hidden link: A C.

It must be noted that associate rule algorithm can not be applied to get A C directly because A and C are not occurred in the same data set. A and C are connected through the bridge concept B. Finally, the following symbols are used to describe association rule: Support (B) means that the probability that B occurs. Accordingly, Support (B?C) means the possibility that B and C occur together. ?Conf? indicates confidence. Conf=Sup(B?C)/sup(B) means the confidence that B implies C (B C). F (B C) measure is a measure of confidence of B C. The larger the value is, the more confident of B C is.

2.2 Algorithm   Chi-Square Association Rule ABC: Association rule is frequently used in data mining application to find the connection of two items. However, it?s hard for the method to explain the statistical significance of the relationship between two variables. For example, term ?humans? is highly co-occurred with term ?Raynaud disease?. In regards to the formula of association rule, term ?humans? accepts the highest score in our experiment. However, when judging the statistical significance of the relationship between the two terms, term ?humans? is ranked much lower. As a result, statistically unrelated terms by chi-square are filtered out to help improve the performance of generating novel implicit association rules. In another word, association rule method itself can generate many non-meaningful rules. Other method such as chi-square filtering can be applied to help pick up meaningful rule sets from the huge number of rules. As [10] mentioned, when considering the scale-free distribution of objects within the literature, it is apparent that some frequently mentioned objects could be co-mentioned many times with other terms without any actual biological association being implied. Therefore, chi-square as an important statistical means to measure the strength of association can help improve the performance of ABC and reduce a lot of unnecessary work.

Input: (1) Concept A, (2) K (top B concept), (3) M(top C concept for each B concept), (4) time range of PubMed articles. (5) Direction of the rule generating (A B C or C B A).

Download PubMed articles for certain time range to build term document matrix.

A Chi-square dependency graph matrix is built based on the term document matrix. If the chi-square value between two terms is smaller than the critical value 6.63, it means that it accepts the null hypothesis that the two terms are statistically independent of each other (P<.05). Thus, the cell value of dependency matrix is set as zero.

Generate B A rules or A B rules. Dependency graph matrix helps generate rule sets within which each term is statistically significant dependent of another. According to association rule, Let Confidence (P (B A)) =P (AB)/P (B), Support (B) =P (B), F measure (2confidence*Support/ (Confidence+ Support) is used to calculate the rule strength.

All the B terms are sorted according to the rule strength. Top k B terms are picked from the list.

Accordingly, all the C B or B C rules are generated if the chi-square between B and C are over the critical value. All the B terms can not be in the candidate C terms list, because all these terms co-occur with concept A. Similarly, only top M C terms are picked from each C term list.

3.Experiment results and analysis   3.1 Dataset   For replication of Swanson?s Raynaud disease/ fish oils discovery, 1,737,439 citations, from 1980 to 1985 in PubMed database are downloaded. MeSH terms are extracted from each article and a large term document matrix (16045*1,737,439) is built. As sparse matrix technique is applied, although it?s a large matrix, most of algorithms performed on it can be finished within several minutes.

3.2 Comparison between methods of chi- square, chi-square association rule and mutual info ABC   From Table 1,we can see that chi-square association  rule, compared with chi-square and mutual info ABC, saves a lot of computation time for generating unnecessary association rules. it dramatically reduces the computation time and complexity.

Table 1. Compare The Rank Of All The B Terms  From Which Fish Oil Is Discovered According To The Closeness Between Term A (Fish Oils) And B.

B terms from which term ?fish oils? is discovered  Chi- Square ABC  Chi-Square Association Rule  ABC  Mutual Info ABC  Adolescent 397 11 861 Child 235 41 1137 Clinical Trials 80 22 413 Humans 44 1 811 Male 118 4 823  Prostaglandins E 127 60 352   4. Conclusion  This paper presents a Mining Biomedical  Knowledge method Using Chi-Square Association Rule ABC. For a given starting medical concept, it discovers new, potentially meaningful relations/connection with other concepts that have not been published in the medical literature before. The discovered relations/connections are novel and can be useful for domain expert to conduct new experiment, try new treatment etc. As our future research, we will reduce and rank A concepts in a semantic manner, which would be a challenging issue. For this problem, we may need more disease specialized biomedical ontology.

5. References   [1]Swanson D R. Two Medical Literatures the Are Logically but not Bibliographically Connected [J].

Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 1987, 38 ( 4) : 228- 233.

[2]Swanson D R. A Second Example of Mutually Isolated Medical Literatures Related by Implicit, Unnoticed Connections[J].Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 1989,40(6) : 432- 435.

[3]Swanson D.R. migraine and magnesium: eleven neglected connections[J]. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 1988,31(4):526-557.

[4]Lindsay, R.K, and Gordon, M.D. Literature-based discovery by lexical statistics.Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 50(7):574-587, 1999.

[5]Pratt, Wanda and Yetisgen-Yildiz, Meliha, LitLinker: capturing connections across the biomedical literature, K-CAP'03, pp. 105-112, Sanibel Island, FL,Oct. 23-25, 2003 [6]Srinivasan, P., Text mining: Generating hypotheses from MEDLINE, Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 2004, Vol. 55, No. 4, pp. 396-413 [7]Weeber, M., Vos, R., Klein, H., de Jong-Van den Berg, L.T.W., Aronson, A & Molema, G. Generating hypotheses by discovering implicit associations in the literature: A case report for new potential therapeutic uses for Thalidomide. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association  [8]Agrawal, R., et al., Fast Discovery of Association Rules, Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, U. Fayyad, et al., Editors. 1995,AAAI/MIT Press.

[9]Hristovski D, Stare J, Peterlin B, and Dzeroski S.

Supporting discovery in medicine by association rule mining in Medline and UMLS. Medinfo. 2001, 10(Pt 2), 1344-8.

