Design of Healthy Eating System based on Web Data Mining

AbstractWith the pace of life gradually accelerated  nowadays, fast-food becomes more and more popular in daily  life, which would lead unhealthy eating habit. In order to solve  this problem, we present a proposal of healthy eating analyzing  and recommender system based on web data mining, which  would track your eating habit and recommend the types of  foods that improve your health and avoid the types of foods  that raise your risk for illnesses. In this paper, we first  introduce some basic knowledge of web data mining. Then a  web-based data mining solution to healthy eating analyzing  and recommender system is brought up. Finally we post the  system implementation proposal for this system.

Keywords-web data mining; healthy eating; recommender  system

I.  INTRODUCTION  With the pace of life gradually accelerated nowadays,  people seem too busy to pay much attention to their eating.

Therefore fast-food becomes more and more popular in daily  life, which would lead unhealthy eating habit. To resolve this  contradiction, we resort to the new web technique: web data  mining [1].

Web data mining aims to discover useful information and  knowledge from the web hyperlink structure, page contents,  and usage data. Here we present a proposal of healthy eating  system based on web data mining, which would track your  eating habit and recommend the types of foods that improve  your health and avoid the types of foods that raise your risk  for illnesses. Jinhua Sun and Yanqi Xie introduce a web data  mining solution to e-commerce to discover hidden patterns  and business strategies from their customer and web data,  propose a new framework based on data mining technology  for building a Web-page recommender system [2], which  would be used as the basic framework for healthy eating    system.

In our proposal, this system consists of three correlative  procedures: eating habit data acquisition, data mining  process and healthy eating recommendation. We suppose  that there is a website where people could take their orders  over the internet just like that in the restaurant. We acquire  people eating habit data in the database which could track  peoples recipe record. Also people could directly input their  eating data into the database through the website. Then we  use mining algorithm like classification, association rules in  the data mining process to extract the useful information of  peoples eating habit. Finally we give out personalized  recommendation for each individual.



II. WEB DATA MINING  The characteristics of web data determine the immense  challenge for effective data mining. According to the  characteristics of web data and combining the general  process of data mining, the web data mining process can be  described as the five functional modules [3], namely the data  acquisition, data pre-processing, data mining, analysis and  evaluation and knowledge formulation modules. The  functions of each module are shown as Figure 1.

A. Data acquisition  Generally speaking, in terms of functionality, data  acquisition module selectively obtains data from the outside  web environment to provide material and resources for the  latter data mining. The data source that the web environment  provided includes the web pages data, hyperlinks data and  the history data of user visiting log. This module is  composed by three relatively independent processes which  are data search, data selection and data collection.

B. Data preprocessing  Data preprocessing mainly processes and reconstructs the  source data acquired in data acquisition phase and builds the  data warehouse of related themes to create basic platform for  data mining process. Data preprocessing is preparation for  Data Acquisition  Data Preprocessing  Data Mining  Knowledge Formulation  Analysis    Evaluation  Figure 1.  Web data mining process   978-0-7695-4080-1/10 $26.00  2010 IEEE  DOI 10.1109/ICIE.2010.89   data mining and it mainly includes data scrubbing, data  integration, data conversion, data reduction, etc.

C. Data mining  Data mining module is the core of the whole system.

Data mining is the process of extracting patterns from data,  which is becoming an increasingly important tool to  transform this data into information. It is commonly used in  a wide range of profiling practices, such as marketing,  surveillance, fraud detection and scientific discovery.

Generally speaking, the ultimate goals of data mining only  are description and prediction, the so-called description is  that using a comprehensible model to express the attributes  and characteristics information contained in the data; and the  prediction is to find the discipline of the attributes according  to their existing data value and then speculate a possible  attribute value in the future. Classical data mining techniques  include classification of users, finding associations between  different product items or customer behavior, and clustering  of users [4].

1) Classification arranges the data into predefined  groups. For example, an email program might attempt to  classify an email as legitimate or spam. Common algorithms  include decision tree learning, nearest neighbor, naive  Bayesian classification and neural networks.

2) Clustering is like classification but the groups are not  predefined, so the algorithm will try to group similar items  together.

3) Regression attempts to find a function which models  the data with the least error.

4) Association rule learning searches for relationships  between variables. For example a supermarket might gather  data on customer purchasing habits. Using association rule  learning, the supermarket can determine which products are  frequently bought together and use this information for  marketing purposes. This is sometimes referred to as market  basket analysis.

D. Analysis and evaluation  Analysis and evaluation module is to analyze the  credibility and effectiveness of the knowledge model the data  mining obtained, and to educe evaluated conclusions to  provide information support for the management and  decision-making of users.

E. Knowledge formulation  Knowledge expression module refers to the knowledge  models mined from the web data by using data mining tools,  and it will be shown with appropriate form to facilitate user  acceptance and mutual exchange.



III. DESIGN OF HEALTHY EATING SYSTEM  A. Function Description  In our proposal, the system is composed by three parts:  eating data acquisition, data mining process and healthy  recommendation. The system function description is as  shown in figure 2.

1) Data Acquisition - We suppose that there is a website  where people could take their orders over the internet just  like that in the restaurant. We acquire people eating data in  the database which could track peoples recipe record. Also  people could directly input their eating data into the  database through the website.

The eating data acquired through the website is the first-  hand material for this system, e.g. the eating time, food name,  amount, material, etc. All these related items are shown as  the first step in figure 2.

2) Data Mining - We use data mining algorithms like  classification, clustering, association rules, etc. in the data  mining process to extract the useful information of peoples  eating habit. First, we analyze the nutritive structure of each  kind of food and calculate how much fat, energy, vitamin  you have in your recipe. Then we use the classification  mining algorithm to process the composition data and give  out the result whether your diet is healthy or not.

3) Healthy Eating Recommendation - After the data  mining process in last step, we could get much useful  information. For example what you lack, what you have too  much, the potential disease, etc.. Then we could recommend  the healthy recipe, group of dishes, tips, etc. according to  the personal condition. The recommendations by our  recommender system would improve your trophic structure    and raise your health standards. On the other hand, we also  track clients individual preferences. This system could  1. Eating data:  # Time  # Food Name  # Amount  # Food Material  #  2. Result:  # How much fat  # How much energy  # What you need  # Healthy or not  #  3. Recommendation:  # Recipe  # Group of dishes  # Potential disease  # Healthy tips  #  Figure 2.  System function description   recommend the related dishes to fulfill personalized need by  using association rules mining. Therefore it would provide  better service and experience for clients.

B. Healthy Eating System  The healthy eating system architecture consists of four  parts: the integration layer, the data layer, the  recommendation engine layer and the user interface. The  basic framework of the recommender system is described in  [2]. The system architecture is shown in figure 3.

1) Integration layer is set of programs used to prepare  data for further processing. For instance: extraction,  cleaning, transformation and loading. This layer uses  XQuery, XSLT and XML Schemas to feed the data  repository, i.e., relational or XML native database. The web  log parser component is used to parse and transform plain  ASCII files produced by a web server to a standard database  format.

This layer is used to tie the instances of web services and  web pages to sessions and users. It is important to investigate  the usage of the web services composition used through    users sessions.

2) Data Layer is a repository of input/output eating data.

It also stores pre-processed logs, e-commerce sessions, and  information about the web services execution.

3) Recommendations Engine Layer is a data mining  engine and is in charge of bulk loading XML data from  database, executing SQL commands against it and executes  the mining algorithms. These algorithms could involve a  simple classification of the users recipe in the database and  could also find the association between users diet  composition and some potential diseases. Then according to  these relations we could recommend different groups of  dishes, which would be better for peoples health.

We adopt decision tree algorithm to analyze clients  recipes data and give out their healthy situation. The goal is  to create a model that predicts the value of a target variable  based on several input variables. Here the attribute set is  showed as a vector X=(X1, X2, X3 , Xk), where Xi stands  for different attributes such as fat, protein, sugar, vitamin,  minerals amount, etc., which are extracted from history data  of clients diet. The classification attribute set C=(c1, c2,  c3, , cn) means that there are n different classes which  stand for different health situations. We use decision tree as  the classifier to realize the mapping function Cf(X):H ? ,  which could be constructed by the prior knowledge of  scientific nutritive structure.

For the recommender system association rule learning  would be effective. The original definition of association rule  mining is described in [5]. For example, the rule  {beef}potatoes}{onions, ?  found in the sales data of a  supermarket would indicate that if a customer buys onions  and potatoes together, he or she is likely to also buy beef.

According with this theory, we could process clients history  data to find out their preferences. Then the system could  recommend the related dishes to clients, which would  enhance the quality of personalized service.

4) User Interface  is an abstract concept which supplies  the interface between client and web server. Users could  Post  Submit    Figure 3.  Healthy eating system architecture  XML Log Web Log  Xquery/XSLT Web Log Parser  Heuristic / Data Cleaner  Health  Module  Mining for  Personalization  U  ser Interface  User  Log  Recommendation  Engine Layer  Data Layer  Integration  Layer  Result  Recommendation  Data Base / Warehouse / Cube  Basic  Knowledge  OLAP DM  Algorithm   take orders over the website; also they could directly submit  what they have during the whole day. At the same time,  users could get the recommendation for healthy eating from  the server.



IV. IMPLEMENTATION PROPOSAL  In this system, a website as the raw data source should be  implemented, which is also used as an e-commerce platform  for clients. This website should realize the following  functions as shown in figure 4.

A. E-commerce platform  The first problem we meet in constructing this system is  how to acquire the firsthand users recipe data. To solve this  realistic problem, a consumer-to-consumer e-commerce  platform is needed, e.g. taobao.com. This C2C ecommerce  platform would connect the buyers and sellers over the  internet, which would create the opportunity to acquire the    raw data of users.

The e-commerce web site should let their clients take  orders over the internet just like that in the restaurant. Then  the web server could send clients orders for food to the  restaurants and later clients could have their meals in the  booked restaurant.

B. User interface  If Users dont take orders over the internet and they just  want to input what they have during a day, the web site  should fulfill this requirement.

C.  Log information  The web site should take down the log information of  users action over the browser. These data could be used as  data resource for data mining.

D. Data processing in background  Data processing engine is an indispensable part of this  web site. First, the web server should collect users diets data  through the database and history log. Then the firsthand data  should be handled by special data mining algorithms which  could give out the evaluated results and recommended  suggestions.



V. CONCLUSIONS  In this paper we present a proposal of healthy eating  system based on web data mining. In our proposal, we would  cut this system into three parts: eating habit data acquisition,  data mining process and healthy eating recommendation. We  suppose that there is a website where people could take their  orders over the internet just like that in the restaurant. We  acquire people eating habit data in the database which could  track peoples recipe record. Also people could input their  eating data into the database through the website. Then we  use mining algorithms like clustering, association rules in the  data mining process to extract the useful information of  peoples eating habit. Finally we give out personalized  recommendations for each person.

The proposal in this paper is just the first step of healthy  eating system. More research work should be done during  the implementation period later.

