Privacy Preserving Based on Association Rule Mining

Abstract-Privacy has become an important issue in Data Mining. Many methods have been brought out to solve this problem. This paper deals with the problem of association rule mining which preserves the confidentiality of each database. In order to find the association rule, each participant has to share their own data. Thus, much privacy information may be broadcast or been illegal used. These issues can be divided into two categories: data hiding and knowledge hiding. This paper reviews the major method of privacy preserving on each category and choose some of them to complete our system. At the end, an improvement of sensitive rules hiding is proposed to make it more accuracy and security.

Keywords-Associationrule; data mining; privacy preserving; data hinding; knowledge hiding

I. INTRODUCTION  Association rule mining, as a very important technique, has already been applied in a wide range of areas. However, it breaks out many privacy issues. From a general point of view, we may classifY privacy issues into two broad categories. The first is related to the data perse and is known as data hiding, while the second concerns the information ,or else the knowledge, that a data mining method may discover after having analyzed the data , and is known as knowledge hiding.

Data hiding tries to remove confidential or private information from the data before its disclosure. In this case, many randomization methods have been addressed. The randomization method has been traditionally used in the context of distorting data by probability distribution. The miner uses the perturbation data to get the association rule.

In this case, the data miner does not know the raw data and also can get the similar result. Which the key point for data miner is how to reconstruct the raw data distribution.

Agrawal R gave out a method bayes reconstruction method [1].

Randomization method will change the raw database, there will be many negative impacts, just can be classifY into two parts:  ? Useful rules have been lost; ? New rules have been produced artificially.

In fact, there will be a contradiction between accuracy  and security. In other word, if we perturb the raw data so much that the mining result will tum to poor. In the same, if we perturb it so little that the hacker will get the data they  ZhongLiu  Sichuan College of Architectural Technology Deyang, China  liuzhong@scac.edu.cn  want more easily. To solve this problem, Secure mUlti-party computation [2] is addressed, it use security communication protocols and cryptography, make it possible to mining rules on the raw data, this can reduce the negative impact. But this will cause huge communication costs and complex cryptography, which will make the algorithm low-efficiency.

Knowledge hiding, on the other hand, is concerned with the sanitization of confidential knowledge from the data. As a result of association rule mining, many useful association rules will be discovered, but at the same time, many privacy rules will also be exposed which do not want others to know.

To solve this, we have to limit the mining process, in order to keep these sensitive rules being hidden. There are so many methods to solve this problem. Which we used is just one kind of them, called support-based and confidence-based blocking schemes [3, 4, 5].

The main disadvantage of a blocking algorithm is the fact that the dataset, apart from the blocked values, is not distorted. Thus, an adversary can disclose the hidden rules by identifYing those generating item sets that contain question marks and lead to rules with a maximum confidence that lies above the minimum confidence threshold. If the number of these rules is small then the probability of identifYing the sensitive ones among them becomes high. Chris Clifton presents a method to avoid this problem [6].



II. ApPROACHES  In this section, the main approaches used in our system are presented. Apriori algorithm is adopted to find the frequent item sets, then in order to get the global support and confidence without privacy disclosure, secure computation is used. For the knowledge hiding, an improved algorithm is mentioned to get satisfY result.

A. Secure computation  The history of the multi-party computation problem is extensive since it was introduced by Yao [7] and extended by Goldreich et al. [8] and many others. The basic idea of secure multiparty computation (SMC) is that a computation is secure if at the end of the computation, no party knows anything except its own input and the results.

Security sum [6, 9] is a very simple and useful method which base on SMC. It is used for get the sum of data from the different site. It works as follow:      Assume that the value v = sumt=lv/ to be computed is known to lie in the range [0, n]. One site is designated as the master site, numbered 1. The remaining sites are numbered 2???s. Site 1 generates a random number R, uniformly chosen from [0, n]. Site 1 adds this to its local value Vj, and sends the sum R+vj mod n to site 2. Since the value R is chosen uniformly from [1, n], the number R+vj mod n is also distributed uniformly across this region, so site 2 learns nothing about the actual value ofvj. For the remaining sites i = 2 . . .  s -1, the algorithm is as follows:  j-I  Site receives V=R + ?>j modn then j=l  j  computes V = R + L Vj modn = (Vj + V)modn and j=l  send to site i+ 1 At last each site do the steps above, and sends the final  result back to the site 1, the site 1 minus R and get the sum.

B. Association rule hiding  Wang and Jafari [3] propose two modification schemes that incorporate unknowns and aim at the hiding of predictive association rules, i.e., rules containing the sensitive items on their LHS (left-hand-side). Both algorithms rely on the distortion of a portion of the database transactions to lower the confidence of the association rules.

Compared to the work of Say gin et al. [4, 5], the algorithms presented in [3] require a reduced number of database scans and exhibit an efficient pruning strategy. However, by construction, they are assigned the task of hiding all the rules containing the sensitive items on their LHS, while the algorithms in the work of [4, 5] can hide any specific rule.

The first strategy, called ISL, decreases the confidence of a rule by increasing the support of the item sets in its LHS.

The second approach, called DSR, reduces the confidence of the rule by decreasing the support of the item sets in its RHS (left-hand-side). Both algorithms experience the item ordering effect under which, based on the order that the sensitive items are hidden, the produced sanitized databases are different. Moreover, the DSR algorithm seems to be more effective when the sensitive items have high support.



III. OUR ALGORITHMS  A. The Association rule mining System  Fig.1 gives a general structure of out system which can be divided into three steps:  First step: Security sum is used to get the global support and confidence, which keep the participant don't know the local support of each sit.

Second step: SMC is adopted to send all item sets from different sit to one center, without data leakage.

Third step: In this step system the sensitive rules will be hidden. It's a very important step, building up a Sensitive rules Database, Which contain the rules should be hidden.

Then something should do to hide these rules, which is discussed in next section.

The first two steps are belonging to the data hiding process and the third step is the knowledge hiding process, a detailed description is given in the next section.

)----I-----+---- PISlIlCP  ?--- TlunlOl<p  Fig.l.association rule mining system  B. Data hiding  Center M produce a random data matrix, which meet the average distribution, then send this matrix to sit A, follow the Security Sum method, we can get the global support and confidence of each item from the local support and confidence on each sit.

Assume the items on Sit A which have a support matrix XA , center M will produce a random matrix Y which have the same order with X, and Y can be distribution-free . Sit A get Y and send ZA= X+ Y to Sit B, Sit B with its own support matrix XB, make ZB=ZA+XB . At the end of this process, M will get the global support by minus Y. each sit can't know the local support on the other sit.

The RSA encrypt algorithm is used, Data miner produce the center encrypt key which denoted C-e and the key-pair of each sit denoted as (ej,dJ ej is encryption key and dj is decryption key .Data miner will send dj to Disturb Center and send ej and C-e to each Sit .Disturb Center will produce a JD for each sit .while, each sit will use the JD, ej and C-e to encrypt their own frequent itemset and send the result JD e/C-e(frequent itemset)) to Disturb Center. The Disturb Center deletes use the dj and the ID decrypt the data from different sit. After this step, Disturb Center will change the data to C-e(frequent itemset) and disrupts the order then sends C-e(frequent itemset) to Data miner. Data miner decrypts the itemsets and use the Apriori algorithm and the global support and confidence form M to analyze the itemsets and get the association rules. The detail of the method is described as follow: Encrypt step:  1) Data Miner produce public encryption key : C-e 2) Data Miner produce key-pair of each sit (ej,dJ 3) Send ejto each sit, dj to Disturb Center 4) Disturb Center send JD to each sit 5) Each sit Encrypt their frequent itemset to ID e/C?  e(frequent itemset))  Decrypt step: 1) Each sit send their data ID e/C-e(frequent itemset))  to Disturb Center  Vl-638    2010 3rd International Conforence on Advanced Computer Theory and Engineering(ICACTE)  2) Disturb Center use di decrypt the data from each sit and remove the ID  3) Disturb Center disrupts the order of the data ,send C-e(frequent itemset) to Data Miner  4) Data Miner decrypts the data, getting frequent itemsets.

C. Know/edge hiding  In traditional methods, to hide a sensitive rule, some item should be deleted or use an unknown data to change the raw data. In terms of Association rule mining, rule A=>B will be discovered, as long as satisfY these two conditions:  1. Support(A=>B)=P(A and B) '?:.Min_sup ;  support(A u B) 2. Confidence(A=>B)=P(AIB)= ----"'--"'------'----'-  support(A) '?:.MinJonf,  Properly, decrease the support of B or decrease the support of A U B or increase the support of n, all of them can realize hiding the rule. But there is a conflict, when a support of items is changed some other insensitive rule will be hidden at the same time or other new forgery rule will be produced.

S.-L.Wang [3] proposes two data mining algorithms for hiding informative association rules, namely Increase Support of LHS (lSL) and Decrease Support ofRHS (DSR).

The first algorithm tries to increase the support of left hand side of the rule. The second algorithm tries to decrease the support of the right hand side of the rule. The detail of the ISL algorithm is described as follow.

Algorithm ISL  Input:  (1) a source database D,  (2) a min_support,  (3) a min_confidence,  (4) a set of predicting items X Output: a transformed database D', where rules  containing X on LHS will be hidden  1. Find large I-item sets from D;  2. For each predicting item xE X 3. If x is not a large I-itemset, then X = X-{x}; 4. If X is empty, then EXIT;  II no rule contains X in LHS 5. Find large 2-itemsets from D;  6. For each xE X { 7. For each large 2-itemset containing x { 8. Compute confidence of rule U, where U is a rule like  x-y; 9. If conf(U} < min_con/, then  10. Go to next large 2-itemset;  11. Else {IIIncrease Support of LHS  12. Find TL = {t in Dlt does not support U};  13. Sort TL in ascending order by the number of items;  14. While {conf( U) '?:. min _ conf and TL is not empty }{  15. Choose the first transaction t from TL;  16. ModifY t to support x, the LHS( U); 17. Compute support and confidence of U;  18. Remove and save the first transaction t from TL;  19. }; II end While  20. }; II end if conf(U) < min_cmif  21. If TL is empty, then {  22. Can not hide x-y; 23. Restore D;  24. Go to next large-2 itemset;  25. } II end ifTL is empty  26. } II end of for each large 2-itemset  27. Remove x from X; 28. } II end of for each xE X 29.0utput updated D, as the transformed D'  Through the above method, the sensitive rules will be hidden, but some insensitive rules may have been hidden also and many new rules may have been produced artificially. To solve this problem, system should use the mining results to restraint the choosing process (which choose item to modifY).our method like this:  NO y T ( end )  Fig 2 sensitive rules hiding process  In the modifY the choose process, we choose other item as sacrifice item, in order to get a better results. Then we add some noise rules to increased security.

In the ISL, the short itemset is chosen as sacrifice item, because it has least item, negative impact cause by modifY it may be the smallest. Our method first step is the same with ISL or DSR, then check the mining result, in this step, using privacy quantifY to measure the result, if it's dissatisfied, return to change the choose policy. check the whole database, classifY the items with their support, the items with support more close to Min_sup as "unsettled itemsets" the other is "settled itemsets", when choose the sacrifice item, the item in "settled itemsets" will be chosen first.

Vl-639     As the main disadvantage of a blocking algorithm is the fact that the dataset, apart from the blocked values, is not distorted. So create some noise rules is necessary, to make the dataset distortion, which can be deleted in prune step.



IV. CONCLUSIONS  In this work, we have reviewed some approach about privacy preserving when doing association rule mining,construction a system for data mining ,which consider the main hidden danger when the mining running.

Using Secure computation and RSA encryption technology, avoid data leakage which cause by data sharing. On the side of knowledge hiding, using ISL and DSR achieve Sensitive rules hiding, and present an optimization method to get a better result, with smaller negative impact. For the mass data, the method may be low impact and secure computation will cause huge communication costs and complex cryptography will make the algorithm low-efficiency.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  This research was supported by Natural science fund for colleges and universities in Jiangsu Province (08KJD520018), Natural Science Foundation from Nanjing University of Information & Science Technology (20080302).

