CHINESE QUESTION CLASSIFICATION BASED ON MINING ASSOCIATION  RULES

Abstract: In this paper, a method of Chinese question classification  based on the mining association rules is proposed. Words and Bi-gram are extracted from question as classific features. The method can mine the association rules between the type of the question and its classific features, to construct an association rules - based database. At last the type of the question is marked by choosing the type which the most association rules define.

Experimental results show that the proposed method is feasible and can achieve good performance.

Keywords: Nature Language Processing; Association rules; Question  classification  1. Introduction  With the rapid development of Internet, people find it more and more difficult to get their requirements by search engine. Traditional document retrieval searches relevant documents according to keywords which are provided by users, and the results is a long ranked list of documents. The question answering system can give a correct and exact answer to a given question. So it has recently received much attention from natural language processing communities and it is one of the most important topic in TREC( Text REtrieval Conference). A typical question answering system includes four modules: question analysis, search module, answer candidate extraction and answer selection. Question analysis module extracts keywords, classifies question type and gives a kind of formal expression of a given question. Question classification system can sign one class to a given question based on the expected answer type. It could restrict the candidate?s space of the answer according to the semantic category of the answer and could select the appropriate approach to extract the answer. So the precision of the question classification could affect the quality of question answering systems.

There are two kinds of question classification method.

One was based on handcrafted rules [1][2][3][4] which was  used in the past years. By all appearances, its shortage is time-consuming and labor-intensive to get these rules. And it is difficult that hand-crafted rules which could work perfectly on a specific questions set are applied to another one.

Recently more and more question classification methods have been researched and applied which were based on statistical method and machine learning techniques, such as SVM [5][6][7][8], SNoW [9][10], Maximum Entropy Model [11], Modified Bayesian [12] and etc. Jun Suzuki?s question classification system was based on SVM [6] which used HDAG kernel. Krystle Kocik[11] developed a new approach to question classification, which involved the application of statistical methods, namely Maximum Entropy models for classification. Yu Zhang [12] introduced a modified Bayesian model to classify the Chinese question in open-domain answering system which was based on analysis of the Bayesian model. Keliang JIA[13] proposed a method of Chinese question classification based on ensemble learning which takes full use of the generalization feasibility of ensemble learning to improve the precision of the Chinese question classification.

This paper presents our research work on automatic question classification based on association rules. It is organized as follows: section 2 presents the Chinese question classification taxonomy; section 3 describes Chinese question classification based on association rules; section 4 presents experimental results for question classification and finally section 5 conclude the paper.

2. Chinese question taxonomy  There are numerous question taxonomies which were defined according to question answering system. There are three kinds of QA (question answering) task in TREC: definition task, factoid question task and list question task. In this paper, we focus attention on factoid questions. In most of these question taxonomies, question types are defined according to the semantic viewpoint of the answer in order to reduce the number of answer candidates. As there is no          standard Chinese question taxonomy, this paper builds Chinese question taxonomy by combining Chinese question  features and some other question taxonomy [5][8][9][13] from previous researchers. Table 1 shows all question types.

TABLE 1 . CHINESE QUESTION TAXONOMY  Coarse Fine  abbreviation abbreviation, explanation  human Discoverer, person name, position, inventor, first person, human description,  human others  location city, continent, country, ocean, mountain, state, province, island, river,  address, lake, sea  numeric code, total, area, money, distance, length, order, percent, spend,  temperature, size, weight, age, period, frequency, phone number, numeric other time date, time, day, month, season, year, time range, time list, time other  entity animal, body, color, plant, creative, disease, substance, religion, press, event,  food, instrument, language, product, Sport, vehicle, symbol, technique description definition, description, manner, reason, other description  organization Party, sports-team, university,  bank, company, institute, union, other  organization  3. Question classification based on association rules  3.1. Specification of the association rules  To mine the association rules is to discover the important relevance between the items in a transaction database. In the association rules, the item sets I={i1,i2,?,in} includes n different items. Given a transaction database D, each transaction record is a subset of the sets I. The association rule is described as YX? , here IX ? ,  IY ?  and ?=YX? . Its support degree and confidence degree are separately defined as follow formulas.

{ } DTYT,XDT)YX(support ???=?       (1) )X(support)YX(support)YX(confidence ?=?    (2)  The task to mine association rules is to discover all of the strong association rules. The support degree of the rules is no less than the minimize support degree determined by the users and the confidence degree is no less than the minimize confidence degree determined by the users.

From formula (1), the support degree reflects the frequency of the item set occurring in the transaction database D. The item set, which frequency is more than the threshold, is a frequent item sets. So we think the frequent item sets means that there is some correlation between the corresponding items.

3.2. Features extraction  Given a Chinese question, our system first segments it and tags its words POS. After that the system then extracts    pertinent features from the question. This step is very important part to any question classification system. Better feature sets can provide more accurate question representations and finally can be used to get better classification performance. After features extraction a feature vector is created, which is the basis for mining association rules. There are usually two kinds of features can be extracted from the question sets to construct the vector: lexical semantic features (word, POS and named entity types and so on) and structural features (Bi-gram and dependency relation and so on).

To select the words and POS features, the research [8] introduces that POS is little effective of question classification, and Chinese POS tags is more difficult than English. So POS isn?t extracted as classific feature in this paper.

To extract N-gram and dependency syntactic features, the research [8] shows the contribution of dependency relation is no better than that of Bi-gram because of the precision of the dependency parser. So Bi-gram is selected as classific feature in this paper.

3.3. Basic idea of question classification based on mining association rules  In the paper, questions set is regarded as a transaction database, and a question in it is regarded as a transaction record, the words and other features extracted from the questions are regarded as items. If some items frequently occur together in some transactions, then there must be some correlation between them. The paper redefines the meanings of the formula 1 and formula 2. Given a question, Y presents          the set of the types of the question, X means the set of its classific features. The item sets I includes all question types and all question classific features. The database D is the question sets, each record T is a question. The association rule YX? means that the type Y of the question can be determined by its classific features set X.

The basic idea of the question classification based on mining association rules is: to discover the frequent item sets composed of the question types and question classific features by scanning question database, which support degree is no less than the threshold of support degree; to produce the association rules YX?  which confidence degree is no less than the threshold of the confidence degree based on maximum frequent item sets; at last to determine the type of the question by choosing the type which the most association rules deduced.

In the research, there are more items in the frequent item sets, theirs frequency occurring in the question database is less, theirs support degree is less. But these frequent item sets are helpful to the classification. In order to avoid to loss these frequent item sets, the paper gives different min-support degree according to different N-frequent item sets. N is larger, the min-support degree is smaller. N is smaller, the degree is larger. The association rules YX? , which confidence degree is no less than the threshold of the confidence degree, is produced .

3.4. Question classification based on mining association rules  Given a question, firstly choose the association rules from the association rules database according to its classific features, the selected rules may be more than one, they are all used in question classification. At last the type of the question is determined by the rules committee voting, the type which is determined by the most rules is selected as the type of the question. The algorithm is as follows:  Step1 Generate the frequent item sets.

Step1.1 Generate the 1-candidate sets according to the  question database, scan the database to obtain their support degree, select the candidate sets which support degree is no less than the threshold of support degree to formulate the 1-frenquent item sets;  Step1.2 Use N-frequent item sets to generate N+1-candidate sets, set a smaller threshold of support degree, rescan the database to obtain their support degree, select the candidate sets which degree is no less than the threshold to formulate the N+1-frenquent item sets;  Step1.3 Try the step1.2 again and again, until no N+1 candidate sets generates or N is more than 5. Get all frequent item sets which satisfy the condition.

Step2 Produce the association rules YX?  from maximum frequent item sets according to the threshold of the confidence degree;  Step3 Given a question, choose the association rules according to its classific features. At last the type of the question is determined by the rules committee voting. The type, which is decided by the most rules, is selected as the type of the question.

Step4 Output the type. End the program.

4. Experiments and result analysis  4.1. Data set  There aren?t standard data sources for Chinese question classification. Here a data set is defined as a set of Chinese questions labeled with expected answer types according to some question taxonomy. So we collect our question set from the TREC QA track which was first introduced at TREC-8.

We download the free test question set from TREC, translate them and modify them as our test question set. There are 5500 questions.

4.2. Experiments and results  In order to test the classifier in this paper, we conduct the experiments under the fine grained category definition.

We conduct evaluation in terms of precision shown as formula (3) :  all  corr  num numprecision =         (3)  Here, numcorr is the number of the correct classified questions, while numall is the total of the testing questions.

Experiment 1: comparison study of different scale of training set. The test set is 500 questions. The experimental results are shown in table 2.

TABLE 2 . COMPARISON STUDY OF THE DIFFERENT SCALE QUESTION TRAINING SET  feature 2000 3500 5000 word 62.8% 68.8% 71.8% Word+Bi-gram 69.2% 78.0% 83.8%  From table 2, we can find that the precision is better and  better with the enlargement of the questions set. It is because that the association rules are based on the statistic of the feature frequency, and larger training set is more advantageous to compute the feature frequency and more coincident with the fact. So the classification result is more effective. The precision based on words and Bi-gram is improved by about 10% compared to classifier based on          words only because Bi-gram is a kind of structural information and is more informative than words.

Experiment 2: we design open test and close test based on KNN and AR(association rules). Open test: the test set is 500 questions extracted randomly from 5500 question set and the rest 5000 question is as the training set. Close test: the training set is 5000 questions and the test set is 500 questions extracted randomly from the training set. The experimental results are shown in table 3.

TABLE 3 . COMPARISON STUDY OF THE KNN AND THE AR  Test manner KNN AR Close test 68.4% 86.4% Open test 65.8% 83.8%   Table 3 shows that the AR method in this paper achieves  better performance than the KNN method. As the table shows, the precisions of open test are close to the precisions of close test. It proves that the proposed method can achieve good performance in question classification for new question set.

5. Conclusion  This paper puts forward a new method for Chinese question classification based on the mining association rules.

Words and Bi-gram are extracted from question as classific features. The method can mine the association rules between the question type and its features, and the type of the question is determined by choosing the type which the most association rules deduced. The experimental results show that the precision obtained by our algorithm is higher than other algorithms. In future, we will extract more features (including named entity, chunk, question focus, Bi-gram and so on) in order to be favorable to question classification and expect to improve the method of mining association rules.

