THE DESIGN OF ENERGY-SAVING FILTERING MECHANISM FOR SENSOR

Abstract: The transmission of massive highly related data could  generally exist in gathering scenario of sensor networks and lead  to the depletion of valuable energy resource. According to the  above energy waste problem, an effective filtering mechanism is  proposed in the paper to enhance the energy-efficiency of  data-gathering. Many current researches adopt clustering  method and aggregation technology to lower energy cost during  the process in data transmission, while our proposed filtering  framework mainly puts emphasis on inhibiting the production  of redundant loads at the gathering source to greatly reduce  energy cost using self-adaptive filtering scheme, which is  constructed by prediction module for mining the time domain  association, self-learning module for modifying model and  driving module for executing filtering operation. We can prove  the above filter components combined with the running of  error-driving rule and threshold-distributing rule can effectively  decrease the quantity of data transmission in networks based on  QoS requirement. Finally, the simulation results show that the  proposed filtering mechanism can do better than some classical  data gathering approaches on the aspect of energy-saving effect.

Keywords: Sensor networks; Data-gathering; Filtering mechanism;  Energy-saving  1. Introduction  The traditional architecture in sensor networks consists  of a large number of sensor nodes deployed over an area of  interest to sample data, process them locally and send the  results to a data collection point, i.e., BS. Data gathering[1-2]  is a critical operation in sensor networks for extracting useful  information from the operating environment. Energy-efficient  in data gathering of sensor networks has been long studied in many articles. In [3], the authors tried to compute a minimum spanning tree over the sensor network to minimize the total  energy expended in a round of communication. Modulation  scaling[4] is integrated into the weighted fair queuing  scheduling policy and the problem of balancing the energy  dissipation along a multi-hop communication path is studied.

Data aggregation techniques[5-9]can be introduced into  cluster-based approaches in sensor networks, which is  defined as the process of aggregating the data from multiple sensors to eliminate redundant transmission and  corresponding works focus on the design of efficient  algorithms to construct routing trees in aggregation way. The  authors of [10] present an ant colony based method to solve  the problem of constructing an aggregation tree for a group of  source nodes within the sensor networks. However, the  construction of the appropriate tree depends heavily on the  nodes? deployment and depletes an important amount of  power. Paper [11] proposes an adaptive data aggregation  scheme for clustered sensor networks, where the temporal  and spatial aggregation degrees are determined by the current  scheme state according to the observed reliability. But the scheme neglected the importance of scalability of such kind  of networks. The central work of [12] adopts the Mobile  Agents (MAs) technologies for an energy-efficiency data  gathering. However, the size of the mobile agent message is  large enough to waste an important part of this reduced power,  when sending it on the sensor networks.

The above researches emphasize on the idea that the  underlying structure of the network can be abstracted as a  data aggregation tree, which aggregates and collects  information from multiple sources route to the sink. And  presented solutions mainly achieve the energy-saving effect during the process of data transmission. Different from the  mentioned methods, in this paper, predictive mechanism on  time series model is adopted to reveal the variation law in  time dimension and mine the implication of time-redundancy.

The addressed schemes in the paper mainly focus on reducing  the temporal redundant degree in event-source to achieve the  energy-saving effect. That is to say, redundant-data filtering  operations which run at the source of data-gathering structure  can be performed before the course of data transmission.

Paper Organization: the background of related works is  discussed in Section 1. The system model of prediction-based filter structure in data-gathering mechanism is presented in  Section 2. In Section 3, Prediction-Mode-Filtering algorithm  (PMF) for the energy-saving problem in sensor networks is      described in details. Simulation results are shown in Section  4. Finally, concluding remarks are made in Section 5.

2. System model  Sensor networks can be regarded as an undirected weighted  connectivity-graph G(N,E,C) , where N and E respectively  represent the set of nodes and links inG , whileC denotes the set  of corresponding cost in E . At the beginning stage of basic data-gathering, base station (BS) firstly initiates the query  request. The major task in the stage is the construction and  modification of predictive model based on the study on historic information. After the above initialization, cluster  head (CH) receives the sampling sequence from cluster?s  members in the hierarchical clustering structure, realizes the  parameter estimation of time-series predictive model, then  returns the results to members. Finally, each member  respectively sets up the identical model replica on itself. The above serial operations could be modeled as the following steps :  CH collects the sampling sequence 1{ }i t  ix = from icluster at  the interval t? , which is used as training-data enters into queue ? to build model. CH estimates the stability characteristic of { }  i x according to the parameter rule[13-14]  and executes the smooth pre-processing. Then, CH selects the  obeyed order to modify the model parameters by calculating the partial autocorrelation function. The green function and  the l -step predictive equation ARMA [15] can be obtained as follows:    1, ( )( 1) i  i k i k k  k  G G G k? ? ?  =  ? ?=  = ? ?? (1)  1 1   ? ( ) ( ),  ?( )  ? ( ),  p q  i t i  i i  p  i t  i  x l i t l i l q  x l  x l i l q  ? ? ??  ? ?  = =  =  + ? ? + ?  ?  =  + ?  >  ? ?? ? ? ??  ? ?  ?  (2)  Then the predictive model can be modified according to  the new observed series 1 (1 ){ } , m  t i t m lx + = ? ? and the  adjustment of model is shown as follows:  2 2    1 1 2 2   ? ?( ) ( )  ? ( )  var( ( )) , 1, 0  m  t m t l i t i  i  t i t i t i  l m l  t m i l i t ii  G  x l x l m G  x x l  e l m G l m?  ?  ?  ?  + ? + =  + + + ?  ? ? ?  + ==  ? = + +?  ?? = ??  ? ? + = <  ? ? > ??  ?  ?  ?  (3)  From the modification of prediction equation shown in  equation?3??we can see that the l m+ step prediction  variance is decreased by 2 2  l l G ? compared with the original  variance. That means, to modify the predictive value using  the new sampling series needn?t repeated calculation and the  algorithm complexity is accordingly reduced.

3. The design of Prediction-based filter structure in  data-gathering mechanism  In the self-adapting data filtering stage, the same  bidirectional predictive model is introduced into both CH and  members. The core in energy-saving mechanism is the  self-adapting filtering framework (as seen in Figure 1), which  is mainly composed of predictive module (PM), self-learning  module (LM), trigger module (TM), threshold allocation  rule 1? and error driving rule 1? . The execution step of filtering framework is as follows. Firstly, predictive module  constructs the ( , )ARMA p q based on input series to execute  predictive function, subject to rule 1? . Then the deviation value from the threshold and error range acts as the input  signal of trigger module to generate results, which can drive  the corresponding node?s operation.

The design and operation of each component in this  filtering system is shown in Figure 1, whose structure is  based on our approach.

TM  Sampling  Input of filter  Predictive value  ?  LM PM  Output of filter  Transmission  Operation  Threshold  Prediction-based filter  +  ?  E rro  r 1 ?Rule  1?Rule  times  Threshold? Y  N thcnt  Figure 1. Prediction-based filtering structure  The pseudo-code of learning module based on system  model is shown as follows:  Modular algorithm of LM  Initialization:  0x ? ? // clearance of the data memory Learn(data stream) // model modification  for 1:i t= read ix and enqueue it into ?  ( , ) ( ), ( )p q ACF PACF? ? ? // order selection      1 1 ( , , , , , ) ( )  p q Para? ? ? ? ?= ? ?? ?  //parameter estimation   ( ) ( ) i  i  k i k k  k  G Compute G G? ? ?  =  ? ?? = ?? // calculation of the green?s function  ? ( ) ( , )tVal l Predict l?? // the thl step prediction  ( ) ( )b CompVal? ? ? // calculation of the variance  3.1. The design of threshold allocation rule  ?  The precision threshold allocation rule 1? can indirectly  control the transmission performed by i k n cluster? ? ?G. And  the precision threshold th  err could be constant value or  adjustable one, whose energy-saving effects are discussed as  follows:  Formula (4) is mathematical programming(MP) of  filtering-mechanism with constant precision threshold,  where ( ) i  Num packet means the quantity of data  transmission in cluster and the objective function denotes the  goal to minimize the amount of transmission packets in  cluster, which is subject to constraint condition of data  consistency.

min . ( )  ?.

i  i  t t  i i th  Num packet  st X X err  ? ?  ? ?4?  In the filtering-mechanism with constant precision, each member in cluster is allocated with the same precision range  and the transmission operation is triggered only when the  prediction-error exceeds therr , so the range of precision  threshold is in inverse proportion to energy cost. The above  analysis enlightens a way to further reduce the energy  consumption by distributing the personalized precision range  to i k n cluster? ? according to its own energy status (as seen  in formula?5?). Therefore, adjusting precision range can be  exploited to reduce the total energy cost in cluster. In the  application of environment monitoring in sensor networks,  extracting the mean value of sampling data is usually treated  as the data fusion mode, so the cluster as a whole can be  regarded as an abstracted node and QoS is satisfied under the  premise.

?  ]  m in . ( )  . [ /  :  th  i  k  i  i  t t  i i i  ii  X X err  er r  err  N um packe t  s t e rr N  ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ? ?  ?5?  The constraint condition in?5?embodies the precision  requirement for the cluster as a whole, subject to  rule 1? (denoted by formula?9?), where kN is number of  members in kcluster . Table 1 shows the definition of related  symbols in the filtering-mechanism with adjustable precision.

TABLE 1. SYMBOLS DEFINITION  Symbol Definition  j Costi  * ( * ),j  j j Cost E d Costi amp iitoCHelecl ?= + ? C  therr The threshold of error range based on QoS  j  ierr Precision interval allocated to in at moment j  j  iout Transmission when 1 j  iout = ,otherwise 0 j  iout =  T Time series, i.e., { 1 , }T j j j n= + +?? ? ?  kN / { },kk kkN NCHcluster ? ?=  GN  MP for energy optimization in inter-cluster data  gathering is shown as follows:  min .

j j  i i  j T i Nk  Cost out ? ?  ?? ? ?6?  . , , th i k  j  i ki ns t err N j Terr N  ?? ? ? ?? N ?7?  The objective function?6?indicates that the prediction  mechanism can achieve the energy-saving effect by reducing  the total number of data transmission in k  N . Because the  accumulated transmission times of i k n N? ? should be in  inverse proportion to assigned precision interval j  ierr ,  i.e., * (1 / ) j  i it out err?? in given segment *t . So, the MP  for energy optimization can be converted into?8?and the  threshold allocation rule 1? is defined as?9?.

min. [ ]  j  i  j  ij T i Nk  Cost  err? ? ? ? ?8?  2 2     : : : ( ) ( )  [( ) / ]  . . :  j  i ki  j j  Nj j j  m j jN  N  th  k  k  k  Cost Cost  err err err err err  err N err  s t =  ? = ??  ? ? ? ??  ?  ? ? ?  ?9?  The self-adaptive filtering mechanism driven by 1? is the specific case of data-fusion, which further optimizes the  energy-saving effect. 1? denotes serial operations performed in the later stage of data-gathering to produce the self-adaptive filtering threshold.

3.2. The design of error driving rule 1?  i k n cluster? ? ? G makes use of historical sampling  data) { | 1, 2 , } i x i t= ? to deduce 1?tx + according to the  predictive model in PM, then performs adaptive  filtering-operations based on rule 1? .

TABLE 2. RULE  ? DERIVED BY PREDICTION ERROR  Predictive error range Driven operation  [0, )i therr err? Not transmitting data  [ , )i th therr err ?? Modifying predictive model  [ , )i therr ?? ? ; thcnt cnt? Transmitting data  The concrete operating process based on error range is  illustrated as follows?  If the requirement of predictive precision is met,  i.e., [0, )i therr err? , members needn?t send sampling series to CH, which embodies the design idea that the energy-saving  effect is improved by reducing the temporal-redundancy  information in sensor networks on the premise of QoS, which  can be abstracted as threshold th? of filter.

When [ , )i th therr err ?? , TM triggers the operations of LM  and modifies the predictive model; [ , )i therr ?? ? and  thcnt cnt? should indicate that the monitored events occur, so data transmission is started up. The above QoS-oriented  predictive mechanism, in essence, reflects the data-filtering  operation via reducing the transmitted data amount to  decrease energy consumption. In the practical application of  data-gathering, the abnormal values obtained by sensors can  be caused by various reasons. Sometimes, it doesn?t mean that the predictive model missmatches the distribution of  environment data. Therefore, it is unreasonable that the  transmission should be triggered only by single-time  abnormity and threshold of abnormity cumulative times is set  as thcnt to reduce the probability of maloperation, the  transmission can be executed only when thcnt cnt? .

Time-window  ( ){ } , j m  i i i i m size CWCW x  = == , which  corresponds to time series { 1 , }( ) 1iT j j j sizeCW= + + ??? ? , is used  to intercept the infinite flow data and i i out? denotes the  times of abnormity in iCW .

?1, , [1, ( )]  0,  i i i i  i  CWx x err i size out  otherwise  ? > ? =  ? ? ?  ?10?  thi i out cnt>? ?11?  3.3? The data reconstruction based on predictive mode  CH and its members own the duplicate copy of predictive model. If CH doesn?t receive the next frame  sampling-series during the predetermined blocking time,  which means the precision requirement is met. Then the data  reconstruction is implemented by CH to substitute the  calculated predictive results for the actual sampling series on  the premise of meeting QoS. As a result, the frequency of  transmission is greatly reduced. To prevent the misjudgment  caused by the death of nodes, i k n cluster? ? periodically  broadcasts beacon to CH to show that it is alive. If CH  doesn?t receive beacon during time interval tht , node in is  considered dead. The same bidirectional predictive model is  introduced into both BS and CH. BS makes judgment that  whether the requirement of temporal-consistency, i.e., rece send  i i i t t T? ? , is met, where sendit denotes the  sending-moment of i  CH and rece  it is the moment at which  BS receives i  packet .

min . ( )  .

?  i  i  send rece  i i i  t t  i i i  Num packet  t t T st  X X err  ? ?  ? ?  ?? ? ??  ?  ?12?      If BS doesn?t receive any information from specific CH  in a specified time limit i T , the actual sampling series should  be substituted by the calculated predictive values; otherwise,  BS decodes codes sent by CHs for data-reconstruction. The energy-saving essence of proposed scheme is adopting the  prediction calculation to substitute the actual transmission  operation for greatly reducing the amount of communication  loads in networks. Based on the above designs, intra-cluster  communication mode using prediction mechanism in  data-gathering is shown in Figure 2.

Predictive  model  parameter  Evaluating  the energy  status  [ , ] j j j j  s err s erri i i i? +  Updating  information  ?  CH  Constructing  time-series  predictor  New round of clustering  BS  n i  Computing interval  QoS  Sampling series  Executing prediction  Receiving parameters , ,i i i? ? ? ?  ( ) 1 1  p q Y Yt ti t i j t j  i j ? ? ? ?? ?= + ?? ?= =  ?  ?  Model parameter  Precision  Figure 2. Intra-cluster predictive communication mode  4. Simulation and results  The goal of filtering mechanism in sensor networks is to  achieve the energy-saving effect by reducing the redundant communication loads in networks, which is the trade off  between the predication-precision and energy-efficiency. In  the simulator platform ns2, sensor networks can be randomly  formed in the 150m?150m planar topology with adjustable  density.BS is located in (0,0). The monitored data-gathering  is used in application scenarios of environmental thematic  monitoring and events occur in area with diagonal  coordinate[(120,90), (150,60)]). It is assumed that the  occurrence of events obey the Poisson distribution with the  limited duration time and tunable event radius. Given the  range of QoS-oriented predictive error, the simulation results  are obtained from 500 rounds test and set the size of data packet as 100 bytes. Then 3000 continuous observation  samplings are randomly chosen with the sampling interval as  8min and the sampling series contain trend component,  periodic component, and the stable component Querying  requirement launched by BS is as follows  { 25 30min  95%}0.2  nodei SELECT ID WHERE  ERROR CONFIDENCE  C DURATIONtemp  C          ?  ?  Figure 3 shows that when introducing the predictive  mode filter into data-gathering mechanism, the energy cost is  gradually decreased with the increase of the prediction  precision. Compared with the other algorithms[16-17], the  energy consumption of PMF is the least and the reason is  caused by reasonable error-range introduced into PMF on the basis of bidirectional prediction mode, on which the identical  predictive model is run on BS and CH at the same time.

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1       x 10   Accuracy of prediction  E n  e rg  y c o m  s u m  p ti o n (n  J )  PREM ON  Naive  Dual Predic t ion  PMF  Figure 3. Energy consumption among various prediction  methods  The relation between error-threshold and transmission  rate contrasted in different network sizes  ( 11.2 *i iN N += , 1 172, 1, , 3N i= = ? )is shown in Figure 4,  where the transmission rate is defined as the ratio of sent-data  amount to the total sampling series amount. From the  simulation results, we can see that the transmission rate is gradually decreased with the increase of error-threshold,  which leads to the transmission cost being greatly reduced.

When the error-threshold is increased to the specific value,  i.e., 45%therr ? , the change on network size will make little  contribution to decrease energy consumption, that is to say,  the network?s scale effect is weaken. The reason is that  enlarging the allowable error range will inhibit the  transmission operation executed by most nodes.

0.02 0.025 0.03 0.035 0.04 0.045 0.05 0.055 0.06 0.065  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9   Permissible error  D a ta  t ra  n s m  is s io  n ra  te  N1 sensors  N2 sensors  N3 sensors  N4 sensors  Figure 4. Permissible error vs. transmission rate      It is assumed that the occurrence of abrupt events, which  map to the abnormal sampling data, obey the Poisson  distribution with parameter? . As shown in Figure 5, on the predictive mode, when 0.2? ? , with the rise on value? , the inhibition effect on the transmission times can be  gradually enhanced and the corresponding energy cost could  be effectively reduced. While, on the general inquiry mode,  the average transfer times of packets have proportional  relation with the increment of? . So the energy efficiency could be improved by introducing the predictive mode into  data-gathering filtering mechanism of sensor networks.

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1            Poisson distribution parameter ?  A v  e ra  g e  t ra  n s  fe r  ti m  e s  o f  p a  c k e  ts  Prediction mode  General inquiry mode  Figure 5. Poisson parameter vs. times of transmission  5. Conclusion  In this paper, the feature of temporal correlation on  time series data is utilized to design novel energy-efficient  filtering mechanism in data gathering of sensor networks,  subject to QoS constraints. By diminishing the temporal  redundancy on time series, prediction-mode-based filtering mechanism is designed to solve the problem of energy waste  caused by the transmission of time-redundant loads. The  operation processes of filtering mechanism can construct and  modify the predictive model via self-learning on sampling  series to accurately capture the changing law of time domain,  meanwhile, allocation rule on prediction accuracy threshold  and prediction-error-driven rule are introduced into the  design of filtering scheme, where tunable prediction  threshold is determined based on node energy status and  internal information which is included in the data variation  patterns precisely obtained according to prediction error  bound. The above design idea is to further improve the filtering effect on time redundancy data. The experiment  results show that the proposed energy-saving filtering  mechanism can effectively reduce the energy cost of data  gathering mechanism by mining the temporal redundancy and  associability.

Acknowledgements  The work is supported by foundation project of State  Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology at Nanjing University (KFKT2009B18) and Science Foundation for the  Excellent Youth Scholars at East China University of Science  and Technology(YH0157127).

Reference  [1] Yide Zhang, Zhaorong Zhou. A comprehensive study of  data gathering system in Wireless Sensor Networks,  Proc. of IEEE ICCCAS, China, pp. 191-195, 2009.

[2] Anastasi, G., Conti, M., Di Francesco, M.: Data  collection in sensor networks with Data Mules: an  integrated simulation analysis. Proc. of IEEE ISCC  2008, USA, pp. 1096 -1102, 2008.

[3] M Liu, H.G. Gong, Y.C Mao, L.J. Chen, A Distributed Energy-Efficient Data Gathering and Aggregation  Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks. Journal of  Software. Vol 16, No.12, pp.2106?2116, 2005.

[4] V. Raghunathan, S. Ganeriwal, C. Schurger. E2WFQ:  An energy efficient fair scheduling policy for wireless  systems. International Symposium on Low Power  Electronics and Design (ISLPED?02), pp.30?35, 2002.

[5] Loyola, L., De Souza, T., Widmer, J., Fragouli, C.

Network-Coded Broadcast: from Canonical Networks to  Random Topologies. NetCod 2008: Fourth Workshop  on Network Coding, Theory, and Applications, pp. 1-6, 2008.

[6] Silberstein, A., Yang, J. Many-to-Many Aggregation for  Sensor Networks, IEEE ICDE, pp. 986 -995, 2007.

[7] Wu, Y., Fahmy, S., Shroff, N. On the Construction of a  Maximum-Lifetime Data Gathering Tree in Sensor  Networks: NP-Completeness and Approximation  Algorithm, IEEE INFOCOM 2008, pp.356-360, 2008  [8] Khan, M, Pandurangan, G. Distributed Algorithms for  Constructing Approximate Minimum Spanning Trees in   Parallel and Distributed Systems, Vol 20, No.1, pp.

124?139, 2009.

[9] Rajagopalan, R., Varshney, P.Data Aggregation  Techniques in Sensor Networks. A Survey.

Communication Surveys and Tutorials 2006, Vol 8,  No.4, pp. 48?63, 2006.

[10] W.H Liao, Y Kao, C.M Fan, Data aggregation in  wireless sensor networks using ant colony algorithm. J.

Netw. Comput. Appl. 2008, Vol 31, No.4, pp.387?401  [11] H Chen, H Mineno, Adaptive data aggregation scheme  in clustered wireless sensor networks. Computer      Communication Review, Vol 31, No.15, pp.3579?3585,   [12] M Chen, T Kwon et al., Mobile Agent Based Wireless Sensor Networks. Journal of Computers, Vol 5, No.2,  pp. 14?21, 2006.

[13] Ganesan D et al. Coping with irregular spatio-temporal  sampling in sensor networks. ACM SIGCOMM  Computer Communication Review, Vol 34, No.1,  pp.125-130, 2004.

[14] Cohen L, Avrahami-Bakish G et al. Real-time data  mining of non-stationary data streams from sensor  networks. Information Fusion, Elsevier, Vol 9, No.3, pp.

344-353, 2008.

[15] X Wang, J Ma, S Wang, D Bi. Time Series Forecasting  Energy-efficient Organization of Wireless Sensor  Networks. IEEE Sensors Journal, Vol 7, No.1, pp.

1766-1792, 2007.

[16] Y Xu, J Winter, WC Lee. Dual prediction-based  reporting for object tracking sensor networks. 1st Annual   Systems: Networking and Services, USA, pp.154-163,  2004.

[17] X Dai, F Xia, Z Wang, Y Sun. An Energy-Efficient  In-Network Aggregation Query Algorithm for Wireless  Sensor Networks. Proc. of the 1st International  Conference on Innovative Computing, Information and  Control, China, pp. 255-258, 2006.

