Improvement of Bearing-only Tracking Fusion  Strategy Based on Bionics with Infrared Sensor

Abstract?This paper *  mainly studies some improvements of bearing-only data association with a single passive sensor to overcome the existing problems in the applications of JPDA approaches for bearing-only target locating and tracking. First, some adaptive modified rules are presented by deep analysis of JPDA application. This bearing-only association approach reduces computational complexity clearly under the premise of better tracking precision.  Then, an effective track management strategy is designed. This strategy helps to set up a clear tracking level and manage historical the information of the target.  The application of the proposed approach in a simulation and engineering system proves its effectiveness and practicability.

Keywords-Data Association; Track Management; JPDA; Bearing-only; Target tracking  . INTRODUCTION  Multi-target track processing system based on the infrared sensor array is a key component of ship-borne infrared early warning system. Its main function is to achieve target file generated, target tracking and track management of multi- target. Bearing-only tracking with a single station is high nonlinear in substance. For the certain constraints of target observability, real-time and hidden feature, traditional algorithms are difficult to perform well. As yet, resolving method of this issue has been difficult in maneuvering target tracking domain [1-5]. In reference [6-9], some target tracking approaches are presented directly based on bearing-only measurements in polar plane on the assumption that bearing- only target movement is linear. The base of the assumption is that sampling time of passive sensor is shorter and target confirming accuracy is high enough. There is always an application example with JPDA-IMM algorithm in reference [6, 7]. But, some key problems still exist in engineering application. And the stability of this fusion strategy needs to be further improved.  In order to track the target with a large range, the bearing-only measurements will be obtained by constructing infrared sensor array. This sensor system imitates compound eye of insect where every infrared sensor is a small eye in a single passive sensor system. Based on this sensor system, by deep analysis of simulation and engineering   *  This work is sponsored by Gansu Provincial Science and Technology Planning #0916RJZA017 and sponsored by Gansu Provincial Key Laboratory of Industrial Process Advanced Control #XJK0905 in China.

application, some problems are caused by inherent properties of algorithm. Others are caused by direct bearing-only application of traditional algorithm. This paper gives some solution to these problems based on JPDA-IMM. Moreover, an adaptive track management approach will be presented in this paper.

. FEASIBILITY STUDY OF BEARING-ONLY DATA ASSOCIATION ALGORITHM  A. The defination of tracking coordinate Discussed in the above, define state variable  [ ]i i i i iX E E E * * *	 ? ?? ? ??  (1) Note measurement matrix  [ ]z E *	                                                                 (2) Suppose that there are N targets in clutter environment.

Then, state equation and measurement equation are  ( ) ( 1) ( 1) ( 1) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )  1,..., ; 1,2,...,  t t t t  t j  k  k k k k z k H k k k  t N j m  X X Y  X Z  ? 	 V   ? ? ?  ???   (3)  where ( )t kX  denotes state matrix of target t at time k, and ( )jz k denotes the j-th measurement matrix. ( 1)  t kV   and  ( )H k  are linear system matrix. State noise ( 1)t kY   and angle measurement noise ( )kZ are all Gaussian white noise with zero mean and they are also unrelated, whose covariance matrix are ( )k[ and ( )R k  respectively.

B. Joint Probabilistic Data Association (JPDA) JPDA[10-12] is advancing extending algorithm from  PDA[13] (Probabilistic Data Association). It resolves the bug of false tracking in the application of PDA algorithm in the high maneuvering target density environment. This algorithm always is considered as one of the most perfect association approach. The key technology of this bearing-only algorithm application [6] is listed as follows:  1)   Association gate  Proc. 9th  IEEE  Int. Conf. on Cognitive  Informatics  (ICCI?10) F. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Lu, B. Zhang, W. Kinsner & L.A. Zadeh (Eds.)  ??    1( ) ?[ ( | 1)] ( ) [ ( | 1)]'  t tt t t  zA k g z z k k S k z z k k  ? ? \ !? ?  ? ?   (4)  Where, t=1,2,?,N, ? ( | 1)tZ k k   is the position estimation  of target t at k; ( )tS k  is error covariance matrix of the measurement t at k.

? ?? ?( ) [ ( | 1)][ ( | 1)]'t t tS k E z z k k z z k k (5)  where 2gt denotes gate value.

If and only if the target measurement involves in the target association gate, it is regarded as valid measurement, or rejected. Assume that there are mk  valid measurements involving in N target-gates. Those measurements in the association gate are regarded as following association standby.

2)   Clustering matrix If consider that clustering matrix (or confirmed matrix)  have km rows and N 1 lines, clustering is defined as the most aggregate of conjoint tracking gate. All of targets are divided into different groups according to different clustering. There is a binary element matrix of clustering matrix which associates each of these groups all the time. Clustering matrix is defined as follows:  ( ), 1,2,..., ; 0,1,...,j m t Njt kCK	 	 	                                  (6)  where jtC  denotes that measurement j whether or not is contained by association gate.

If Z kj jtC  ?? ? ??  (7)  where 1, 2, ..., , 1, 2, ...,j m t Nk	 	 , and t=0 means that no target exist and correspondingly all line elements of K  are 1.

In this time, any measurement originates from clutter or falsehood.

3)   Feasibility Event Feasibility event is produced by clustering matrix. Assume  association event  ? ?( )Z k comes tjjtE 	    (8) where j=1, ?, km ,  t=1,2,?,N.

When t=0, 0jE  denotes measurement ( )Z kj  coming from clutter or noise. Note association event posterior probability  ? ?| kP Zjt jtJ E	                                       (9) ~jt is association probability. It is probability of association  event appearance.

Define joint association event   mk jt j  j E E   ?                                       (10)  Joint association event ? may represent matrix:  ? ?( ) ( )jtE C E4 5K 	8 9                                    (11) where  ? ( )  jt  jt E E  C E ? ??  ? ??  ,                                 (12)  If satisfying two conditions as follows, joint association is defined as feasibility event ?:  A Every measurement only comes from a headspring, target or clutter, namely:  ?( ) ( ) 1 1,2,...,  T j mj jt k  t ] E C E	 	 	$   (13)  A Every  target only has a measurement, that is  ?( ) ( ) 1 1,2,...,  mk t Nt jt  j ^ E C E	 ! 	$   (14)  For feasibility event E , corresponding matrix ? ( )EK is referred to as feasibility matrix. It is gotten by splitting clustering matrix  that is scanning K  and only choosing a ?1? in every row as feasibility matrix element. Except for the first line, every line of feasibility matrix only has a ?1?.

( )t^ E is defined as target detecting indicator and ( )j] E  is defined as measurement indicator. Then clutter number is:  ( ) [1 ( )]  mk j  j E ] EV 	 $   (15)  4) Feasibility Event Probability and Association Probability Calculation  The sum of joint association event is L at k.  Condition Probability, that is  A If clutter model is Poisson distribution, then  1( | ) [ ( ( ))] ( ) (1 ) ' 1 1  m Tkk t tj t tP Z N Z k P Pi t j D Djc j t  , ] ^ ^E V  _ _   (16)  A Else if clutter model is uniformity distribution, then  1 ! 1( | ) [ ( ( ))] ( ) (1 ) 1 1  m Tkk t tj t tP Z N Z k P Pi t j D Djc v j t ] ^ ^E V 	 _ _V  (17)  Where, c and c? are unitary element.

? ?( ( )) ( ); ( | 1), ( )t tN Z k N Z k Z k k S kt j j j jj 	                       (18) Where, N  denotes normal distribution.

Finally, association probability is:  ? ? ?| ( )  L kP Zjt i jt i i  J E C E	 $   (19)  ?    Where, 1,..., ; 1,...,j m t Tk  The probability of invalid measurement originating from target t is:   1, ..., ; 1, ...,1 , km  t jt j  j m t TkJ J   $                  (20)  5)  State Estimation ? ?( | ) ( | )  km t t  jt j j  X k k X k kJ	$                                   (21)  . MODIFIED BEARING-ONLY DATA ASSOCIATION BASED ON JPDA ALGORITHM  1) Improvement of data association based on JPDA JPDA?s computational cost is high because the association  hypothesis event number between target and measurement is exponential expanded. It is very disadvantage to the bearing- only tracking system. For shortage of distance information, threatening target is hardly to identify quickly. So, the real-time of tracking processing is very crucial. At present, the problem, which is harmonizing the contradiction between computational precision and computational cost, hasn?t been resolved.

Moreover, if the distance between the two targets is very near, it is still possible to bring estimation bias and track aggregation.

Its radical reason is that the association measurement has made greater contributions to state estimation of all targets when this measurement falls into their association gates at the same time.

As a result, the state estimation of every target intends to be identical.  In engineering application, some approach are presented as follow  2) Anomaly  processing of over-expansion of  feasible event number  Computational complexity mainly arises from the over- expansion of feasible event number. For the distribution of dense clutter, feasible event from clustering matrix will expand out of control. It leads to long running time. Especially, system collapse potentially occurs in course of target tracking.

Aiming at the problem, specify a decision approach for total number. It is depicted as compelling program to end the splitting of clustering matrix when feasible event number  EN ? Emax (22) where Emax is defined as upper limit number of feasible event.

Then, the target in the clustering is treated as missing in the current cycle. And substitute one-step prediction for filtering state of the next cycle.

3) Anomaly  processing of the probability of false event According to the splitting rules of JPDA algorithm, the  first feasible event is false event. The fist column elements of its matrix are all 1, which indicates that all measurements come from false target. However, the probability under this circumstance is very small in target tracking phase with dense clutter. Therefore, the engineering system treats it as anomaly and compels the event probability to averagely process.

4) Anomaly  processing of the probability of the feasible event  In theory, the sum of all feasible event probability from a clustering matrix is 1. And the probability of every feasible event PE [0,1]. Whereas, some calculated probabilities wouldn?t satisfy this condition for machine?s miscalculation. It leads to target missed because of subsequent false association probability. Aim at this Anomaly, the probabilities of all feasible events are compelled to averagely process. That is, PE=1/n where n is total number of feasible event. By analysis, this approximation has little affected the actual tracking effect.

5) Anomaly  processing of the association between measurement and target  When the confirmed measurement number is more than one, the association probability between the certain measurement and the tracked target is large so that the probability is close to 1. The tracking system treats it as Anomaly. If the some false measurement exists in the association gate of the target and it is closer to the tracking target than real measurement in dense clutter, the anomaly will occur which is that false measurement has bigger association probability than the real one. Under the circumstance, false measurement contributes more to state estimation so that target missed is inevitably. Aim at this anomaly, this system still adopts averagely processing.

. POSITIVE DEFINITE GUARANTEE OF INVERSE MATRIX AND ELIMINATION OF ILL-POSED MATRIX  In course of target tracking, many inverse matrixes such as filtering covariance matrix need to solve inverse. These matrixes are positive definite in theory. However, for the reason of finite word length of computer, error is accumulated with time going so that the filtering covariance matrixes lost the feature of positive definite and symmetry. Obviously, filtering divergence will appear and it will lead to tracking missed. Moreover, ill-posed matrix might appear. When solving its inverse, the results are very unstable. Filtering divergence also will appear. Solution in the engineering application is shown as follow:  1) Positive definite guarantee According to the condition of positive definite, first,  compel the matrix to symmetry. Then, resolve to get its eigenvalue and determine if positive or negative. When all eigenvalues are positive, do nothing and go on. If there is a negative eigenvalue, the matrix isn?t a positive definite. Under the circumstance, all diagonal elements of the matrix will plus an appropriate positive number. The process will go on till the matrix is positive definite.

2) Elimination of ill-posed matrix First, resolve to get eigenvalue of the matrix. Then  verdict if its certain eigenvalueis is close to zero. If existing, the matrix is ill-posed, or else operation goes on. In this tracking processing system, the diagonal elements of the matrix will plus an appropriate number X, where X [2,5].

The process will go on till the ill-posed matrix is eliminated.

. DESIGN OF TRACK MANAGEMENT MODULE Track management exists throughout the tracking process.

Its performance also directly determintes tracking effect. In  ??    tracking phase,  the establishment and management of the target file is a key indicator for tracking system. Good track management will effectively recognize varieties of targets and help to reduce computational complexity. More important, it provides a base for the posterior situation assessment and threat estimation. Tracking management is realized by a globally unique track number and track logo.  Since these processes such as formation of new target and  deletion of missing target all exist in tracking phase all the time, considering that economize  resource of system, traver every existing target number at the current moment before numbering new target. If old target is missing, its number is replaced by new target.

Then modify old target logo of track property. Or else, continue to number based on old total targrt number with order and create new target logo.

1)  Design track logo It is important to estimation of threatening level. So, target  state devides into threatening target and ordinary target.  And track devides into new, old, missed and deleted. Considering the necessary to record the historical infmations of the target tracks, design the track logo as structure body array shown in tab.1. The difference of the target state is used to provide the guidance  of  logo change for target tracking. Its value is defined as array shown in tab.2, where i is target number.

2) Some approaches of track management If the target displacement of radial position is little,  namely satisfy formula 5, in the three consecutive sampling cycles, regard it as threatening target.

1 mink kr r r !                                                           (23) where kr is bearing-only position vector at time k and minr  is settings for threatening level.

If the target state isn?t renewed by filter, namely nothing of measurements fall into the association gate of the target, in the three consecutive sampling cycles, regard it as missing.

Obviously, if track initiation is completed within the three cycles, target track will be not intermittent when viewing track map of target.

TABLE I. Design of Track Logo  Track logo meaning  target[i].state State of target  target[i]. miss_count The number of missing target  target[i]. attack Threatening level: 0-threat, 1-  ordinate  target[i].

track_history  History information of track  TABLE II. DESIGN OF TARGET TRACK STATE  Value of target[i].state meaning  0 missing  1 Tracking  2 New track  Missed and deleted the old  information  . THE PROCESSING OF SUSPECTED THREATENING TARGET According to the characteristic of bearing-only tracking,  the estimation of threatening target is very important for lack of distance information. The most intuitive feeling is that suspected threatening target whose attacking velocity is high and attacking angle change is small. Especially, those stationary targets need to be tracked first and foremost. In real application, if the equation 24 is satisfied in three consecutive scan cycles for the estimation state of the target, it is considered as a threatenting target and target threatening degree is upgraded.

1 1 T( ) /( )k k k kt t` ` C? ?  !                                   (24) where  k`  is bearing-only position vector in sample time k,  TC  is threatening decision angle given by system.

Moreover, confidence measure based on this decision is  not high. Where, some additional information from passive sensor can be used such as gray change information, area change information, etc.  Use of this information can   improve threatening estimation precision to some extent.

. SIMULATION Where, three selective maneuvering targets are shown in  fig.1 in Cartesian coordinate and in fig.2 in bearing-only coordinate. Assume that measurement noise is Gauss white noise whose coefficient is 0.005rad. In this tracking filtering algorithm, there is an IMM filter composed of 3 models.

These models are depicted as: There is a different Q matrix for model 1 and model 2. Both of them are CV model whose state noise coefficient respectively are 0.1 and 0.01. Model 3 is chosen as CA model whose state noise coefficient is 0.01.

Initial model probability matrix  [1/ 3 1/ 3 1/ 3]:  Model transition probability matrix  0.98 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.98 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.98  P 4 5 6 7  6 7 6 78 9  ??    Assume that T=1s, clutter dense -5 2=1.01 10 /mrad, ? , measuring probability of tracking gate PG=0.99, measuring probability of sensor Pd 0.999 and threshold constant Kg 0.2.

Tracking effect is shown in fig.3.

Figure 1. Target track in Cartesian coordinate  Figure 2. Target track in bearing-only coordinate  . CONCLUSION For presented improvement of data association and track  management approach, simulation result indicates their effectiveness. Computational complexity is reduced clearly under the premise of better tracking precision. According to simulation result of whole track processing system and application of actual ship-borne infrared system, adopting the modified JPDA based on a series of anomaly processing is suitable for bearing-only tracking by using a passive sensor.

Whereas, the phenomena of track aggregation sometimes still appear yet. This problem needs to be resolved in later work.

