The Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery in  Biomedicine

Abstract?The development of database technology has solved the memory and retrieval of substantive data, but the biomedicine database existing the phenomenon of ?data rich, information poor?. In order to solve the problem of Knowledge Discovery in Database, great importance has been continuously attached to the data mining. In this paper, we elaborate the Particularities and Key issues of data mining in biomedicine, analyze and summarize the application research of data mining in the biomedicine domain, point out the few application reason of data mining in the biomedicine domain.

Index Terms?Data Mining, Knowledge Discovery, Biomedicine

I.  INTRODUCTION With the technology development of research and  measuring instruments in biomedical engineering, it becomes possible to record a huge amount of medical information precisely. This leads to the exploration of the medical data. The application of Hospital Information System (HIS) also makes it possible to build complete Electronic Healthcare Record (EHR) which including not only objective physiological values and medical images, such as X-ray, Ultrasound B and CT, but also plenty of detailed patient?s background information, such as age, gender, height, weight and previous medical history. The characteristic of these data are: rich in classes, heterogeneity in essential and valuable for disease diagnosis, treatment, and research. However, it is far beyond the capacity and speed of traditional analysis to understand, analysis and deal with these information. This shortage becomes the bottle-neck of investigation and application in biomedicine. Biomedicine database existing the phenomenon of ?data rich, information poor?. In order to solve the problem of Knowledge Discovery in Database(KDD) , a great importance has been continuously attached to the Data Mining(DM). Data Mining is a cross subject which covers machine learning, mathematical statistics, neutral network, database, pattern recognition, rough sets, fuzzy mathematics and relative technologies. The Data Mining in biomedical database can help us with disease diagnosis, treatment, research and decision making, by discovering the rules and mode of medical diagnosis. The research on building an experimental platform of syndrome differentiation research based on data mining technology is done by YAN Jun-feng. It expresses that implementing TCM(Traditional Chinese  Medicine) diagnosis research taking the unified architecture of symptoms, syndrome elements and differentiation as a break through point, is an achievable objective[1].



II. SOME KEY ISSUES OF DATA MINING IN BIOMEDICINE DATABASE  Data Mining is the process of abstracting unaware, potential and useful information and knowledge from plentiful, incomplete, noisy, fuzzy and stochastic data. The form of abstracted knowledge can be concept, rules, regulations, tends and mode. The implementation methods need both special data structure and algorithm. The algorithms of currently used data mining are: statistic method, decision tree, evolutionary algorithm, neural network, fuzzy logic, association rule, rough set, support vector machine and nearest neighbors algorithm.

However, the particularity of data mining in biomedicine database is due to its privacy, polymorphism, incompleteness, timeliness and redundancy, which means that the method of doing this should differ a lot with that of regular ones.

A. Preprocess of data Preprocessing of data mainly includes issues about  shortage, redundancy, inconsistent and outdated of data through the methods of data cleaning, data transforming and data reducing. Biomedicine database needs data preprocessing because it always containing noise, incomplete, inconsistent data information.

B. Anonymousness and identification transformation Besides data preprocessing, in order to separate the relative  between patients and their records which may referenced some private information, anonymousness and identification transformation are also needed.

C. Standardization of text data Standardization of text data is needed for mining  biomedical information; otherwise, it will become hard to do data mining on experts? explanation of images, signals or other kinds of clinical data.

D. Information fusion technology Biomedicine database is composed by words, data, signals,  images and some voice & video signals. Different technologies and measures should be taken to deal with these databases with   Computer Science & Education Hefei, China. August 24?27, 2010   ThP7.5        different physical properties, so that the results can be comprehended with convergent properties.

Apart from above, key issues of data mining in biomedicine database also includes research on Fast Association Rule Mining (FARM), ensure the accuracy and liability of knowledge which is gained from data mining. In practical, in order to adapt to various requirements of projects, methods of data mining need modification, expansion and optimization.



III. APPLICATIONS OF DATA MINING IN BIOMEDICINE DATABASE  The purposes of data mining and knowledge discovery in biomedicine database is prediction and classification of diseases. The methods of intelligently categories and prediction are: Rough Sets Theory, Decision Tree, Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Association Rule, Evolutionary Computation and Multivariate Statistical.

A. Rough Sets Theory The model of rule produces, which was based on rough sets  theory, can automatic discover the knowledge about positive example and negative example of clinical trial databases automatically [2]. LI Nan used Automatic Judge Algorithm, which is based on rough sets theory, to test whether the tumors of lung is benign. The percentage of response of patients 91.3% with 100% accurate rate [3]. The problem of analysis of clinical data mining of echocardiography was solved by ZHOU Yi through the method of combining rough sets theory, cluster analysis and factor analysis [4]. The bottle-neck problem of knowledge acquisition from expert system was solved effectively by auxiliary method of medical diagnosis, proposed by QIU Yin-an based on rough sets theory and interval annihilation [5]. Favorable outcomes was gained from predicting chest pain, emergency diagnosis of ICU, identify diagnosis of lung cancer and rheumatoid types, diagnosis of breast diseases and premature birth, diagnostic classification of liver trouble and acute appendicitis, due to the research done by LI Qiong through data mining technology based on rough sets theory [6].

B. Artificial Neural Network (ANN) The relation between antipsychotic drugs and  cardiomyopathy and myocarditis has been found by Coulter DM, with the help of Bayesian Neural Network Architecture(NNA) [7]. The classification of cardiac arrhythmia which can be life-threatening was done by Dokur Z using Neural Network Architecture (NNA) [8]. Vefghi L used Neural Network Architecture (NNA) to test the depth of anesthesia and control the consumption of anesthesia drugs [9].

C. Decision Tree After studying issues in automating cardiac SPECT  diagnosing with decision tree, Sacha JP pointed out that Data mining and general knowledge discovery techniques appear to be useful for classification of SPECT cardiac images [10]. Cios KJ used decision tree to discovery knowledge for myocardial perfusion [11]. Decision tree algorithms was applied to the data mining of the mammography classification by WANG Shu- yan, and proposed a medical images classifier based on decision tree algorithm, the experiment results were given [12].

ErnaKentala. once withdrew 6 kind of patient information from Helsinki University affiliated hospital's nose nerve expert system database ONE, established 6 kind of disease's different scale decision tree separately, and aimed at 6 trees to analyze alone affects factor which each kind of disease occurs, withdraw the diagnosis rule from the decision tree, thus expert knowledge transformed into valuable information for young doctors reference at any time [13]. Xu Lei reported that the decision tree data mining techniques can be used to grade the degree of disease, screening of risk factors, the decision to prescribe the size and choice of treatment prescription, etc [13].

D. Evolutionary Computation Evolutionary Computation is a new search and optimization  algorithm which is developed with law of biological evolution.

It contains genetic algorithms, evolutionary programming, evolutionary strategy and genetic programming. Evolutionary Computation is aimed to make the region within the Search space which population evolved into become better and better, the method of realizing this is: starting from any population and go through the processes of random selection, crossover and mutation. Bojarczuk CC used genetic programming to diagnose diseases with the symptom of chest pains [14]. Wang ML used Evolutionary Computation to classified Spine scoliosis [15].

E. Association Rule With the help of Association Rule, after analyzing the clinic  database, LI Xiao-hua found that the age of bronchial asthma patients fall into the region between 1 to 9, the main symptom are cough, shortness of breath and have contact allergy history of smell [16]. The Medical Image Analyzer, done by WANG Shu-yan, based on association rules, realized the data mining of breast cancer images with high accurate rate of classification [17]. CHEN Ming used Apriori algorithm of association rule to express the function of TCM diagnosis [18]. HE Wei and QI Ying applied this technology into Medical research projects [19].

F. Multivariate Statistical Combining the statistical method, computer technology and  evidence-base medicine, TIAN Si-sheng developed a screening system of prescriptions and herbs in the clinical literature of TCM with high integrated and objective evaluation methods of multiply mathematical statistics and evidence-base medicine [20].The sub-health epidemiological data was analyzed firstly with the whole data understanding and then with variables and finally with choosing the appropriate model by LIU Bao-yan, Thus, the classification equation and the clinic characteristic of sub-health are obtained, two logistic regression models were established, each of which is tested using testing data set to reach the classification accuracy, and the results were satisfying which show that the main clinic characteristics are body fatigue, sleep difficulty, bad memory, work efficiency declining, mental blankness, irascibility, etc [21].

Apart from above, data mining technology can also be used in bioinformatics/ DNA analysis, analysis of patient flow, Hospital Pharmacy Drug Administration, Policy Analysis on medical, Medical Health Care and Evaluation of Medical Resource Utilization, etc.

ThP7.5

IV. CONCLUSION Biomedicine database is a comprehensive database which  contains Electronic Medical Record (EMR), medical images, pathologic parameters and assay eventuate. The current data mining technology is mainly applied to relational database, transactional database and data warehouse which are classified as structured database . Mining to complete data is at beginning, the possible causes of this phenomenon can be: poor understand, massive amount of mining results and unfavorable between practical mining method and interaction with users,etc. We believe that data mining technology will take great importance in dealing with biomedicine records, along with the extensive use of data mining technology, improvement and perfection of mining algorithm, combination specialty and complexity of biomedicine information and effective dealing with the key technology of mining. The application scope of data mining in biomedicine research, medical and health care management and decision will become wider and wider, and the economic and social benefits will become more and more considerable.



V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support for  this research by scientific projects of Shanxi Provincial Department of Education under grants No. 20051303.

