Classification Ensemble for Mammograms Using  Ant-Miner

Abstract? This paper proposes a new classification method based on association rule mining. This association rule-based classifier is experimented on a real dataset; a database of medical images from MIAS database. The proposed system employs Ant-Miner metaheuristic algorithm for extracting knowledge in the form of decision rules using texture features extracted with the help of co-occurrence matrices. These rules are used to predict unseen mammogram. The experimental results show that the method performs with greater accuracy.

Keywords? Ant-Miner, Data mining, Mammogram, GLCM Matrix, Metaheuristic

I.  INTRODUCTION Breast Cancer is one of the most common cancers, leading  to cause of death among women, especially in developed countries. There is no primary prevention since cause is still not understood. So, early detection of the stage of cancer allows treatment which could lead to high survival rate. The accuracy with which tumors are detected, when large volumes of images are to be read by radiologists tends to decrease, and hence an automated mechanism for reading of digital mammograms is always preferable. However with the use of proper computer aided systems, we could reduce the number of unnecessary biopsies being conducted. Wavelet- based subband image decomposition for detecting microcalcification in digital mammograms is presented in [1].

Tumor detection using Markov Random field is proposed in [2]. In this technique, detection of tumor in digital mammography is performed in two steps, segmentation and classification. Classification of medical images using neural networks is presented in [3, 4]. Osmar R. Zaine et. al [5] have classified medical images using Association Rule based Classifiers by Category (ARCBC). A study of the breast cancer using data mining techniques has been presented in [6].

Metaheuristics are generally applied to problems for which there is no satisfactory problem-specific algorithm or heuristic; or when it is not practical to implement such a method. Most commonly used metaheuristics are targeted to combinatorial optimization problems, but of course can handle any problem that can be recast in that form, such as solving boolean equations. In this research, the Ant-Miner metaheuristic algorithm has been used to generate rules for classification purpose.  A voting scheme algorithm has been proposed to classify an unknown case which is not classified under one particular angle. A similar technique has been proposed by Andrew Kusiak et al. [7] in predicting survival time for kidney dialysis patients.

This paper is organized as follows: Section II explains the concepts and importance of datamining. Section III elucidates Ant Colony-Based Association Rule Miner, Section IV gives out the proposed algorithm using voting scheme. Section V reports the computational results and discussions.



II. DATA MINING Mining information and knowledge from large database  has been recognized by many researchers as a key research topic in database system and machine learning and by many industrial companies as an important area with an opportunity of major revenues. One of the data mining tasks gaining significant attention is the classification rules extraction from databases. The goal of this task is to assign each case (object, record, and instance) to one class, out of a set of predefined classes, based on the values of some attributes for the case.

There are different classification algorithms used to extract relevant relationship in the data as decision trees which operate performing a successive partitioning of cases until all subsets belong to single class [8] (Quin-lan,1986).This operating way is impracticable except for trivial data sets.

There are many other approaches for data classification, such as statistical and roughest approaches (Ziarko,1994) and neural networks(Lu et al.,1995).Though these classification    techniques are algorithmically strong they require significant expertise to work effectively and do not provide intelligible rules. The classification problem becomes very hard when the number of possible different combinations of parameters is so high that algorithms based on exhaustive searches of the parameter space rapidly become computationally infeasible.

The metaheuristic algorithms based on nature, such as genetic algorithms (GA), neural networks, immune algorithm, are extremely appealing for the tasks of data mining. This paper deals with Ant-Miner metaheuristic algorithm. In the context of the classification task of data mining, discovered knowledge is often expressed in the form of  IF-THEN rules, as follows: IF <conditions> THEN < class>.

The rule antecedent (IF part) contains a set of conditions,  usually connected by a logical conjunction operator (AND).

A. Data Pre-processing Pre-processing is always a necessary whenever the data is  to be mined in noisy, inconsistent or incomplete and pre- processing significantly improves the effectiveness of the data mining techniques [10]. Mammogram images are noisy and inconsistent to interpret in their raw form. To produce a reliable representation of the breast anatomy we need to pre- process the mammograms. There are basically two steps involved in processing the mammogram images and they are noise reduction and enhancement of image. Many images have existing artifacts like written labels that need to be eliminated and this can be done by cropping the images. The pruning of images removes nearly all background noise. The second step is image enhancement. In the process of image generation, transmission and transformation, with the influences of different external and internal factors, the quality of images would be decreased. The purpose of image enhancement is to use special techniques to improve the quality of image or change the images to other formats that are more suitable for processing afterwards. Usually there are two categories of image enhancement techniques: space domain and frequency domain. Histogram equalization technique is an algorithm of gray level enhancement performed in space domain. The distribution of the histogram of an image with low contrast will normally aggregate in a relatively small region. For images after equalization, the different gray levels will have similar occurring rate. In the above situation, the entropy of the image is the largest and contains the most information. In this paper, we choose the widely used histogram equalization technique to enhance the images. Noise removal should be performed first in order not to enhance the noise simultaneously. The results after noise removing and histogram equalizing are shown in Fig 1.

a. Original Image            b. After Noise Removal  and  Histogram  Equilization  Fig1 The Preprocessing stage  B. Grey level co-occurrence matrices features (GLCM).

The GLCM is a well-established robust statistical tool for  extracting second order texture information from images [11, 12]. The GLCM characterizes the spatial distribution of grey levels in an image. Specifically, an element in the GLCM, Pd, (i,j), represents the probability of occurrence of the pair of grey levels (i,j) separated by a distance d at direction . In this study, four GLCMs are computed, corresponding to three different directions (  = 0?, 45?, 90? ) and one distance(d = 1 pixel). Haralick 14 features [11] are derived from each GLCM: Angular second moment, Contrast, Correlation, Variance, Inverse second different moment, Sum Average, Sum Variance, Sum Entropy, Entropy, Difference Variance, Difference Entropy, Measure of Correlation 1, Measure of Correlation 2, and Local Mean.

C. Discretization of Numerical Attributes  In order to perform data mining by decision tree algorithm or Ant-miner algorithm, numerical attributes should be discretized first, i.e. continuous attribute values should be divided into multiple segments. For some attributes, if doctors have had existing dividing points, we can adopt it directly. For example, patients? weight can be divided to thin, common and heavy; their age can be divided into under age, youth and the elderly; Medical test results can be said to be normal and abnormal. But for extracted image feature value, there is no existing threshold. Previous research indicated that supervised discretization methods are better than unsupervised methods [13]. In this research, entropy-based binning via binarization has been used. It intuitively, find best split so that the bins are as pure as possible and formally characterized by maximal information gain [14].



III. ANT COLONY-BASED ASSOCIATION RULE MINER Ant Colony-Based is proposed by Parpinelli et al [9] as an  association rule mining algorithm. An Ant Colony Optimization algorithm (ACO) is essentially a system based on agents which simulate the natural behavior of ants, including mechanisms of cooperation and adaptation. In solving the optimization problems with ACO we have three major functions. Choosing these functions appropriately helps the algorithm to get faster and better results. The first function is a problem-dependent heuristic function (? ) which    measures the quality of items that can be added to the current partial solution. The heuristic function stays unchanged during the algorithm. A rule for pheromone updating, which specifies how to modify the pheromone trail (?), and a probabilistic transition rule based on the value of the heuristic function and on the contents of the pheromone trail that is used to iteratively construct a solution In Ant-Miner algorithm the author refer to each rule condition as a term, so that the rule antecedent is a logical conjunction of terms in the form: IF term1 AND term2 AND ... Each term is a triple <attribute, operator, value>, such as <Gender = female>. The rule consequent (THEN part) specifies the class predicted for cases whose predictor attributes satisfy all the terms specified in the rule antecedent. From a data mining viewpoint, this kind of knowledge representation has the advantage of being intuitively comprehensible for the user, as long as the number of discovered rules and the number of terms in rule antecedents are not large.

ACO algorithms involve simple agents (ants) that cooperate with one another to achieve an emergent, unified behavior for the system as a whole, producing a robust system capable of finding high-quality solutions for problems with a large search space. In the context of rule discovery, an ACO algorithm has the ability to perform a flexible, robust search for a good combination of terms (logical conditions) involving values of the predictor attributes.

In ACO algorithm each ant incrementally constructs/modifies a solution for the target problem. In the proposed model the target problem is the discovery of classification rules for mammogram classification.

A. Pheromone Initialization All cells in the pheromone table are initialized equally as  per the following equation:    ? =  == a  i i  ij  b t   1)0(?  where a is the total number of attributes, and bi is the number of possible values that can be taken on by attribute Ai. The rule is constructed by the ant incrementally by adding one term at a time. The term selection is based on the probability as given by the following equation:  ? ? = =  = a  i  b  j ijiji  ijij ij i  tx  t P  1 1  ))(.(.

)(.

??  ??  where ?ij is the value of a problem-dependent heuristic function for termij, the higher the value of ?ij the more relevant for classification the termij is, and so the higher its probability of being chosen. a is the total number of attributes. xi is set to 1 if the attribute Ai was not yet used by the current ant, or to 0 otherwise. bi is the number of values in the domain of the ith attribute.

B.  Heuristic value In traditional ACO, a heuristic value is usually used in  conjunction with the pheromone value to decide on the transitions to be made. In Ant-Miner, the heuristic value is  taken to be an information theoretic measure for the quality of the term to be added to the rule. The quality here is measured in terms of the entropy for preferring this term to the others, and is given by the following equation:  ))|(.log).|(()|( 21 ijiij K  W iiji VAWPVAWPVAWH ==?== ? =  where W is the class attribute (i.e., the attribute whose domain consists of the classes to be predicted).k is the number of classes. P(W|Ai=Vij) is the empirical probability of observing class W conditional on having observed Ai=Vij. The higher the value of H(W|Ai=Vij), the more uniformly distributed the classes are and so, the smaller the probability that the current ant chooses to add termij to its partial rule.

The information-theoretic heuristic function is:  ? ? = =  =?  =? =  a  i  b  j ijii  iji ij i  VAWHkx  VAWHk  1 1   )|((log.

)|(log ?  where a, xi, and bi have the same meaning as in term selection equation. Immediately after the ant completes the construction of a rule, pruning is undertaken to increase the comprehensibility and accuracy of the rule. After the pruning step, the rule may be assigned a different predicted class based on the majority class in the cases covered by the rule antecedent. The rule pruning procedure iteratively removes the term whose removal will cause a maximum increase in the quality of the rule. The quality of a rule is measured using the following equation:   TNFP  TN FNTP  TPQ ++  = .

where TP(true positives) is the number of cases covered by the rule that have the class predicted by the rule, FP (false positives) is the number of cases covered by the rule that have a class different from the class predicted by the rule, FN (false negatives) is the number of cases that are not covered by the rule but that have the class predicted by the rule, TN (true negatives) is the number of cases that are not covered by the rule and that do not have the class predicted by the rule.

C.  Pheromone Update Rule After each ant completes the construction of its rule,  pheromone updating is carried out as per the following equation:  Qttt ijijij ).()()1( ??? +=+           Rji ?? , where R is the set of terms occurring in the rule  constructed by the ant at iteration t. In Ant-Miner, pheromone evaporation is implemented in an indirect way. More precisely, the effect of pheromone evaporation for unused terms is achieved by normalizing the value of each pheromone ? ij. This normalization is performed by dividing the value of each ? ij by the summation of all ? ij.

D.  Ant-Miner Parameter Setting The parameters used to achieve the results Number of ants =  100 Minimum cases per rule =   10    Maximum uncovered cases = 10 Number cases for rules converge = 10  E. A high-level description of Ant-Miner Algorithm TrainingSet = {all training cases}; DiscoveredRuleList = [ ]; /* rule list is initialized with an empty list */ WHILE (TrainingSet > Max_uncovered_cases) t = 1; /* ant index */ j = 1; /* convergence test index */ Initialize all trails with the same amount of pheromone; REPEAT Ant t starts with an empty rule and incrementally constructs a classification rule Rt by adding one term at a time to the current rule; Prune rule Rt; Update the pheromone of all trails by increasing pheromone in the trail followed by Ant t (proportional to the quality of Rt) and decreasing pheromone in the other trails (simulating pheromone evaporation); IF (Rt =  Rt ? 1) /* update convergence test */ THEN j = j + 1; ELSE j = 1; END IF t = t + 1; UNTIL (i < No_of_ants) OR (j <  No_rules_converg) Choose the best rule Rbest among all rules Rt constructed by all the ants; Add rule Rbest to DiscoveredRuleList; TrainingSet = TrainingSet - {set of cases correctly covered by Rbest}; END WHILE  F.  Comparative study The metaheuristic Ant-Miner algorithm has been  compared with standard C4.5 algorithm. The experimental results show that Ant-Miner classifies the mammogram region with greater accuracy and with less number of rules than C4.5. Another observation made is the default rules used for classification in both the algorithm decreases the accuracy. Ten-fold cross validation has been done on the features extracted in the mammogram region by constructing coocurrence matrices at three different angles namely 0, 45 and 90.  Experimental results reveal that some of the cases which are misclassified by the default rule in one particular angle could be classified by the rules generated in other angles.



IV. THE PROPOSED DECISION MAKING ALGORITHM To the author?s knowledge there are studies focus on  extracting features from co-occurrence matrix at different angles and combing all features to form feature set and then build classification models. There is only one study using mean and range of different features at different Angles namely (? = 00,450, 900,1350)[15].

The Ant-Miner algorithm has been applied to generate classifiers for the features generated over the co-occurrence matrix at different angles namely (? = 00,450, 900). These classifiers are used to make predictions of tumor as benign or  malignant. Each classifier can be considered as a digital expert. If all digital experts generate the same outcome, then this would be the confident prediction. The predictions generated by all classifiers are often not identical, and therefore a decision making algorithms is needed.

A simple voting scheme has been used with each classifier having one vote. Thus the decision outcome with maximum number of votes is the predicted outcome. To be conservative if there is tie or no classifier can classify a particular case the outcome will be Unknown instead of giving any approximate classification using default rule. Figure 2 shows the diagrammatic representation of proposed decision making scheme.

Fig 2  Diagrammatic Representation of Proposed Decision-making Scheme

V. COMPUTATIONAL RESULT  Initial experiment was conducted to classify the mammogram region as normal and abnormal (abnormal includes benign and malignant).  The result shows the accuracy reaches 99% for the proposed method. In the second level the experiment has been extended to classify the region of abnormality as benign and malignant.  Since it is very difficult to interpret the region as benign and malignant there is a drop in the classification rate.

A.  Sample Rule Set The rule set for Fold 3 at Angle 0 is given below  Number of Rules = 2  Rule  : 1 (Contrast   = low)  and  (Entropy  = high)  and  (MC1  = low) and  (SE = high)  : Malignant  Rule  : 2 (Contrast  = low)   and (Correlation = low)   and  (LM = low) and  (ASM =  low)  and  (MC2 = low)   :  Benign    Where MC1 ? Measure of Correlation 1 SE- Sum Entropy LM ? Local Mean ASM ? Angular Second Moment MC2 ? Measure of Correlation 2  Table I reports the prediction given in various angle classifier and the voting scheme prediction.

TABLE 1  PREDICTION RESULTS AND OVERLAP ANALYSIS  B ? Benign    A ? Malignant   UK ? Unknown  For an independent angle analysis some of the mammograms remains unclassified that can be classified by the default class that decreases the classification accuracy.

The Classification percentage, which is improved by the proposed algorithm  is illustrated in Table II.

TABLE II CLASSIFICATION PERCENTAGE AT DIFFERENT ANGLES AND  PROPOSED ALGORITHM (10 FOLDS)  The Classifier at different angles and the classification percentage is given in Table III.

TABLE III AVERAGE CLASSIFICATION PERCENTAGE FOR 10 FOLDS  The results show that the cases which are not classified in one particular angle could be classified by the proposed algorithm with the greater accuracy. The graphical representation of the improvement in classification percentage is shown in Figure 3.

Fig  3  Classification Accuracy

VI. CONCLUSION The result shows the significance of data mining in image  processing. This system gives us more accurate result compared with the co-occurrence matrix constructed by independent angle. Also the malignancy which could not be classified under particular angle of co-occurrence matrix can be classified by the features extracted in other angles.  This paper proposes the decision making tree that considers the result in three different angles. The further study can be made to improve the classification accuracy using different feature set as an additional expert of the proposed algorithm.

