Privacy Preservation in Transaction Databases based  on Anatomy technique

Abstract?This paper considers the problem of privacy preserving transaction data publishing. Transaction data are usually useful for data mining. While it is high-dimensional data, traditional anonymization techniques such as generalization and suppression are not suitable. In this paper, we present a novel technique based on anatomy technique and propose a simple linear-time anonymous algorithm that meets the l-diversity requirement.  The simulation experiments on real datasets and the results of association rules mining on the anonymous transaction data showed that our algorithm can safely and efficiently preserve the privacy in transaction data publication, while ensuring high utility of the released data.

Index Terms?l-diversity, anatomy technique, privacy preservation, association rules mining

I.  INTRODUCTION Privacy preservation in transaction data publication is a  hotspot issue in privacy-preserving data publishing.

Transaction data consist of many aspects such as querying log, online shopping, supermarket transaction data and so on.

Transaction data are usually used for data mining, including association rule mining [3], user behavior prediction and recommender systems. Therefore, when we publish data for scientific research, it must be anonymized so that malicious attacker cannot re-identify user?s privacy information. We first show two examples for re-identification on transaction data [10,11].

Example 1. Bob has bought some things in the supermarket, including bread, milk, biscuits, red wine, beef, ice-cream, light bulbs and home pregnancy test strips. Assume that some of the items purchased by Bob were on top of his shopping bag (e.g., bread, milk, light bulbs) and his neighborhood Alice was in the same bus. Bob would not want Alice to know what s/he has bought (i.e., home pregnancy test strips). But if the supermarket decides to release its transaction data and there is only one record containing bread, milk and light bulbs, then Alice can immediately refer that this record corresponds to Bob and s/he can find out the rest thing Bob purchased.

Example 2. AOL recently released a query log database [1, 2], in analyzing these records, the No. 4417749 user was found  as a 62-year-old widow Thelma Arnold who lives in Liburn.

Although not a record that contains her address or name, but a malicious attacker can still re-identify the user?s personal information using items permutations and combinations.

In these examples, the data holder publishes transaction data for research purposes. Each transaction record contains an arbitrary set of items. An item can be either public (i.e. bread, milk and light bulbs) or private (i.e. home pregnancy test strips).

The attacker attempts to re-identify the subset of some transaction records. As background knowledge, the attacker knows that the target person (i.e., Bob) has a transaction record in the published data and certain public items (e.g., bread, milk, light bulbs). If there are very few transaction records containing these items, the re-identification will be successful.

Many privacy models, such as k-anonymity [4,5,6], l- diversity [7] and t-closeness [8], are used to prevent re- identification attacks on low-dimensional relational data, but directly adopt these to high-dimensional unstructured data will not produce good results. These models anonymize the public attributes (i.e., quasi-identifiers) to prevent the attacker using link attack to infer the privacy of personal information.

However, for transaction data, any attribute (i.e., item) permutations and combinations are considered as the attacker's background knowledge. Therefore, these models are not suitable to solve transaction data. Paper [9] pointed out that the high-dimensional data are more easily attacked by inference attack, and to achieve a degree of anonymity, a large number of data information will be lost.

Traditionally there are two ways to achieve data anonymity: generalization and suppression. Generalization is to replace a value to a more general one, such as use drink to replace milk and beer. Suppression is to delete the existing record, so the user cannot see it in the publishing data.

Currently there is only a few works to research privacy preservation in transaction data. [10] partitions high- dimensional data set into private and public item set and proposed (h,k,p)-coherence model. Attacker's background knowledge can be viewed as a subset of public item set.

(h,k,p)-coherence model requires that any item set whose   Computer Science & Education Hefei, China. August 24?27, 2010   WeP2.5      length is no more than p appear at least k times in the data and the probability that the attacker can get the personal information is not greater than h. The author uses suppression method to preserve privacy. [11] does not distinguish between public item set and private item set and all the item sets are viewed as potential public item set. Similarly, the attacker can get any subset of public item set as his background knowledge.

The author proposed km-anonymity model, and use generalization method to solve the problem, but it costs too much to obtain the optimal solution.

Example 3. In Table I, Table I (A) is the original table.

Using the generalization hierarchy in Figure 1, under the condition of 52-anonymity, [11] generated the anonymous table in Table I (B). [10] generated the anonymous table in Table I(C). Item set {d,g} will be generalized in Table I (B) and item set {c,d,e,f,g,h} will be suppressed in Table I(C).

TABLE I.  ORIGINAL MICRODATA TABLE AND ITS ANONYMIZATION USING VARIOUS ANONYMIZATION TECHNIQUES  (A)THE ORIGINAL TABLE (B) THE GENERALIZED TABLE (52-ANONYMITY)  (C) THE SUPPRESSED TABLE (52-ANONYMITY)  TID Items 1 a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h 2 a,b,d,e,h 3 a,b,c,f,h 4 a,b,f,h 5 a,b,c,d 6 a,b,c,e 7 a,e,f,g 8 b,f,h 9 f,h 10 d,g    TID Items 1 (a,b,c,d,e), (f,g,h) 2 (a,b,c,d,e), (f,g,h) 3 (a,b,c,d,e), (f,g,h) 4 (a,b,c,d,e), (f,g,h) 5 (a,b,c,d,e) 6 (a,b,c,d,e) 7 (a,b,c,d,e), (f,g,h) 8 (a,b,c,d,e), (f,g,h) 9 (f,g,h) 10 (a,b,c,d,e), (f,g,h)    TID Items 1 a,b 2 a,b 3 a,b 4 a,b 5 a,b 6 a,b 7 a 8 b  (D) THE MULTI-ANATOMIED TABLE(2-DIVERSITY)  (E) THE MULTI-ANATOMIED TABLE(2-DIVERSITY)  TID Items 1 d,e,f,h a,b,c,g 2 d,e,h a,b 3 f,h a,b,c 4 f,h a,b 5 d a,b,c 6 e a,b,c 7 e,f a,g 8 f,h b 9 f,h 10 d g    TID Items 1 d,f,h b,e,g a,c 2 d,h b,e a 3 f,h b a,c 4 f,h b a 5 d b a,c 6  b,e a,c 7 f e,g a 8 f,h b 9 f,h  a,c 10 d g a     Figure 1.  Generalization hierarchy for the Table I (B)  When we use association rules analysis in Table I(B) and Table I(C), it?s easy to find out that generalization usually loss  less information than suppression from data mining view.

Suppression is usually considered as the highest generalization.

These two methods all modify the original data.

[12] proposes a simple and effective technique called anatomy to preserve privacy. In [12], anatomy releases all the quasi-identifier and sensitive values directly in two separate tables, met the l-diversity privacy requirement, we need not do any modification in the original table. The extensive experiments in [12] con?rm that anatomy technique allows signi?cantly more effective data analysis than the conventional publication method based on generalization. The query accuracy of anatomy is unaffected by the dataset dimensionality, where as the accuracy of generalization decays severely as dimensionality increases. Furthermore, anatomized tables can be computed much faster than generalized tables.

Transactional data is high-dimensional data, and our goal is to adopt this technique to transaction data.

However, anatomy requires a clear separation between quasi-identifiers and sensitive attributes, for transaction data, we can not completely distinguish quasi-identifier between sensitive attributes. Therefore, we modified anatomy technique so that it can be used in transaction data.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, the preliminaries for our method are reviewed. In section 3, the privacy preservation model based on anatomy technique is proposed. A linear-time anonymous algorithm is illustrated in section 4. The experimental results of the proposed algorithms are argued in section 5. In section 6, we conclude the paper and discuss future work.



II. PRELIMINARIES Definition 1 (p-item set). Let ={I1,I2, ,Im} be the set  consist of m different items where each item Ik(k=1,2, ,m) is equivalent to a attribute. Let D={T1,T2, ,Tn} be the n transaction records in transaction data. Record Ti (i=1,2, ,n) is also called item set. Each record Ti is a subset of attributes and Ti ? A. The length of item set is the number of items in the item set. If the length is p, this item set is called p-item set.

Definition 2 (item partition and columns). An item partition consists of several subsets of A, and each item belongs to exactly one subset. Each subset of items is called a column. Let  there be p columns C1,C2,?,Cp, then AU pi ==1  and for any 1 i j p, ?=? ji CC .

In transaction data, it is difficult to distinguish quasi- identifier between sensitive attributes. In this paper, we view each item in transaction data as the same type that is quasi- identifiers.

Definition 3 (record partition and buckets). A record partition consists of several subsets of D, and each record belongs to exactly one subset. Each subset of record is called a  bucket. Let there be q buckets B1,B2,?,Bq, then DU qi ==1 and for any 1 i j q, ?=? ji BB .

WeP2.5      Definition 4 (multi-dimension anatomy). Given a transaction table T, a multi-dimension anatomy of T consists of item partition and record partition.

Definition 5 (l-diverse multi-dimension anatomy). A multi- dimension is l-diverse, if each bucket Bi(1 i q) satisfies the following conditions. Let vij be the most frequent item set in bucket Bi and column Cj, and c(vij) the number of records with T[Cj] = vij; then  c(vij)/|Bi| 1/l                                             (1)  where |Bi| is the size (the number of records) of Bi.

Example 4. Table I(D) and Table I(E) are two multi- dimension anatomy table. In Table I(D), the item partition is {{d,e,f,h},{a,b,c,g}}, and the record partition is {{t1,t2,t3,t4,t5},{t6,t7,t8,t9,t10}}. In Table I(E), the item partition is {{a,c},{b,e,g},{d,f,h}}, and the record partition is {{t1,t2,t3,t4,t5},{t6,t7,t8,t9,t10}}. In Table I(E), item {b} appears 3 times and |B1| equal to 5, while 3/5 1/2, so Table I(E) satisfies 2-diverse multi-dimension anatomy. Similarly, Table I(D) satisfies 2-diverse multi-dimension anatomy too.

Definition 7 (matching buckets). Let C1,C2,?,Cp be the p columns of a multi-dimension anatomy table. Let t be a record, and t[Ci] be the Ci value of t. Let B be a bucket in the anatomy table, and B[Ci] be the multiset of Ci values in B. We say that B is a matching bucket of t iff for all 1 i p t[Ci] B[Ci]

III. PRIVACY PRESERVATION MODEL BASED ON ANATOMY TECHNIQUE  In this section, we show how multi-dimension anatomy can be used to prevent privacy leak, based on the privacy requirement of l-diversity.

LEMMA 1. Given an l-diverse multi-anatomy transaction table T, let vij be the most frequent item set in bucket Bi and column Cj, and c(vij) the number of records with T[Cj] = vij.

The attacker attempts to get the privacy information in column Cj, when s/he gets the information in other column except column Cj. Then, from the attacker?s perspective,  Pr{T[Cj]=vij}=c(vij)/|Bi|.                                     (2)  PROOF. Consider any record t D, while t does not contain the information in column Cj. The attacker who attempts to get the privacy information in column Cj, however, does not have the column Cj data. Hence, the attacker can only conjecture that equals one of the values in column Cj. Without any other information, the attacker assumes that every item in column Cj has an equal probability, which leads to (2).

Example 5. Table I(E) satisfies the 2-diverse multi- dimension anatomy. Consider the item set {d,f,h} in t2. To determine the privacy information of t2, we have to examine t2?s matching buckets. When we examine C1 in Table I(E), we knows that t2 must be in the first bucket B1, because there are no matches items in bucket B2. Therefore, we can conclude that t2 must be in bucket B1. Then, by examining the second column C2 in bucket B1, we know that the column value for t2 must be either {b},{b,e} or {b,e,g}. Therefore, the probability of  learning the information of t2 is bounded by 1/3. By examining the third column C3 in bucket B1, we know that the column value for t2 must be either {a} or {a,c}. Therefore, the probability of learning the information of t2 is bounded by 1/2.

Totally, the probability to determine t2 is equal to 1/3*1/2=1/6.

COROLLARY 1. Given an l-diverse multi-anatomy transaction table T, the attacker can correctly re-construct any record t D with a probability at most 1/l.

PROOF. Record t is correctly re-constructed. If and only if the attacker precisely obtains the all information otherwise the column Cj, when s/he attempts to infer the information in Cj column, by (2), we know that  Pr{T[Cj]= vij}=c(vij)/|Bi|, where Bi is the unique bucket containing t. Recall that table T is obtained from a l-diverse multi-dimension partition(Definition 5). Hence, by (1), c(vij)/|Bi| 1/l.

THEOREM 1. Given an l-diverse multi-anatomy transaction table T, the attacker?s background knowledge is no more than p columns, he/she can correctly infer the information in other columns with a probability at most 1/l.

PROOF. Let column Cj be the privacy information the attacker attempts to obtain, let record o be the attacker?s background knowledge. Consider record o is equivalent to those of totally f records t1,t2,?,tf in table T. Assume that record ti(1 i f) belongs to bucket ijB (1 ij q, 1 i f), where q is the total number of buckets. Let vreal be the real column Cj value of record o.

The attacker infers vreal in two steps. First, s/he guesses that each of t1,?,tf belongs to o with probability 1/f. Then, by Lemma 1, s/he figures out that vreal is the column Cj value of record o with probability ( )  ii jrealj Bvc / . Hence, the overall  probability that the column Cj value of record o is inferred equals  ( ) ( ) ii j  f  i realj Bfvc ??  =  /    Recall that, by the property of l-diverse multi-dimension anatomy(Definition 5), ( )  ii jrealj Bvc / 1/l. Hence, the above  formula is at most ( ) lf i lf  /1  11 =?? = .

THEOREM 2. Given an l-diverse multi-anatomy  transaction table T that has p columns, each bucket at lease introduce as many as lp records (true record and faked record).

PROOF. After l-diverse multi-dimension anatomy, for a bucket Bi, we can re-construct |Bi|p records through permutations and combinations. Recall the property of l-diverse multi-dimension anatomy(Definition 5), the number of different item set for each column in each bucket is at least l, so we would get as many as lp records.

WeP2.5

IV. ANONYMOUS ALGORITHM BASED ON ANATOMY TECHNIQUE  In this section, we show an effective anonymous algorithm based on anatomy technique that meets the privacy requirement of l-diversity. Our algorithm consists of two phases: item partition and record partition.

A. Item partition Our algorithm first split item set so that highly-correlated  item set are in the same column. It is helpful to data utility and privacy. For data utility, grouping highly-correlated item set together helps protect the relationship between item set. For data privacy, the association of uncorrelated item set presents high identification risks because its values is much less frequent and thus more vulnerable to attack.

1) Correlation measure Mean-square contingency coefficient [13] is used for  measuring correlations between two categorical attributes. We choose to use this measure because the transaction data can be viewed as categorical attributes containing only two values.

Given two attributes I1 and I2 with value domains {u1,u2,?,ud1} and {v1,v2,?,vd2} respectively. Their domain sizes are d1 and d2. The mean-square contingency coefficient between I1 and I2 is defined as:  ( ) ( )?? = =  ? ??  ?= 1 2 2  1 1  1},min{  2 ,  d  i  d  j ff  fff dd ji  jiijII?                      (3)  Here, fi and fj are the fraction of occurrences of ui and vj in the data, respectively. fij is the fraction of occurrences of ui and vj in the data. For transaction data, the dimension is very large, but only contains two value 0 and 1, 0 indicates there is no value in this item and 1 indicates there is a value in this item.

So (3) can be rewritten as:  ( ) ( ) ji  jiij  ff fffII ?  ??=  2 ,?  (4)  Here, fi and fj are the fraction of occurrences of ui=1 and vj=1in the data, respectively. fij is the fraction of occurrences of ui=1 and vj=1 in the data. Because value 0 is meaningless, so we only calculate the value 1. It is easy to know that ( ) 1,0 212 ?? II? .

2) Item clustering Having computed the relationship between each pair of  attributes, we use clustering to divide attributes into columns.

In our algorithm, each item is a point in the clustering space.

The distance between two items is defined as d(I1,I2)=1-  ( )212 , II? . When two attributes are highly-correlated, the distance between them is smaller.

We use the k-medoid methods to achieve item clustering.

We use the well-known k-medioid algorithm PAM (Partition Around Medoids) algorithm [14]. PAM algorithm first randomly select k objects as the initial medoids, the remaining points will be assigned to the nearest medoid. Then, PAM  chooses one medoid point and one non-medoid point and swaps them as long as the cost of clutering decreases. Here, the clustering cost is measured as the sum of the cost of each cluster, which is measured as the sum of the distance from each non-medioid point to the medoid point in the same cluster.

When no points can be swapped, program terminates. PAM's time complexity is O((m-k)2), where m is the size of attributes and k is the number of cluster. PAM is suitable only for small amounts of data, however, the cluster space here is the number of attributes, therefore, PAM will not cost too much.

B. Record partition In the record partition phase, records are partitioned into  buckets. Here we use a simple linear-time algorithm to handle record partition. Our algorithm is described in Figure 2.

Algorithm Multi-Anatomy(T,l,C,p) 1. Multi-B= ? ; Bcnt = 0; 2. Initialize p hash buckets Hi(1 i p) 3. For each record t in T 4. For each column Ci in t, hash its value in hash buckets Hi 5. if the most frequent value in each Hi satisfy c(Hi)/|Hi| 1/l 6.     BBcnt=all record t in hash buckets Hi 7.     Multi-B=Multi-B BBcnt 8.     Bcnt=Bcnt+1 9.     Clear all hash buckets 10.For each non-empty hash bucket 11.    t=the record in hash bucket 12.   assign t to a random bucket in Bi if the most frequent value in each column Cj of Bi satisfy c(vij)/|Bi| 1/l when add t 13.Retrun Multi-B  Figure 2.  Anonymous algorithm  At first, we initialize p hash buckets where p is the number of columns (line 1-2). Then we scan each record in the transaction table T, for each column we hash its value in the corresponding hash bucket. If the table after partitioning satisfies l-diversity (line 3-5), we add the records in hash bucket to Multi-B where Multi-B is the union of each buckets.

Then we clear all hash buckets (line 6-9). Finally, we randomly assign the left records to bucket if it satisfies l-diversity (line 10-12). After that, the function returns the result Multi-B.

We now analyze the time complexity of the record partition.

We use p hash bucket and the complexity of hash is O(1). And we only scan each record once which takes O(n) time where n is the number of records. Totally, the time complexity of our algorithm is O(n)+O(m), for m<<n, so the total time complexity is therefore O(n).



V. EXPERIMENTS In this section, we evaluated experimentally the proposed  anonymization techniques. We evaluated three aspects: privacy leakage, data utility and execution time.

A. Experimental setup The experiments were performed on a 2.66 GHz Intel IV  processor machine with RAM of 1 GB. The operating system was Windows XP Professional Edition, and the implementation was built and run in Visual C++ 6.0. We used two different datasets: Connect and T40I10D100K, all can be publicly   WeP2.5      available from FIMI Repository (http://fimi.cs.helsinki.fi/data/).

Connect is a real dataset containing game state information.

T40I10D100K is a synthetic dataset. T40I10D100K have a very large item set that is extremely larger than a relation table.

Table II provides a brief description of these datasets.

TABLE II.  DATASET STATISTICS  Dataset Transactions|D| Average Length Items Data  size(K bytes)  Connect 67,557 43 129 9,225 T40I10D100K 100,000 39.6 942 15,478    In our algorithm, attributes are partitioned into two or more columns. For a bucket that contains k records and p columns, we generate k records as follows. We randomly permutated the values in each column because many data mining algorithms cannot handle anatomy table well currently.

B. Privacy leakages By Theorem 2, through l-diversity multi-dimension  anatomy a table is partition into p columns. The number of faked records would be very large.

Figure 3 is the number of faked records of T40I10D100K.

As expected, the number of faked records is so large that we have to use function ln. As shown in the figure 3, when we increase the value of l where l is the l-diverse, the number of fake records becomes larger. In particular, when we increase the value of p where p is the number of columns, the number of fake records becomes exponentially larger.

Figure 3.  Number of faked records of T40I10D100K  C. Data utility In data utility, we use Apriori algorithm to mining  association rules of anonymous data.

Because Connect is very dense, so we limit the length of association rules where the minimum length is 2 and maximum length is 4. Figure 4 shows the number of association rules of the anonymous data Connect when p=10, l=5,6,8,10. It shows that the different between anonymous data and original data is much small indicating that our algorithm for dense date set introduces little information.

Figure 5 shows the number of association rules of the anonymous data T40I10D100K when p=20,l=6,8,10,12. It shows that when the confident is low, such as confident=10%, the difference between anonymous data and original data is very small. When confident increases, the gap increases slowly, but the difference usually maintain at 40% -60%.

Figure 4.  Number of association rules of Connect  Figure 5.  Number of association rules of T40I10D100K  Figure 6.  Accuracy radio of T40I10D100K   WeP2.5      The number of association rules is part of data utility, the correct number of association rules is also a key part of data utility.

So we introduce the following equation AR (accuracy radio) = M / N where N is the number of association rules for original data and M is the number of common association rules for anonymous data.

Figure 6 is the accuracy radio of T40I10D100K. It shows that, when confident decreases, the accuracy radio increases.

Because our algorithm losses the information of unusual association rules while maintains the information of usual association rules.

D. Execution time Figure 7 is the time cost of T40I10D100K. It shows that our  algorithm is very efficient, when the l value increases, the time cost will slightly increases because it costs a little more time to meet l-diversity.

Figure 7.  Time Cost of T40I10D100K

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, we study the privacy issues in transaction data  publication. Based on anatomy technique, we propose a new privacy model called multi-dimension anatomy that meets the privacy requirement of l-diversity and suits to transaction data.

We introduce a simple linear-time anonymous algorithm.

Experiments show that our algorithm can safely and effectively protect privacy in transaction data.

There are still a number of promising areas for future work.

First, the linear-time algorithm proposed in this paper seems a little simple, some new heuristic algorithm needs to further research. Second, while an anatomized table has been generated, it remains an open problem on how to use the anonymized data.

