Maintaining Privacy and Data Quality in Privacy  Preserving Association Rule Mining

Abstract?Privacy preserving data mining (PPDM) is a novel research direction to preserve privacy for sensitive knowledge from disclosure. Many of the researchers in this area have recently made effort to preserve privacy for sensitive association rules in statistical database. In this paper, we propose a heuristic algorithm named DSRRC (Decrease Support of R.H.S. item of Rule Clusters), which provides privacy for sensitive rules at certain level while ensuring data quality. Proposed algorithm clusters the sensitive association rules based on certain criteria and hides as many as possible rules at a time by modifying fewer transactions. Because of less modification in database it helps maintaining data quality.

Keywords?Data mining, Frequent Itemset Hiding, Association Rule Hiding, Sensitivity, Clustering

I. INTRODUCTION Successful applications of data mining techniques have  been demonstrated in many areas that benefit commercial, social and human activities. Along with the success of these techniques, they pose a threat to privacy. One can easily disclose other?s sensitive information or knowledge by using these techniques. So, before releasing database, sensitive information or knowledge must be hidden from unauthorized access. To solve privacy problem, PPDM has become a hotspot in data mining and database security field.

Researchers have proposed several approaches for knowledge hiding, in context of association rule mining.

M.Attallah et al. [1] was the first to propose heuristic algorithms for preventing disclosure of sensitive knowledge.

Oliveria et al. [3] presented taxonomy of attacks against sensitive knowledge. In following, we show the necessity of sensitive association rule hiding in real life application.

A. Motivation Consider, as a tea reseller we are purchasing tea at low  price from two companies, Tata Tea Ltd. and Lipton Tea Ltd., while granting them to access our customer database. Now,   suppose the Lipton Tea supplier misuse the database and mines  association rules related to the Tata Tea, saying that most of the customers who buy bread also buy Tata tea. Lipton tea supplier  now runs a coupon scheme that offers some discount on bread with purchase of Lipton Tea. So, the amount of sales on Tata Tea is down rapidly and Tata Tea supplier cannot offer tea at low price to us as before and Lipton monopolizes the tea market and is not offering tea at low price to us as before. As a result, we may start losing business to our competitors. So, releasing database with sensitive knowledge is bad for us. This scenario leads to the research of sensitive knowledge (or rule) hiding in database.

In this paper, we propose a heuristic algorithm named DSRRC (Decrease Support of R.H.S. item of Rule Clusters) to preserve privacy for sensitive association rules in database.

Proposed algorithm modifies fewer transactions and hides many rules at a time. So, it is more efficient than other heuristic approaches. Moreover it maintains data quality in sanitized database. So, sanitized database is as useful as original database. A detailed description of proposed DSRRC algorithm is given in section 3.

Some parameters for data quality presented in [8], are as follows: (1) accuracy, measures the proximity of a sanitized value to the original one. (2) completeness, is used to evaluate the degree of missed data in the sanitized database and (3) consistency, is related to the relationships that must continue to hold among the different among data items in a sanitized database.

B. Problem Description The association rule hiding problem is to sanitize database  in a way that through association rule mining one will not be able to disclosing the sensitive rules and will be able to mine all the non-sensitive rules. More specifically, the problem statement can be defined as follows: Let given dataset D, a set of association rules R over D is given and also R0?R, R0 is specified as sensitive rules set. Now, the problem is to find    sanitized database D0 such that there exist only a set of rules R- R0, can be mined. Finding an optimal solution to this problem is NP-hard, proved in [1].

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we discuss related background and existing approaches. In section 3, a detailed description of proposed DSRRC algorithm is given. An example demonstrating DSRRC algorithm is given in section 4. In section 5 we analyze and discuss the performance results of proposed algorithm. Finally in section 6, we conclude proposed algorithm by defining some future trends.



II. THEORITICAL BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK Association rule using support and confidence can be  defined as follows. Let I= {i1,?,im}be a set of items. Database D={T1,?.,Tn}is a set of transactions, where Ti?I(1?i?m). Each transaction T is an itemset such that T?I. A transaction T supports X, a set of items in I, if X?I. The association rule is an implication formula like X?Y, where X?I, Y?I and X?Y=?.

The rule with support s and confidence c is called, if |X?Y|/|D| ? s and |X?Y|/|X| ? c. Because of interestingness, we consider user specified thresholds for support and confidence, MST (minimum support threshold) and MCT (minimum confidence threshold). A detailed overview of association rule mining algorithms are presented in [2].

Privacy preserving association rule mining should achieve one of the following goals: (1) All the sensitive association rules must be hidden in sanitized database. (2) All the rules that are not specified as sensitive can be mined from sanitized database. (3) No new rule that was not previously found in original database can be mined from sanitized database. First goal considers privacy issue. Second goal is related to the usefulness of sanitized dataset. Third goal is related to the side effect of the sanitization process.

Many approaches have been proposed to preserve privacy for sensitive knowledge or sensitive association rules in database. They can be classified in to following classes: heuristic based approaches, border based approaches, exact approaches, reconstruction based approaches, and cryptography based approaches. In following, a detailed overview of these approaches is given.

A. Heuristic Based Approaches These approaches can be further divided in to two groups  based on data modification techniques: data distortion techniques and data blocking techniques.

Data distortion techniques try to hide association rules by decreasing or increasing support (or confidence). To increase or decrease support (or confidence), they replace 0?s by 1?s or vice versa in selected transactions. So they can be used to address the complexity issue. But they produce undesirable side effects in the new database, which lead them to suboptimal solution. M.Attallah et al. [1] were the first proposed heuristic algorithms. The proof of NP-hardness of optimal sanitization is also given in [1].  Verykios et al. [11] proposed five assumptions which are used to hide sensitive knowledge in database by reducing support or confidence of sensitive rules.

Y-H Wu et al. [14] proposed method to reduce the side effects in sanitized database, which are produced by other approaches [11]. K.Duraiswamy et al. [19] proposed an efficient clustering based approach to reduce the time complexity of the hiding process.

Data blocking techniques replace the 0?s and 1?s by unknowns (???) in selected transaction instead of inserting or deleting items. So it is difficult for an adversary to know the value behind ???. Y.Saygin et al. [7][15] were the first to introduce blocking based technique for sensitive rule hiding.

The safety margin is also introduced in [7] to show how much below the minimum threshold new support and confidence of a sensitive rule should. Wang and Jafari [17] proposed more efficient approaches than other approaches presented in [7][15].

B. Border Based Approaches Border based approaches use the notion of borders  presented in [4]. These approaches preprocess the sensitive rules so that minimum numbers of rules are given as input to hiding process. So, they maintain database quality while minimizing side effects. Sun and Yu [10] were the first to propose the border revision process. Hiding process in [10] greedily selects those modifications that lead to minimal side effects. The authors in [13] presented more efficient algorithms than other similar approaches presented in [10].

C. Exact Approaches Exact approaches formulate hiding problem to constraint  satisfaction problem (CSP) and solve it by using binary integer programming (BIP). They provide an exact (optimal) solution that satisfies all the constraints. However if there is no exact solution exists in database, some of the constraint are relaxed.

These approaches provide better solution than other approaches. But they suffer from high time complexity to CSP.

Gkoulalas and Verykios [6] proposed an approach to find optimal solution for rule hiding problem. The authors in [12] proposed a partitioning approach for the scalability of the algorithm.

D. Reconstruction Based Approaches Reconstruction based approaches generate privacy aware  database by extracting sensitive characteristics from the original database. These approaches generate lesser side effects in database than heuristic approaches. Mielikainen [9] was the first analyzed the computational complexity of inverse frequent set mining and showed in many cases the problems are computationally difficult. Y. Guo [16] proposed a FP tree based algorithm which reconstruct the original database by using non characteristic of database and efficiently generates number of secure databases.

E. Cryptography Based Approaches Cryptography based approaches used in multiparty  computation. If the database of one organization is distributed among several sites, then secure computation is needed between them.  These approaches encrypt original database instead of distorting it for sharing. So they provide input privacy. Vaidya and Clifton [5] proposed a secure approach for    sharing association rules when data are vertically partitioned.

The authors in [20] addressed the secure mining of association rules over horizontal partitioned data.

We proposed a more efficient heuristic algorithm than other heuristic approaches presented in this section.



II. DSRRC- PROPOSED HEURISTIC BASED ALGORITHM To hide an association rule like X ?Y, we decrease its  confidence (|X?Y|/|X|) to smaller than specified minimum confidence threshold (MCT). We decrease the support of Y (R.H.S. of the rule) in the most sensitive transactions.

Therefore algorithm reduces the confidence faster than reducing the support of X. To decrease support count of an item, we delete one item from selected transaction by changing from 1 to 0.

A. Framework of DSRRC Algorithm Some important concepts used in proposed framework of  DSRRC algorithm are as follows:-  1) Item Sensitivity: is the frequency of data item exists in the number of the sensitive association rule containing this item. It is used to measure rule sensitivity.

2) Rule Sensitivity: is the sum of the sensitivities of all items containing that association rule.

3) Cluster Sensitivity: is the sum of the sensitivities of all association rules in cluster. Cluster sensitivity defines the rule cluster which is most affecting to the privacy.

4) Sensitive Transaction: is the transaction in given database which contains sensitive item.

5) Transaction sensitivity: is the sum of sensitivities of sensitive items contained in the transaction.

A detailed overview of sensitivities is given in [21]. The proposed framework of DSRRC algorithm is shown in Figure.1. Initially association rules (AR) are mined from the source database D by using association rule mining algorithms e.g. Apriori algorithm in [2]. Then sensitive rules (SR) are specified from mined rules. Selected rules are clustered based on common R.H.S. item of the rules. Rule-clusters are denoted as RCLs. Then for each Rule-cluster sensitive transactions are indexed. Sensitivity of each item (and each rule) in each Rule- cluster is calculated. Rule-Clusters are sorted in decreasing order of their sensitivity and sensitive transactions supporting first rule-cluster are sorted in decreasing order of their sensitivity.

Figure 1. Framework of proposed DSRRC algorithm.

After sorting process, rule hiding (RH) process hides all the sensitive rules in sorted transactions for each cluster by using strategy mentioned in this section and updates the sensitivity of sensitive transactions in other cluster. Hiding process starts from highest sensitive transaction and continues until all the sensitive rules in all clusters are not hidden. Finally modified transactions are updated in original database and produced database is called sanitized database D? which ensures certain privacy for specified rules and maintains data quality.

B. DSRRC Algorithm According to above presented framework for hiding  association rules in database, the proposed DSRRC algorithm is shown in Figure 2. By using given minimum support threshold (MST) and minimum confidence threshold (MCT), algorithm first generates the possible number of association rules from source database D. Now some of the generated association rules are selected as sensitive rule set (set RH) by database owner. Rules with only single R.H.S. item are specified as sensitive. Then algorithm finds C clusters based on common R.H.S. item in sensitive rule set RH and calculates the sensitivity of each cluster. After that it index sensitive transactions for each cluster and sorts all the clusters by decreasing order of their sensitivities. For the highest sensitive cluster, algorithm sorts sensitive transaction in decreasing order of their sensitivites.

INPUT: Source database D, Minimum Confidence Threshold (MCT), Minimum support threshold (MST).

OUTPUT: The sanitized database D?.

1. Begin 2. Generate association rules.

3. Selecting the Sensitive rule set RH with single antecedent and consequent  e.g. x?y.

4. Clustering-based on common item in  R.H.S. of the selected rules 5. Find sensitivity of each item in each cluster.

6. Find the sensitivity of each rule in each cluster.

7. Find the sensitivity of each cluster 8. Index the sensitive transactions for each cluster.

9. Sort generated clusters in decreasing order of their sensitivity.

10. For the first cluster, sort selected transaction in decreasing order of their  sensitivity 11. For each cluster c? C 12. { 13.        While(all the sensitive rules ? c are not hidden) 14.        { 15.       Take first transaction for cluster c.

16.                Delete common R.H.S. item from the transaction.

17.               Update the sensitivity of deleted item for modified transaction in  other cluster and sort it.

18.                For i = 1 to no. of rule Rh?c 19.               { 20.                     Update support and confidence of the rule r ?c.

21.                     If(support of r < MST or confidence of r < MCT) 22.                    { 23.                         Remove  Rule r from Rh 24.                   } 25.              } 26.             Take next transaction.

27.      } 28.      End while 29. } 30. End for  Update Transactions  Update Sensitivity  Rule- Clusters  Output  Update  Indexing & Sorting  GroupSelect  Transactions  Mine D AR SR RCLs  RHTransaction Table  D?    31. Update the modified transactions in D.

32. End  Figure 2. DSRRC algorithm.

Now, the hiding Process tries to hide all the sensitive rules by deleting common R.H.S. item of the rules in cluster, from the sensitive transactions. While loop continues until all the rules are not hidden in cluster c. Every time in while loop it updates the sensitivity of deleted item for modified transaction in other cluster and sorts it. Finally algorithm updates all the modified transactions in original database. Proposed DSRRC algorithm produces sanitized database D?, in which most of the sensitive rules are hidden. This algorithm hides many rules in an iteration of hiding process and it modifies less transaction in database.



III. EXAMPLE The following example illustrates proposed DSRRC  algorithm. A sample transaction database D is shown in Table 1. TID shows unique transaction number. Binary valued item shows whether an item is present or absent in that transaction.

Suppose MST and MCT are selected 3 and 75% respectively.

Table 2 shows frequent itemsets satisfying MST, generated from sample database D.

Table 1. Sample Transaction Database D.

TID Items Items (Binary Form) 1 a b c d e 11111000 2 a c d 10110000 3 a b d f g 11010110 4 b c d e 01111000 5 a b d 11010000 6 c d e f h 01110101 7 a b c g 11100010 8 a c d e 10111000 9 a c d h 10110001  In following, the possible number of association rules satisfying MST and MCT,  generated by Apriori algorithm [2]: b?a, a?d, d?a, b?d, c?d, d?c, e?c, e?d, ab?d, bd?a, ac?d, ce?d, de?c, e?dc. Suppose the rules b?a, b?d and c?d specified as sensitive and should be hidden in sanitized database. There are two different R.H.S. items in selected rules, named ?a? and ?d?.  As shown in Table 3, Algorithm generates two clusters based on common R.H.S. item of the selected rules.

Table 2. Frequent Itemsets with Support Count.

Frequent Itemsets with Support Count  a:7,b:5,c:7,d:8,e:4, ab:4,ac:5,bc:3, ad:6, bd:4, cd:6, ce:4, de:4,abd:3,  acd:4, cde:4  Table 3. Clusters generated by DSRRC.

Cluster-1(d) (b??d, c?d)  Cluster-2(a) (b?a)  Item Sensitivity Item Sensitivity b 1 a 1 c 1 b 1 d 2  Total sensitivity  Total  sensitivity  Cluster 1 includes sensitive rules namely b?d, c?d, where cluster 2 includes b?a. For cluster 1 sensitivities of items b, c, and d have 1,1and 2 respectively, where sensitivities for items a and b in cluster 2 have 1and 1 respectively. Total sensitivity for cluster-1 and cluster-2 is 4 and 2 respectively. For each cluster, sensitive transactions are indexed. Indexed transactions with their sensitivity are shown in table 4. Clusters are sorted based on their sensitivity. For the first cluster (here cluster-1), algorithm sorts transactions in decreasing order of their sensitivity.

Table 4. Clusters generated by DSRRC algorithm.

Cluster-1(d) (b?d, c?d)  Cluster-2(a) (b?a)  TID Sensitivity TID Sensitivity 1 4 1 2 2 3 3 2 3 3 5 2 4 4 7 2 5 3 6 3 8 3 9 3  Hiding process of algorithm modifies first transaction by deleting item d (common R.H.S. of rules in cluster-1). Table 5(a) shows sanitized database after first iteration. Now, the support or confidence for all the rules in cluster-1 is decreased below the minimum thresholds. Then next cluster is taken.

After one iteration, final sanitized database as shown in Table 5(b) is generated.

Now, if we mine association rules from final sanitized database, we can see that most of the specified sensitive rules are hidden and very few side effects produced. But using only two iterations and modifying only one transaction, algorithm successfully hides many sensitive rules. So, DSRRC provides database quality while preserving privacy.

Table 5. Sanitized Databases.

TID Items TID Items 1 a b c  e 1  b c e 2 a c d 2 a c d 3 a b d f g 3 a b d f g 4 b c d e 4 b c d e 5 a b d 5 a b d 6 c d e f h 6 c d e f h 7 a b c g 7 a b c g 8 a c d e 8 a c d e 9 a c d h 9 a c d h  (a) Sanitized Database D1.       (b) Final Sanitized Database.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS For performance comparison, we selected the best  sanitizing algorithm: Algo 1b [11] which hides sensitive rules by reducing support of R.H.S.  item of the rules.

We used Algo1b and DSRRC to sanitize sample database as shown in Table 2 and applied Apriori algorithm on both the produced sanitized database to mine association rules. In our experiment, we selected 3 sensitive association rules as in example. The sample dataset has 14 association rules with support count ? 3 and confidence ? 75. Then we evaluated the internal parameters and external parameters for both the algorithms.  The internal and external parameters for rule hiding algorithms are as follows: hiding failure (HF), misses cost (MC), artifactual patterns (AP), dissimilarity (DISS), side effect factor (SEF), data quality etc. A detailed overview of these parameters is given in [18].

As shown in Table 6 (a) and Table 6 (b), performance of DSRRC is better than Algo 1b, in terms of hiding failure, misses cost, artifactual patterns, dissimilarity, side effect factor and data quality of sanitized database. In Figure 3, we can see that performance of DSRRC algorithm is better than Algo 1b.

Table 6. Comparative Performance Results.

Parameters Algo 1b DSRRC HF ? 33.33% 0% MC ? 45.45% ? 36% AP ? 68.18% 0%  DISS(D,D?) ? 9.67% ? 6.4% SEF ? 81.81% ? 36%  (a) Performance Results for Internal Parameters.

Parameters Algo 1b DSRRC Accuracy ? 90.32% ? 93.45%  Quality Completeness ? 77.78% ? 88.89%  (b) Performance Results for External Parameters.

Figure 3. Performance Comparision between DSRRC and Algo 1b.

Indexing is used in proposed algorithm, which helps to reduce number of scans of database. The number of modifications in database is very less because of clustering and use of sensitivities. Efficiency is improved by clustering which helps to hide many rules by modifying less sensitive transactions. The modifications in transactions are stopped when support or confidence reduced than minimum thresholds. Clustering and sensitivity help to hide many rules at a time.



V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE In this paper, we proposed a heuristic algorithm named  DSRRC which hides many sensitive association rules at a time while maintaining database quality. Several existing approaches regarding sensitive rule hiding problem are also discussed. An example demonstrating proposed DSRRC algorithm is discussed. We analyzed experimental results for DSRRC, which show that performance of the DSRRC algorithm is better than other existing heuristic approaches.

Our proposed algorithm hides only rules that contain single item on R.H.S. of the rule. But it is more efficient than other heuristic approaches.

Proposed algorithm can be modified to hide sensitive rules which contain different number of R.H.S. items.

