Intelligent Data Prefetching for Hybrid Flash-Disk Storage Using Sequential  Pattern Mining Technique

Abstract?This paper presents an intelligent prefetching technique that significantly improves hybrid flash-disk storage, a combination of hard disk and flash memory. As a prefetching strategy, we adopt the sequential pattern mining, a variant of association rule mining. Our goal is to minimize overall I/O processing time of hybrid storage systems with using the Fully Associated Sector Translation (FAST) technique that is known to be the best mapping method in managing flash memory. It is very significant to further enhance the system performance of the hybrid storage when applying FAST to it. In our work, the hybrid storage uses the flash memory as a cache space to improve system performance. With this memory architecture, the proposed method is to prefetch objects onto ?prefetching? blocks in the level of both file and block in hybrid storage systems. Through extensive experiments using real UCC data and synthetic data, we show that the proposed prefetching method outperforms conventional ones.

Keywords- flash-disk storage; prefetching; sequential pattern mining; fully-associative sector translation

I.  INTRODUCTION The hybrid flash-disk storage is a new type of storage  that includes flash memory storage space in addition to the usual magnetic disk storage [1]. Normally, flash memory embedded in the hybrid storage acts as a storage ?cache? space, holding frequently accessed data. For example, a hybrid storage HM12HII/DOM made by SAMSUNG company has 256Mbytes of flash memory space with 120Gbytes of HDD. Flash memory has prospective features useful to a storage system which enable it to provide much better performance than hard disks. Flash memory is non- volatile solid-state memory with a number of powerful features; recently, its density and I/O performance have improved to a level at which it can be used as a mass storage in general computing systems. It is as fast as DRAM in reading operations and much faster than a hard disk in writing1. Also, flash memory is more scalable than DRAM due to its simple cell structure and insensitivity to cell failure. These features enable the creation of a large memory space. However, since the flash memory still costs much   * Corresponding author 1 It has been reported that read operations in NAND-type flash memory  takes about 15 ?s, and write operations take about 200 ?s per sector (typically, 512bytes).

higher than HDD in terms of price2, it is now hard for flash memory to replace conventional HDD. Hence, the hybrid flash-disk storage device that combines relatively smaller space of flash memory with HDD has been suggested [1, 2].

Due to the numerous advantages of flash memory, the hybrid storage has a great possibility to replace conventional hard disks [3].

In order for the hybrid storage to be used as a mass storage, it is necessary to develop high-level management skills fit for the storage [4, 5]. For the efficient management of the hybrid storage, we assume that the hybrid storage system uses the ?Fully Associative Sector Translation? (FAST) technique [6] that is known to be the best mapping method in managing flash memory as a kind of Flash Translation Layer (FTL). Here, flash memory space consists of ?data? blocks and ?log? blocks. The FAST technique can effectively handle sequential accesses while highly utilizing ?log? block space because sequential access is inherently frequent in flash memory space. Thus, to enhance the FAST- based hybrid storage systems, we utilize the sequential pattern mining [7], a variant of association rule mining, which is to extract sequential patterns with time information from large-scale sequence data. The sequential patterns can contribute to greatly improving I/O speed of hybrid storage systems through prefetching operations.

