

Using distributed apriori association rule and classical apriori mining algorithms for grid based knowledge discovery  Mrs. R. Sumithra, MCA, M.Phil., (Ph.D.) (Ph.D. Scholar,  Karunya University) Lecturer,Dept of  SS, CA & IT, CMS College Coimbatore, India r.sumithrasuresh@gmail.com  Dr (Mrs). Sujni Paul MCA, M.Phil, Ph.D.

Associate Professor Department of Computer Applications, KU Coimbatore, India sujni_paul@karunya.edu  Abstract - The aim of this paper is to extract knowledge using predictive apriori and distributed grid based apriori algorithms for association rule mining. The paper presents the implementation of an association rules discovery data mining task using Grid technologies. A result of implementation with a comparison of classic apriori and distributed apriori is also discussed. Distributed data mining systems provide an efficient use of multiple processors and databases to speed up the execution of data mining and enable data distribution. To evaluate the efficiency of the proposed system, performance analysis of apriori and predictive apriori algorithms on a centralized database have been given using weka tool. The main aim of grid computing is to give organizations and application developers the ability to create distributed computing environments that can utilize computing resources on demand. Therefore, it can help increase efficiencies and reduce the cost of computing networks by decreasing data processing time and optimizing resources and distributing workloads, thereby allowing users to achieve much faster results on large operations and at lower costs. In this paper distributed apriori association rule on grid based environment is mined and the knowledge obtained is interpreted.

Keywords - Distributed data mining (DDM), Apriori algorithm, Grids, Predictive apriori, Association rule, frequent item set mining

I. INTRODUCTION Data mining has attracted a great deal of attention in  the information industry and in society as a whole in recent years, due to wide availability of huge amounts of data and the imminent need for turning such data into useful information and knowledge. Data mining refers to extracting or ?mining? knowledge from large amounts of data.

Distributed data mining (DDM) is data mining where the data and computation are spread over many independent sites.  Each site has its own data source and data mining algorithms producing local models[10]. From them global meaningful knowledge has to be derived. The Grid is a distributed computing infrastructure that enables coordinated resource sharing within dynamic organizations   Association rules are used to show the relationships between data items with support and confidence measurements [9].

The Weka Experiment Environment enables the user to create, run, modify, and analyse experiments in a more convenient manner than is possible when processing the schemes individually. For example, the user can create an experiment that runs several schemes against a series of datasets and then analyse the results to determine if one of the schemes is (statistically) better than the other schemes.

Based on these concepts the study is being carried out in the subsequent headings.



II. MINING FREQUENT PATTERNS Frequent patterns are patterns that occur frequently in  data. There are many kinds of frequent patterns, including item sets, subsequences and substructures [6]. Suppose as a marketing manager of AllElectronics would like to determine which items are frequently purchased together with the same transactions. An example of such a rule, mined from the AllElectronics transactional database is Buys(X,?Computer?) => buys(X,?Software?) [support=1%,confidence=50%] where X is a variable representing a customer. A confidence, or certainty, of 50% means that if a customer buys a computer, there is a 50% chance that she will buy software as well. A 1% support means that 1% of all of the transactions under analysis showed that computer and software were purchased together. The above rule can be simply written as ?computer=>software [1%,50%]?  A. Apriori  Algorithm Apriori is a seminal algorithm proposed by  R.Agrawal and R.Srikant in 1994 from mining frequent itemsets for Boolean association rules. It is based on the fact that the algorithm uses prior knowledge of frequent itemset properties [2]. Apriori employs an iterative approach known as a level-wise search, where k-itemsets are used to explore (k+1) itemsets. First the set of frequent 1 itemsets is found by scanning the database to accumulate the count for each     item, and collecting those items that satisfy minimum support. The resulting set is denoted L1.  Next L1, is used to find L2, the set of frequent 2- itemsets, which is used to find L3, and so on, until no more frequent k-itemsets can be found. The finding of each Lk requires one full scan of the database. To improve the efficiency of the level-wise generation of frequent itemsets, an important property called the Apriori property [all nonempty subsets of a frequent itemset must also be frequent], is used to reduce the search space. The [3] two set process is followed consisting of join and prune actions.

The join step: To find Lk, a set of candidate k- itemsets is generated by joining Lk-1 with itself. This set of candidates is denoted Ck.  Let l1 and l2 be itemset in lk-1.

After a series of process the resulting itemset formed by joining l1 and l2 is l1[1], l1[2], ?l1[k-2], l1[k-1], l2[k-1].

The prune step: Ck is a superset of Lk, that is, its members may or may not be frequent, but all of the frequent k-itemsets are included in Ck. A scan of the database to determine the count of each candidate in Ck would result in the determination of  Lk (i.e. all candidates having a count no less than the minimum support count are frequent by definition, and therefore belong to Lk).

To reduce the size of Ck, the Apriori property is used as follows. Any (k-1) itemset that is not frequent cannot be a subset of a frequent k-itemset. Hence, if any (k- 1) subset of a candidate k-itemset is not in Lk-1. then the candidate cannot be frequent either and so can be removed from Ck.

B. Predictive  Apriori Algorithm The Predictive Apriori algorithm [7]returns an  array best [1 . . .n] of association rules [xi => yi] (xi, yi  < {a1, . . . , ak}, xi ? yi = ?), says that any rule not included in best is either less accurate than the n-th best rule best[n], or it is subsumed by an at least equally accurate rule that is contained in best.

C. DDM Using Grid Architecture A possible infrastructure for a virtual organisation,  implemented using Grid technologies, is presented in Figure. 1.

The company has a central branch and several local branches (LB). Each branch is composed of a number of Grid nodes (GN) interconnected in a Grid infrastructure.

In the case study [1], the data mining task is the discovery of the association rules in the local branch databases, and the implementation of the Grid infrastructure is based on the Globus toolkit. In the OGSA context, the association rules discovery task is exposed in the form of Grid services. The mining service has several components specific to a Grid service: service data access, service data element, and service implementation. The association rules discovery service is interacting with the rest of the grid services: service registry, service creation, authorisation,  notification, manageability and concurrency. The Apriori Grid Service must comply with OGSA rules, constraints, standard interfaces and behaviour.

The service data access contains a standard interface and a discovery service, for registering information about Grid service instances with registry services. The client application calls the standard method FindServiceData, which retrieves service information from individual Apriori Grid Service instances. The service data access defines a standard interface and semantics for dynamic service creation of the Apriori Grid Service, located at the Service Data Element level.

Figure 1. Virtual organisation infrastructure using grid technologies.

In the case study, from the central branch the association rules discovery task has to be launched, mining the data from central and local branches. It is a distributed framework for mining associative rules in geographic distributed databases. The framework implements VO structure and it uses data mining methods and techniques and different technologies like Grid [8], Java and relational databases. The client module allows the user to send the parameters and the commands to the rest of the components.

Configuration parameters of the framework and of the Apriori algorithm, then call the mining methods. The client finds and creates the Apriori Grid Service and sends it the parameters for: locating and connecting to the remote transaction databases, locating the transaction tables or calling the pre-processing methods, Apriori algorithm minimum support and confidence, locating the knowledge base with the partial rules generated.

In the next step, the Apriori Grid Service instances perform the association rules discovery task independently on the remote databases, located on the Central Branch or   LB  Gn  LB  GN  GN  GN  LB  GN GN  GN                LB  GN  GN  GN  Central branch  GN GN  GN GN  GN  GN     on the Local Branches of the VO. The user/client application receives notifications when an association mining service completes its job and the results can be explored from the knowledge base. The user can explore the partial association rules generated or can apply incremental methods to combine the partial rules into more general rules.

The Apriori Grid Service implements an original Apriori library for mining the associative rules. The library is implemented in Java for portability and compatibility with the implementation [1] of the Globus 3 Toolkit Core services and, in this phase, it contains the serial version of the algorithm.

The implementation of the algorithm follows the next steps:  ? finds all 1-itemsets candidates and all frequent 1- itemsets candidates (a candidate is an item set to be counted).

? then finds all frequent 2-itemsets.

? then generates a hash tree structure for storing the  k-itemsets.

? the algorithm multiple scans the database and does  not load it in the memory, which is very useful for large databases  D. Results Of Apriori And Predictive Apriori Algorithms The apriori and its advancement of predictive  apriori algorithms are run using weka toolkit on a centralised database.. The results are given in Figure.2 and Figure.3 Comparison of two algorithms is like  ? Pred. Apriori mines a higher quality set of rules ? Pred. Apriori needs fewer rules ? But  pred. Apriori is slower than Apriori  For discussion 2 samples have been taken , APriori gives confidence level of 1 and predictive apriori gives accurate confidence level of  0.9 (Apriori)  1. tear-prod-rate=reduced 12 ==> contact- lenses=none 12    conf:(1)  2. contact-lenses=soft 5 ==> astigmatism=no 5 conf:(1)  Figure.2. Association rule finding of Apriori algorithm     Figure.3. Association rule finding of Predictive Apriori algorithm  (Predictive apriori) 1. tear-prod-rate=reduced 12 ==> contact-  lenses=none 12    acc:(0.99355) 2. contact-lenses=soft 5 ==> astigmatism=no tear-  prod-rate=normal 5    acc:(0.96077)  The best rules generated depend on the number of best rules requested; the order of rules will change for both.The visualisation for results of both the algorithms has also been given in Figure.4. and Figure.5.

Figure. 4. Plot matrix for Apriori algorithm  Figure. 5. Graph representation for Predictive apriori  E. Comparison Of Classical Apriori &  Grid Based Apriori  Algorithms A series of tests were run. First of all, the sequential  standalone implementation of the Apriori algorithm, called by the Apriori Grid Service, and a classical implementation (Weka library) were compared. The organisation of the datasets was given in the form ??TxxIyyDzzzK??, where     ??xx?? denotes the average number of items present per transaction, ??yy?? denotes the average support of each item in the dataset and ??zzzK?? denotes the total number of transactions in ??K?? (1000 s). The experiments were performed for 4 database sizes (3000, 7000, 10,000 and 50,000 transactions) and the resulting rules resulted had 30%, 25% and 20% support factors (given in  Figure. 6).

Figure. 6. Comparison of results  The efficiency of the Apriori Grid Service algorithm compared with the classical Apriori is presented in the figure 6 which shows an improvement in performance for the Grid version of the association algorithm compared to the classical Apriori of 25% for 30% support, and it increased to about 27% for 25% support and to 31% for 20% support, all for the larger dataset (10 k transactions).

Also, a series of distributed tests using the ??Virtual Organization?? implemented on the local intranet were performed [1]. The test called the Apriori Grid Service with different series of parameters (remote databases, algorithm support and confidence factors, rules generated) and accurate results in real time have been obtained.

CONCLUSION This paper presents a study on results of Apriori  and predictive apriori algorithms on a centralized database using weka toolkit. A comparison is also made which shows how distributed associative rule mining apriori algorithm works better than previous classical models whose results have been given. The future scope of this work is that parallel distribution of knowledge extraction could be made on a distributed grid environment to produce a more optimized result.

