SICE Annual Conference 2010  August 18-21, 2010, The Grand Hotel, Taipei, Taiwan

Abstract?In this paper, a data mining method using Genetic Network Programming (GNP) will be introduced and its effec- tiveness and efficiency will be studied using an existing large-scale traffic simulation system. The results of simulation will also be described.

Keywords?GNP; Data Mining; Attribute Accumulation; Traffic Prediction; Evolution; Classification;.



I. INTRODUCTION  With the deteriorating traffic status in the expanding modern metropolis, individual traffic management systems, sometimes known as car navigation systems, are widely used to shorten the traveling time for drivers. In a complicated and dynamic system, the effectiveness of navigation depends heavily on how accurately the information is provided. Therefore, if the traffic conditions like vehicle flows and congestions can be accurately predicted and described, the effectiveness of navigation systems will be improved.

Here, a proposed method of association rule mining using Genetic Network Programming (also known as GNP) is ap- plied to a large-scale road network to verify its performance.

GNP is a kind of algorithm which represents solutions with directed-graph structures, which here is used to extract rules from the large database alongside with rule accumulation mechanism so that as many rules as possible can be extracted from the database with decent efficiency.

In this paper, GNP is used in the dynamic case, where the database concerns not only the data of one certain time point, but a long time sequence, or we can say that the database is time-related. GNP is used to generate candidate rules from a large number time-related attributes.

Here, we apply Genetical Network Programming for ex- tracting association rules from traffic systems and use them for the prediction of traffics of the road networks. In order to achieve realistic results, the algorithm is also applied to the simulator, where the traffic of Kitakyushu is used for simulations.



II. ALGORITHM DESCRIPTION  The whole algorithm is divided into to two phase, Data Mining and Prediction (also called Classificiation). GNP is applied to the first phase, where a time-related GNP data mining is used to obtain rules which are exploited in the latter phase to make prediction. The algorithm in the two phases will be introduced in details, respectively.

A. Data Mining  Data Mining[1], the analytical approach to draw useful information from large sets of data, is widely used in various fields. Generally, data mining is used to find relationships be- tween several attributes. Its goal is to extract information from data sets, which can be used later for other applications. In other words, the knowledge obtained could be in many forms, which would be the form of relationships of traffic volumes among different roads and time in the traffic prediction.

One of the greatest advantages of using data mining to obtain rules over other methods (like analyzing the geometric and topological relationships of road networks) is that data mining is a relatively efficient method to obtain as many rules as possible. Here, Association Rule Mining is used to extract knowledge from the database, whose major task is to find the relationships among attributes, or hidden correlations among attributes. Relationships between data sets can be represented as association rules. An association rule has the form of (X => Y ), where X represents antecedent and Y represents consequent. This means those data satisfying X is likely to satisfy Y with certain confidence.

When data mining is applied to large scale traffic systems, the relationship is usually expressed in the form of rules like ?if Section A(t=3) has High volume and Section B(t=4) has High volume, then Section C(t=6) has High volume?. These rules are called Association Rules, and can be used to make prediction thereafter[2].

When considering the evolutionary computation, there are several existing methods like Genetic Algorithm[3] and Ge- netic Programming[4]. In GA case, a rule is represented as  PR0001/10/0000-2637- 2637 -     the chromosome of an individual, which makes it hard to have a complete picture of the real relationships in the problem.

In Genetic Programming, the tree structure is used which improves the representation of rules, but it thus suffer from the loose structure and bloating problem.

Genetic Network Programming (GNP)[5] used in the pro- posed method is an extension of Genetic Algorithm. In GNP, individuals are expressed as directed graphs, which have strong expressive power while keeping a compact program, where all the resources can be reused without the bloating problem as the number of nodes is fixed. This is the reason why Genetic Network Programming is used for the optimization of large scale systems[5].

Also, due to the nature of the problem, time-related asso- ciation rule mining is needed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the method.

B. Genetic Network Programming  Fig.1 shows the basic structure of GNP. Principally GNP is composed of three kinds of nodes: Start Node, Judgment Nodes and Processing Nodes. In the case of Judgment Nodes, if-then logics are used to decide the flow of agents, while Processing Nodes carry a set of actions. Before the start-up, all the nodes are pre-defined and stored.

Fig. 1. Basic Structure of GNP Individual  In the Chrosome of a GNP node, its ID, type (Start Node, Processing Node, Judgment Node), connection and direction to other nodes are defined, as GNP uses the directed-graph to represent its individual.

Fig.2 is the structure of a single rule individual included in GNP. For example: if Section A(t=0) has High volume and Section B(t=3) has High volume, then Section C(t=4) has High volume.

The most important part of GNP data mining applied to traffic system is that it concerns only those rules with single consequent part, as is shown in the previous example as C(t=4) is high.

When the algorithm has found enough rules for a certain consequent, it moves to the next. This has proven to be a most trust-worthy method, but it remains relatively time-consuming.

In the proposed method, the algorithm considers not only the  Fig. 2. Basic Structure of GNP Individual  attributes, but also the time delays, as the database is not a transaction-based but a time-related database.

For all the rules extracted using data mining method, Support, Confidence, Chi-Square are used to decide whether the rule is accepted as a useful rule and stored in the pool.

In the Case of X => Y , support is defined as the number of data satisfying X divided by the total number of data. For example if in a database of 100 tuples, the data that satisfy X is 20, then we can say that the support is 20/100 = 0.2. Support actually measures how widely the rule extracted can apply to the database, or how frequently the situation described by X is seen in the data set.

Confidence is the conditional probability of P(Y ? ?X). For  example, if in the previously mentioned database, those data who satisfy both X and Y is 15, it can be said that the confidence is 15/20 = 0.75. Confidence measures how effective the rule is, that is, how confidently as you can deduce the conclusion if you have the clues.

Chi-square measures how independent X is from Y . In other words, all rules have to satisfy these three measures, so as to be recognized as an important or effective rule.

C. Rule Accumulation Mechanism  In order to extract rules from the large database, Rule Accumulation Mechanism is also needed, which involves the Small Rule Pool and Big Rule Pool(also known as SRP and BRP). Every round, new rules are obtained and their overlap is checked in SRP, and SRP is also compared with BRP.

All the attributes that are used in the rules extracted are counted and the top v percent attributes are viewed as impor- tant attributes and have high likelihood to be used for the next time.

In other words, when a good rule is extracted, firstly it will be compared with the rules in the SRP. If it is new, then it will be stored in SRP and later the SRP will be compared with BRP. Those never extracted in the past will be considered as a new one.

- 2638 -     D. Prediction  Prediction is the final process of applying rules extracted to make the prediction of future traffic flows, which is evaluated by the accuracy of prediction. Here, accuracy is defined by the number of correct predictions divided by all the records that can be predicted. That is to say, all the unpredictable records are ignored.



III. LARGE-SCALE TRAFFIC SIMULATION  A. Solutions  A new simulator is needed which can simulate the large scale traffic system with the complicated traffic control like traffic lights control and if possible traffic accidents. Here a software named Sound4U is applied to our simulator.

Also the program to do the long prediction is also devel- oped.

B. Map Configuration  In the Sound4U software, users can pick up the roads of different levels like national, prefectural, urban and so on, traffic control like traffic lights control, and the vehicle flows from the national map using a filter. Also the vehicle types can be set up as different car groups impose different influences on the traffic.

In the simulation, the map of Kitakyushu in Fukuoka Prefecture is chosen as the basic traffic network. The road network in this paper especially focuses on the area near Kurosaki, one of the central part of Kitakyushu city containing more than 3,500 roads, already a complicated system. In this paper, only the national, prefectural and urban roads are picked up, considering the efficiency.

The map is shown in Fig 3,  Fig. 3. Map for Simulation  Considering the fact that most of roads are two-way, the map actually contain more than 7,000 sections. Generally, it takes 10 to 15 minutes for a car to move from one side of the map to the other side.

The whole simulation time is two hours, where the traffic volume will be recorded for every minute. Also the scan time  is 1 second, by which the simulation is updated. Generally speaking, the shorter scan time will lead to higher simulation accuracy.

From observation of the real traffic lights, the time of switching different traffic lights is set at 30 to 50 seconds according to the location. Generally speaking, the roads in the urban areas tend to have shorter interval between switching, while in rural areas longer time interval is set.

C. OD Setting  Here a concept has to be explained. OD, or Origin- Destination is used to define the traffic flow. As can be seen from the name, OD means a traffic flow that runs from Origin to Destination.

In the simulator OD is defined, traffic control is set up and route selection algorithm is set for each vehicle group in the simulator, and the simulator will do the rest.

The vehicles are generated from Origin/Destination (OD) points, which are put around the boundaries of the whole map. A traffic flow should be generated from one OD point towards another. This is called an origin/destination (OD) pair, representing a traffic flow.

10 Destination points are set for every Origin point out of 20 points, so there are 200 OD pairs in all.

When setting up the ODs, three patterns are used. One is Rush Hour pattern, where two peaks of traffic flows are set. Another is Standard Distribution and the third is Total Randomized.

It is possible to set different groups of vehicles (as they introduce different influences on the traffic system), but only one kind is used here for simplicity.

D. Density Discretization  Although what we want is the prediction of traffic situations, the first step is to discretize the simulation results, as the GNP- based data mining method is principally designed to deal with boolean values rather than continuous values.

Also, the traffic density rather than the traffic volume should be used for measuring the traffic situation due to the fact that the traffic volume does not reflect how busy a street is, especially considering the fact that many roads have different lane numbers and lengths. Usually the longer the road is, and the more lanes it has, the more vehicles it can hold, which means it is busier than some other roads.

Therefore after the simulation, first the traffic density of each section is calculated, where it it is divided into Low, Middle and High situations by certain thresholds. Actually, the following traffic density of every time unit (here one minute) can be obtained.

D = Num/(L ? C) where, D is the density of the section;  - 2639 -     Num is the number of cars remaining in the section; L is the length of the section; C is the capacity of the section And here is how the traffic density is discretized into High,  Middle and Low.

Fig. 4. Discretization of Traffic  E. Section Reduction  Even for the large scale system, 7,000 sections is a good number and a heavy burden on the traffic prediction. Thus, one of the crucial steps is to pick up the most important sections, called ?major sections?.

As the proposed method classifies the sections by Low, Middle and High for every period, we can give them certain scores, which can be used for ranking the sections. Only the top 500 sections are picked up using the ranking of sections.

As there are Low, Middle and High for every section, the number of attributes actually becomes 1,500 with time steps of 120(two hours by 1 minute).



IV. SIMULATION RESULTS  The Simulation Condition is set up as follows.

A map near Kurosaki 20 OD, 200 OD pairs 3,500 roads, 7,000 sections Number of judgment nodes 100 Number of processing nodes 10 Number of attributes 1500 Number of time units 120 Number of generations per Round 50 Sub Attribute Set Size for Attribute Accumulation 100 After obtaining the association rules for the traffics of the  road networks, a classification method is used to make the prediction on the traffics and the results are analyzed.

The general flow of simulation is shown in Fig.5, There are two database involved, of which one is called  Training Database, the other Testing Database. The GNP- based algorithm extracts rules from the Training Database (or, the algorithm would learn from the Training Database).

Fig. 5. General Flow of Simulation  50 rules are required for each class, but sometimes it just turn out to be impossible to find enough rules for certain attributes.

These rules would be used to make prediction later, and prediction results would be compared with Testing Database to see how accurate the prediction is.

Here, Accuracy is defined by the number of correct predic- tion divided by all the records that can be predicted.

A. Probabilistic Route Finding  In the simulations, vehicles generated from the Origin follow certain rules when finding its way to the Destination.

This is also named ?route-finding?, as vehicles decide which road to take among lots of choices.

With Probabilistic Route Finding, vehicles decide which route to take considering the traveling time when they depart from Origin. They will stick with their choice after leaving Origin. The probability of choosing one road is shown as below.

P (i) = exp(uVi)?  j?J exp(uVi) , (1)  P (i) is the probability for vehicle to take the ith route V i is the time consumption for taking the ith route In the simulations, the route-selection is controlled by a  parameter called Logit Parameter u.

When u approaches infinity, the algorithm turns into greedy  algorithm When u approaches zero, the route for a car is totally randomly determined  The X axis is the prediction time step, while Y is the prediction accuracy in Fig.6.

Generally, the accuracy falls with the increase of prediction steps and the more probabilistic, the less accurate. In the probabilistic case, the accuracy drops as the process become more random, or as u becomes smaller.



V. CONCLUSIONS  An decent accuracy of 80 percent using 7000 sections map has proved that the proposed algorithm can be applied to a large-scale realistic traffic system with reliability.

There still exist some problems to be solved, like a small number of usable rules when extending the prediction time,  - 2640 -     Fig. 6. Prediction Accuracy under Different Parameters  or the relatively low efficiency, although the Attribute Accu- mulation and Section Reduction have been already exploited to improve it.

In the future, should try to systematically analyze the per- formance of scenario under many different kinds of situations like very big traffic volumes. Other route-finding methods are also expected to be employed.

