Design for Exhibition System Based on RFID

Abstract: Many of visitors would be left stranded in the exhibition or traveling area, which might cause traffic jam and bring big pressure to organizer or operator. If the organizer can realize the number of visitor in every venues on time, then the visitors may be guided, and moreover should be provided with ?Personalized Tour Guide? according to their preferences. This paper advances a new exhibition information system based on RFID, which is provided with language translator, information classifier and multi-media entertainment, and elaborates the design from several aspects including system architecture, functional modules, data model and interface. The design in this paper is thought over loosely- coupling characteristic of system, and is specifically devised for The 2010 World Exposition at Shanghai (WES), and it is intended to extend to other occasions like tourism, banking, club, chain-store operation, and net-bars, etc.

Keywords: RFID, Exhibition Logistics, Visitort Management, Loosely Coupling, Dispatching System, Data Model

I.  INTRODUCTION RFID (Radio Frequency Identification), also named as E-  tag, is a non-contact automatic identification technique. It can automatically detect the target via radio signals, and track the item and transmit the data in a expedite way. RFID is able to detect the objects moving at high speed and multi-objects at the same time [1]. Generally, there are three signals can be transmitted to PC: Tag ID, Reader ID and Reading Time when reading tags.

During the large exhibition, many visitors possibly from different countries and organizations would be stranded in the area. There will be more than 70 million visitors in the 2010 World Exposition at Shanghai (WES) according to expert forecasting, supplying RFID for every visitor during the exhibition, the exhibition information system can be aware of  the number of visitor dynamic instantly as visitors are checked in. Present with the latest data statistics, the visitors can be guided via broadcast and screen based on their nationality and provided with ?Personalized Tour Guide? through their ID information and matched exhibition counters which are displayed in the LED screen of the terminal PC [2-3]. Therefore, they are guided to the most appropriate place and the problems relating to visitor guiding and information transmission are resolved as a result.

The exhibition system based on RFID is information management system which uses radio frequency to automatically identify items and collect relevant information to guide the management. The system has a loosely-coupled collection of components, each of which carries out some task and may enable other operations. The major characteristic of this style is that it does not bind recipients of signals to their originators. It is especially useful for applications that need to be able to be reconfigured, by changing a service provider or by enabling and disabling operations [4]. This paper analyses identification function for RFID in exhibition system, and designs the system with respect to exhibition?s system architecture, system composition, functional modules, Entity- Relationship (ER) data model, interface and so on.



II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTRUE The exhibition system architecture, show in Figure 1, is  composed by system platform, terminal set and RFID device.

RFID device is connected to terminal set, and terminals connect to system platform with RFID middleware as a media, and import tag data to system platform. This architecture?s advantages, compared with commonly used RFID framework, are that data is exchanged between RFID device and system platform via the media of RFID middleware, which ensures the     better data exchange between two different parts and ensures the independence and robustness of system platform and RFID device. Applied in practice, if some part of the frame changes, only RFID middleware needs to be changed accordingly while the rest parts remain, which thus insures the mutual independence of different parts of the system [5].

Figure 1 can be also comprehended as three layers architecture: system platform is the data process layer, terminal set is the information promulgation layer, RFID device is the data capture layer. They are loosely coupled each other (loosely-coupled layers, on the other hand, are relatively independent and are easier to comprehend and adapt. Loose coupling therefore is a desirable feature of a design and its subsequent realization), and may be disposed separately in different places, and connected by VPN or internet.

Maintenance is supported and extensions are easy to realize because of the loose coupling between layers.

RFID tags include important data such as nationality, language, occupation, and work title, and they are recorded in tags as visitors registered. When visitor enters the exhibition room and checks in, the tags are captured by RFID reader, and further transmitted to system platform via terminals.

Terminal is information promulgation device in exhibition rooms; it can be independent STB (Set Top Box), all-in-one device integrated with screen, or all-in-one device integrated with screen and modem. Information is promulgated on terminal in store-and-play mode: download information from system platform and store in terminal to play. Terminal provides VGA, DVI and audio output.

Figure 1.  Sysytem Architecture  System platform chooses the kind of video and audio recourse to be played and the languages should be used based on the analysis results of visitors information from each exhibition rooms so as to implement the centralized control of real-time monitoring, video and audio play and remote network, and at the same time take account of unified management of centralized network management platform and personalized dispatching of  terminal and as a result implement the functions such as information classification, language translation, real-time screening and net media player in information terminals at different rooms.



III. THE DESIGN FOR TERMINAL FUNCTION To display the exhibits information is one of the core  services of exhibition system, and the display is implemented by terminal which, as part of the exhibition system, should have following functions:  ? Register: searching automatically for network management platform to be registered after terminal is started up.

? Identification: Receiving the tag data from visitors in current location through RFID reader, compute statistics of tag data and send these statistics to system platform.

? Heartbeat: According to the preset heartbeat cycle, transmitting to the system platform the current data: RFID tags captured by the terminal, current IP address of the terminal, current play list and video of the terminal.

? Information Partition: Dividing the screen into four partitions: video partition, image partition, text partition and scrolling partition. Video partition mainly displays introduction to the exhibition room or the exhibited brand, image partition mainly displays introduction to the exhibited items, text and scrolling s partition mainly display tour guide information and real-time attention.

? Accepting Instructions from Platform and Executing: After terminal is certified, updating the local play list from the play list database and automatically download  new video and audio resources and images from the content center to be stored in local hard drive, and executing them. Before terminal power off, automatically send signals to platform to indicate normal power off on the way.

? Play: The display modes include: visitor-specified (display according to the numbers of visitor), real-time spot display (display according to organizer needs), repeated mode (display  circularly) and periodical mode (display periodically).

Terminal takes turns to check visitor-specified list, scheduled list, repeated list and periodical list in database, and play the video and audio by its required format.

? Language Translation: Preset to store multi-language audio scripts in the content center and link them with video files in the database center for each video resource. Play appropriate language audio to specific visitors.

VPN or Internet  RFID Device RFID  Tags  Database  Content Center  Network Manage.

Platform  Business Manage.

Platform  ......

Terminal 1  Terminal n  System Platform

IV. THE DESIGN FOR SYSTEM PLATFORM System Platform comprises three parts: business  management platform, Network management platform and content center. These three parts are mutual independent as well as related; they can be arrayed separately in different place for the maintenance and convenience. They are loosely coupled each other as the system architecture. Business management platform is used to manage information, register, customer orders (customer requirement collection), historical data statistics, and calculate expense of customer and so on.

Network management platform is used to manage terminals, monitor the operating process and collect logs. Content center is used to upload and download, and store media files.

Terminals are used to execute the instructions from Network management platform, and download the specified file and play the specified media.

A. Network Management Platform Network management platform is used by maintainers to  activate, manage and maintain the system. It directly manages and controls all the terminals and sends instructions to all the terminals by reading the shared database information and collects LOG information running on platform and terminals.

This platform not only can be used for system user management and system user role management and system privilege management [6], but also have the following functions:  1) Terminal Management: Each terminal holds a unique ID, which distinguish detail information of each terminal, so network management platform can collect and display current status of each terminal, including IP address and play list, real- time playing content and time and cause of last time aberration of each terminal. Considering the characteristics of exhibition and the independence advantage of exhibition system architecture previous described, Terminal Management should also have the following functions:  a) Messaging to terminal: giving some massages to the terminal to update online;  b) Remote Controling: remote controling the terminals (and its LED screen) on/off;  c) Certificating: supporting terminal sign-up auto certification;  d) Downloading: downloading information such as play list from the shared database and content center for certified terminals;  e) Time Sync: supporting time sync between network management paltform and terminal.

2) Log Management: To keep track of platform and terminal, the network management platform maintains a great lot of special records called a log (or journal) that contains information about all alerts and operating to system platform and terminals, and playing information to terminal. These log records are maintained by the network management, and stored into shared database. The log may contain the following data: terminal daily records, terminal playing records, terminal  repairing records, system platform operating record. These records used for other purposes (for example, for performance monitoring and auditing). Log records can be selected by user and terminal and datetime and playing list.

3) Data Backup and Recovery: Backup copies of the database and the log file to be made periodically without necessarily having to stop the system first.

B. Bussiness management platform Business Management Platform focuses mainly on business  management: visitor register (i.e. RFID register), media information (audio, video, image and text) register (media information is stored in content center), edit schedule according to customer requests and timely dispatch the instructions into terminals through Network Management Platform. This platform accesses essentially the database shared with Network Management Platform, Moreover, Business Management Platform can also provide user self-service and inquiry service, and meanwhile provide necessary expenses statistics. This platform has following functions:  1) Visitor register: Supplying RFID for every visitor during the exhibition, and memorizing visitor information in database when visitor checke in.

2) Media Sorting Management: After the medias (audio, video, image and text) to be play are authorized by censorship, the medias register information will be inserted or updated in database by Sorting Management immediately, and the medias will be inserted or updated to content center.

3) Play List Management: Making play list task according to customer request and input the task information: task title, play mode (visitor-specified, real-time spot display, repeated mode and periodical mode), staring and ending time, medias resource and so on. Support manually edit or update of the list in the play list database and adjustment of the locations of the tasks to be played in the list.

4) Played Management:  By terminal heartbeat founction, status (playing and played) of midea is recorded in database.

The object for played management is called After-play of media item, that is midea information after play, as well as the object for play list management is called Before-play of media item, that is midea information before play. The data source for this function is resourced from terminal logs.

5) Statistics, Fee Calculating and Report: Providing with inquiry and statistic by classification, midea item, played time of terminals, customer, and so on. By calling the different logs in the shared database, it can generate statistics report and expenses detail list to be printed.

C. Database Design Exhibition system information cover with RFID tags that  records visitor information, terminals that promulgates media, users (further classified into network platform users and business platform users) who operates system platform and manages terminal, media information (further classified into public media information and advertising media information) that represents in audio, images, videos and texts, customers who need to exhibits or promulgation, and so on. The whole    ER model is showed in Figure 2. Media information includes audio, images, videos and texts. Play modes also include visitor-specified, real-time spot display, repeated mode and periodical mode. Please refer to reference [7] for the more detailed database structure.

Figure 2.  Entity-Relationship Model

V. SYSTEM INTERFACE XML programs are more easily to be integrated with  information produced on different operation systems as Windows, Mac OS, Linux and so on, and then it is easier to load XML data into programs to analyze and exported as XML file [8]. As a result, by applying XML as interface protocol at each part of the system (terminals, RFID device, business management platform, network management platform and content center), it comes to a loose coupling state of different parts, which rules out the trouble of updating one by one when the parts are necessary for future updates and instead solve the problem only by putting in the sever-side a revised configuration file for automatic download and update.

Several parts designed by this paper are the core components of the exhibition system, and for the network design in practice, the new terminals, network nodes and access servers can be added based on this system according to the exhibition venues? patterns and area

VI. CONCLUSION Because RFID is a non-contact auto identification  technique, it surely has prolonged lifecycle, longer distance reading ability, capability of tag data encryption, larger data storage, information storing flexibility and other advantages.

Specifically for exhibition, our design can improve the quality of the management from following points of view:  ? Providing more effective identification;  ? Guiding the visitors and improve media play feedback through the statistic of individual features of each venue;  ? Offering centralized profile management of exhibitor (customer) which is beneficial for data analysis of customers and visitors;  ? Establishing comprehensive visitor profile and visiting track, and to mine further information like visitor preferences etc. ;  ? Making system easy and convenience to dispose and maintenance and repair by loose coupling architecture and module. According to customer feedbacks from different venues (or exhibition rooms), expanding or reducing agilely system configuration to adapt application environment for more benefit;  ? Improving the efficiency of daily maintenance and media resources update by applying VPN networks for all terminals in the system.

Although RFID technique makes the network systems? information resource extending to visible and mobile physical objects (e.g. visitors). However, due to visitor moving and data exchange between different readers, the data quantity to be processed and analyzed by system become to very augmented, the information exchange among servers and sync management become more complicated. How to identify RFID tags more accurately and decrease data quantity in RFID system are further research topic on its way, especially for visitor crowded venues.

