Research on Knowledge Map Construction in Intelligentized Content Website

Abstract-A knowledge map is a vital tool for better knowledge management. While application of searching the content which user concerned in the website remains in the initial stages of development, website content management is a process of knowledge management and therefore suited to knowledge maps. This paper presents a knowledge map for the intelligentized content website. And in this work it constructs the architecture of the knowledge map system that is made by six modules according to the principle of high cohesion and low coupling. Then it utilizes association rules and pruning algorithm to achieve the core module of system. And the results from it are used to generating knowledge map. This map representation compensates for the lack of various meanings in a single knowledge map. For novices interested in searching website knowledge content, results of the present study provide constructive information to know their concerned content in the website. In summary, this paper presents a suitable procedure for extracting knowledge from website knowledge content sources for development of a knowledge map. The proposed approach can be used for rapid generation of knowledge maps.

Keywords-knowledge management; knowledge map; intelligentized content website; meta knowledge; association rules

I. INTRODUCTION  The theory of the article derived from the use of the content management website. Everyone would defme some category which according to their own habits or intellectual levels, and then they will submit some essay into the websites. Those creators will fmd that they can find the articles in need instantly in the beginning.

However, as the time goes on, the content are becoming much more than before so that they would be not easily to fmd. Meanwhile, to different readers, the same article will belong to different category. Towards a new member, he wants to find the content that he pays attention to, but it is actually more complex than he think. Managing content in the website is a process of knowledge management.

Therefore, there is a strongly desire of constructing such auxiliary tool to help manage knowledge content [1]. And knowledge map is considered an effective tool for it [2].

Gang Liu2  College of Software Changchun University of Technology  ChangChun 130012, China e-mail: Igsteel@gmail.com

II. THE DEFINITION AND FUNCTION OF KNOWLEDGE MAp  A. The Definition of Knowledge Map  The knowledge map originated from the geographical map. Initially, the knowledge map of American Express is an American geographical map which is full of knowledge.

It's not only a file and a table with index number or hierarchical relationships, but also a table of information resource management and a graph of information resource distribution [3]. This is the early form of the knowledge map. And this form lays particular emphasis on the description of the relationship between information resource and relevant departments. But the relations between information resource items are not involved.

According to the definition given by Gartner Group, [4] the knowledge map works to descript a group of concept and their incidence relation. Users can fmd the concepts in need quickly. Moreover, they can find the interrelated knowledge resources' hyperlink either.

You can give knowledge map such defmition in the knowledge management area [5]: It is the general list of catalogs; it can be a knowledge management instrument.

And then, scattered thoughts can be summarized and easily administrated. People can access, share and recycle the knowledge with knowledge map. Apart from this, it also provides the users' location when users are researching in the sea of knowledge and show them how to search information accurately and efficiently [6].

B. The Function and Application of Knowledge Map On the whole, knowledge map is the basis of  expressing knowledge. For the purpose specified in the definition of "share information", it used unified concepts to achieve such goal. And such measures illustrate its great superiority in the communication, interoperability, systems engineering and knowledge management [7].

At present, the reference for knowledge map is as follows: Knowledge Retrieval [8], information integration [9] and knowledge acquisition [10].

The main function of the knowledge map is to achieve knowledge sharing and reusing. And that makes computers formulate a better understanding about the information and languages. Therefore, knowledge map has outstanding  CMCE 2010    application prospect in the information interoperate and knowledge understanding.



III. ARCHITECTURE OF KNOWLEDGE MAP  The target of this system's overall design is to achieve a knowledge map that with extensible characteristic and portability. The system can be cross-platform and because of that it is able to integrate with different web sites. And this paper will focus on constructing knowledge map of intelligentized content website. The general architecture of this system, which is made by six parts, is given in Figure 1. The six parts are stated below: Data Acquisition Module, Pretreatment Module, Segmentation Module, Ontology Product Module, Classification Module and Knowledge Map Generating Module.

Data Acquisition Module is in charge of communicating with the website and it is the role of bridge in the knowledge map which provides essential data.

Pretreatment Module is responsible for documentation. Its main aims are participle, removing useless words, and counting the word frequency. The system integrates Data Acquisition Module with Pretreatment Module so that they can work on the data acquisition and preprocessing together. Segmentation Module's main task is processing Chinese text segmentation for HTML Web page. Ontology Product Module provides a platform that experts could defme ontology and its relations. Moreover, it provide the basis that how to classify for Classification Module.

Classification Module's main responsibility is classifying pretreated documents on the basis of the ontology concept that given by domain experts. And classification of features can be extracted either. The results are the foundation of the Knowledge Map Generating Module.

According to consumers' demands, Knowledge Map Generating Module would generate knowledge map and display it.

The design pattern of each module is based on such principle: high cohesion and low coupling. If a module is highly reusable, it would be designed to be independent.

And the modules' reusability can be increased by this approach. Each module has independent existence and can be developed all alone. The advantage this design pattern bring us is that we can update the specifically module along with developing modem technology without changing others.

Figure I. Architecture of Knowledge Map

IV. IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM OF THE MAIN MODULES IN THE SYSTEM  Classification Module and Knowledge Map Generating Module are the main modules of this system. And the following are their implementation.

A. Concrete Realization of the Classification Module  As the core module of the system, Classification Module was divided into two modules during the implementation process: association rules generation module and classification module.

? The Realization of Association Rules Generation  Module Association rules generation module mines out the text  association rules of the classification from the set of words after pretreatment. However, because it still exists noise data after pretreatment in the set of words, it can generate noise text association rules and lead to adverse effect for the classification accuracy of the classification module.

This module also carries out the pruning of text association rules. Therefore, this module is divided into two parts to achieve, association rules mining and using the generated association rules for pruning.

1. The Generation Algorithm for Web Document  Classification Association Rules [11] Input: As Di : {Ci'tj,t2 ...... ,tm} of a series of document set  D , where Ci is the class label of Dj, t j is the term extracting from the document. Minimum confidence threshold, minimum support threshold (J" ?  Output: As tl/\t2/\t3, ... ,/\tn=>Ci of a series of  association rules set R ( multidimensional association rules), where Ci is the of  classification Category, t. is a term.

}  The algorithm is listed as follows: 1) C1 +- { Candidate I term-sets and their support}  2) Fl +- { Frequent 1 term-sets and their support} 3) for (i +- 2 ; F';-l * <1>; i +-i-I) { 4) Ci +- (Fi_1ooFi_1) 5) Ci +-Ci -{ c I ( i  -1) item-set of c ? Fi-1 } 6) Dj +- filterTable (Dj_1, Fj_1) 7) froeach document d in Dj do{ 8) foreach c in Ci {  9) c.support+- c.support + Count( c, d) 10) }  } Fl +-{ C E Cj I c.support> (J" }  } Sets +-Uj{ CECi li> l}  R=<I>  11) 12)  13) 14)  15) 16) 17)  18) }  foreach itemset I in Sets do{ R +- R + { l  => Cat}  In Step 6), the purpose of executing the function filterTable( Di-1, F';-l) during each iteration is reducing the space occupied by the document through releasing the transaction excluding item sets.

2. Pruning Algorithm for Association Rules Input: Association rules set(S) and training text set(D)  during the period of mining association rules.

Output: The rules set used for classification.

The algorithm is listed as follows: 1) R = sort (R); 2) R '= fmdMoreSpecific(R); 3) R" = prune(R'); 4) foreach r in R " { 5) D '= findTransaction(r); 6) if (D'.sizeO >= 1){ 7) choose r; 8) } 9) removeTransaction(r); 10) } ? The Realization of Classification Module  The module uses the dominant factor algorithm to solve the problem that one new document belongs to multiple categories. The dominant factor t5 is a part of most types of rules in the process of classifYing an document using rules. Only to meet the rule of the dominant factor t5 threshold is meaningful rules.

Algorithm of New Document Classification [11]: Input:The term which created by new document to be  classified n; The association rules term which is composed by the association rules generated from ARC v; Dominant factor t5 ; Confidence threshold (J'.

Output:The list of the classification classList.

The algorithm is listed as follows: 1) S?<l> 2) R = fmdRules(n, v); 3) sorteR); 4) foreach rule r in R { 5) if ( r.conf> (J') { 6) count++; 7) S?Sur 8) 9) 10) 11)  } groupRuleByClass(S); foreach Si in Sl>S2,S3,,,,,Sn {  of the document  12)  13)  14) 15) 16)  Si .sumConfidence = sumRuleConfidience( Si );  Si .countRule = countRule( Sj );  } if (classifiyType = = II single "){  className = maxSumConfidence( Sj, S2, S3 , ... , Sn);  if(className = = null){ 17) 18)  19) 20) 21) 22) 23) }  className = maxRule(Sj,S2,S3,,,,,Sn);  } classList.add( className);  } else { classList = takeKClasses( S , t5);  In the process for implementation, the function fmdRules(n, v) obtained the rules set R by scanning the database in step 2). In step 22) the function takeKClasses( S , t5) assigned the categories whose rules total can meet the dominant factor included by S to the document, that is, assigned the categories of Si .countRule   >= t5 to the document. At this point the document can also attributable to a number of categories.

B. Concrete Realization of the Knowledge Map Generating Module  According to the aim of the system, knowledge map uses the way of thinking management to show to the users ultimately. That is, the tree of knowledge shows the distribution of knowledge by the way of human's thinking.

Users fmd the concrete knowledge through traversing every layer and get other knowledge which is related to this in order to facilitating the user to understand knowledge distribution and content [12].

There are two kinds of knowledge map presentation method in the realization of this module, by sort or by document. And this paper presents the former.

It's simple to present knowledge map when there is no request. It only need present all sort in the form of ladder and label the characteristic word of the sort.

Algorithm of knowledge map presentation: Input: Viewing the request of knowledge map.

Output: The structure of knowledge maps.

The algorithm is listed as follows: 1) T = generateTreeO; 2) foreach node in T{ 3) node.characterWords = findCharacterWords(node); 4) node.rules = fmdRules(node); 5) } 6) writeToXML(file); 7) readToPage(file);  Writing the generated knowledge tree to .xml file in order to generating knowledge tree of variable levels dynamically. In step 5) and step 6), present the generated knowledge tree onto the interface if the tree-level is pre? defmed fixed value. The aim of writing the generated knowledge tree to .xml file is reducing the number of visiting database and improving the efficiency of system.

That is, the knowledge tree is not re-generated from the database when the knowledge map is used by other users.

But the algorithm is re-implemented when a new sort or a new document is generated.



V. TESTING AND PROTOTYPE DISPLAY  The testing data comes from the Confluence content management system including the resources of Data Structures and Algorithm Design. Testing results is given in Figure 2. , that includes (a) and (b). And (a) shows the index of knowledge map, (b) shows knowledge map presentation by sort.

The figures above reveal that the aim of system has already implemented.

This knowledge map has no applicability for onefold website from the experimental process because of the particle size of sort. The thinner particle size of sort can lead to bigger cross of sort and not to get better classification. And the thicker ones may bring more contents when users are searching and not easy to see. The particle size has no unique standard and it is adjusted based on the data during the experimental process.



VI. CONCLUSIONS  The ultimate goal of knowledge map is to guide users to view the content of their concerns and help them fmd    the desultory knowledge in the website. This article designs in detail and chooses the algorithms for the core modules to refme the overall structure, and ultimately implements knowledge map. Of course, there should be possible to continue to dig out deeply according to the research of paper. Firstly, the system may be added permission control module to manage the permission of ontology concept. Secondly, we can add search function for the knowledge map and combine knowledge map with search engines. And we may get the better improvement through some experimental results. These are to be further researched and improved.

