

Anonymous Communication in MANET?s, Solutions and Challenges    Avissa Hosseini Tehrani, Hamid Shahnasser ECE Department, San Francisco State University, CA  E-mail:  tehrani@sfsu.edu    Introduction   A mobile ad hoc network (MANET) is designed for small groups of people with same special interests who want to communicate through their available devices like laptops or cell phones to share their ideas easily, quickly, and with minimum requirements. However providing a secure communication platform for this kind of network is a challenge because of the shared wireless medium. In MANET there is no fixed infrastructure like routers in wired network or an access point in managed wireless network to relay packets between nodes. Instead, each node participates in routing by forwarding data for other nodes. MANET has become popular in several application areas, including when a group of soldiers in enemy territory need to communicate through their available devices to receive a command or report their situations. The content of messages can be secured with cryptography, but vital information like nodes? identities and their locations can be revealed by traffic analysis. Emergency operations like search and rescue, commando operations, security scenarios, and collaborative research group are other examples of applications using MANET. In most of these applications security is very important however each of them needs a different level of security.

Attacks on MANETs can be divided into two categories, passive and active attacks. An active attack alters the operation of networks by modifying and interrupting data. A passive attack does not disturb the operation of networks. Traffic Analysis is one of the most invisible and unsolved passive security attacks against MANETs. In traffic analysis an adversary overhears network traffic in order to infer sensitive information about the applications and participators in a communication, like node?s identity, location, and the relationships of communicating nodes.

The passive adversary can be an external observer or an insider node in the path. Passive adversaries attempt to be invisible, until they locate their targets and then physically destroy them. The anonymous communication protocol is designed to protect MANET against traffic analysis. The main principles of an ideal anonymous protocol are: ? Protecting sender, receiver and their relationship: the real identities of the sender, receiver and intermediate nodes are secure and adversaries cannot determine who is talking to whom.

? Intractability: adversaries cannot trace a message to its sender or receiver.

? Secure authentication: each pair of nodes can authenticate each other without knowing their real identities.

? High efficiency: the computational overhead of cryptographic operations should be low.

This paper reviews and evaluates some outstanding protocols offering anonymity for MANETs.

It takes a closer look at the meaning of anonymity and the necessity of using anonymous communication to protect mobile ad hoc networks; then it explains the pros and cons of each current solution and the short comings and challenges that are not addressed by these protocols.

Current Solutions   Five protocols are reviewed in this section and all follow three phases: first is the Path Discovery phase in which a Route Request message (RREQ) is broadcasted by the source to find a path through intermediate nodes to destination. Second Phase is the Path Reverse phase in which destination sends a Route Reply message (RREP) back to source through the nodes in the path.

The last phase is the Data Transfer phase in which the source sends data to destination through the path.



I.   One of the early anonymous protocols offered for wireless network was Secure Distributed Anonymous Routing Protocol (SDAR). SDAR [3] defined a protocol like Onion [9] in wired network. In the path discovery phase a fixed size RREQ message, created by the source, passes through intermediate nodes when their real identities are added to the message. In path reverse phase, a RREP message constructed by the destination from all intermediate real ids is sent toward source. When the source gets the reverse message, it uses the intermediate session keys to encrypt the data and transfer it to destination in data transfer phase. In this protocol, real identities of sender and receiver are secured against an outside viewer, because they are encrypted in the route reply (RREP) message, but the receiver recognizes the sender and all the intermediate nodes? identities. If the receiver is compromised, all information about the other nodes is revealed. Padding keeps the size of the message constant whenever it is broadcasted by an intermediate node and that makes it difficult for adversaries to follow the message, but padding requires extra work. The excess computing required in every node for encryption/decryption makes this protocol inefficient. All nodes may need to have a connection to a CA (Certificate Authority) or other such resources to learn about other node?s public key and verify their signatures.



II. MASK is another anonymous routing protocol in MANETs. RREQ and RREP have a fixed size and fixed number of fields and routing information doesn?t add to RREQ (there is no layered Onion structure and padding). Nodes use a pseudonym instead of real identifiers in the routing process. For authentication, MASK uses pairing concept to implement anonymous authentication [2] which requires RREQ to have a different pseudonym when it goes from one node to another.

Also the source and the destination can authenticate each other based on the pseudonym they receive and defined hash functions. All nodes have to broadcast the message be it the destination node when it receives the RREQ or the source when it receives the RREP.  Authentication defined in this protocol is more secure and has less overhead than the other methods. This protocol is also resistant to several attacks like message coding attack, flow recognition and message reply attack, and timing analysis attack. The RREP type is encrypted in the message so adversaries cannot trace a RREP message to its source. Attacker cannot track RREQ and RREP in the way to destination and to the source because these messages are forwarded by destination and source as well. Too much key synchronization is needed between nodes in this protocol.

This protocol needs a trusted center to create pseudonyms for different nodes. Destination id is included in RREQ message without any encryption, and it is a pseudonym, but this pseudonym id does not change when a message is broadcasted through intermediate nodes and can reveal some information. There is less encryption and decryption in this method but creating and keeping different pseudonyms in tables in each node creates another overhead.



III. The other famous protocol is Anonymous Routing Protocol for MANET (ARM) [4]. An important aspect of this protocol is that ?a powerful passive adversary can trace the RREP message from the destination back to the source. This is because only the intermediate nodes that are assumed to forward the RREP actually do so and all the other nodes drop the RREP packet.? [4]. ARM uses pseudonym instead of real identity of source and destination. When the destination receives RREQ, it broadcasts the message as well to confuse the adversaries. On the way back to the source, when a node receives an RREP, it broadcasts the message even if it is not in the path. This protocol uses probabilistic time to leave (ttl) and padding, so it is not clear what nodes pass RREP to the source. There is less encryption in this protocol, but still every node has to do some extra computation, e.g., trying to decrypt the trapdoor or making random value for dummy messages. An adversary will be able to learn which node is the source of a fresh message, but it cannot track messages to other nodes in the path. The use of pseudonym needs coordination and synchronization between source and destination and other nodes. There are too many dummy messages forwarded between nodes in this protocol.



IV. Anonymous Secure Routing in MANETs (ASR) is another protocol. ASR argues that anonymity and security issues have to be seen together and not separately [7]. This method is similar to the Mask protocol in that the RREQ and RREP have constant size but in ASR destination identity is encrypted in RREQ. ASR uses a different equation to compute pseudonym for intermediate nodes. ASR is also similar to MASK in that it does not add routing information to the RREQ. ASR encrypts destination identification in RREQ, but each intermediate node has to do a decryption to access the destination and see if it is the last node in the path. In this protocol, there is the same data that is traveling between nodes like seq (the sequence number of the current session), and it is not encrypted.



V.   ANODR is the last protocol discussed here [6]. The feature that did not mentioned in other protocols is the route maintenance phase: the routing table entries in intermediate nodes are recycled upon a definite timeout. RREP messages carry no identifier that can be linked to the RREQ messages. This means that for a node to decide whether it has to forward a RREP or not, it has to try to decrypt it with every private key it has stored in its routing table.

Review and Challenges   Two scenarios of change in a communication help adversaries to eavesdrop information. One is change in traffic pattern. When a node (source) sends a message with RREQ type, the adversary can guess this node is the sender. When an intermediate node receives a RREQ message, and after a period of time forwards a RREQ message, the adversary can guess this node is in the path.

When a node receives a RREQ message and stops forwarding RREQ, the adversary can guess this node is the destination. On the way back to the source, when a node receives the RREP message, it forwards the message if this node is in the path otherwise drops it. The adversary can trace the RREP message and find out which nodes are in the path. The solution defined by MASK and ARM is that all nodes forward the message, including the destination when it receives RREQ, source when it receives RREP and all intermediate nodes when they receive RREP even if they are not in the path so that the adversary cannot figure out the exact place the message stopped. Two ways are offered to keep the size of the message constant. One way is    padding that adds too much overhead and the other way is keeping routing information in the nodes, not in the messages. The second method is more efficient and more secure.

The other scenario is the routing information carried in a message. If RREQ or RREP messages carry source, destination and intermediate nodes identifications, an adversary can read this information.  One solution is to encrypt routing information and add it to the message, but that needs too much encryption and decryption and uses padding to fix the size of message which is not efficient. The other solution is using pseudonyms instead of real identities and keeping routing information in nodes. In this way the size of message doesn?t change, it needs less decryption and is more secure. But still there are some fields in RREQ message that can reveal some information to adversaries like message type and message ID. Some methods suggest encrypting these two fields as well, but this creates more overhead. It means each node has to decrypt part of message to see if this message is for this node or not. Hence it is not efficient and can present an opportunity for adversaries to run duplicate message attack.

In conclusion, in the routing process, using pseudonyms instead of real identities helps to hide real identities. Pseudonyms have to be changed dynamically since traffic analysis uses the same mechanism to analyze real identifiers and pseudonyms. In addition, critical data that reveals information to attacker has to be encrypted. Having too much encryption/decryption is not efficient and creates a big overhead for the nodes that have restricted computing power. To avoid information deduction we need to keep the message size unchanged. Consequently it is better not to add routing information to RREQ message otherwise we have to pad messages to make them the same size, adding extra overheads. The last word is how to break up an anonymous communication. Since the purpose is security and privacy not ambiguous communication, everyone should not be capable of setting up an anonymous MANET.

References:  [1] C. Siva Ram Murthy, B. S. Manoj.  ?Ad Hoc Wireless Networks?, Prentice Hall, 2004.

[2] Yanchao Zhanz, Wei Liu, and Wenjing Lout.  ?Anonymous Communications in Mobile Ad  Hoc Networks?, IEEE, 2004.

[3] Azzedine Boukerche, Khalil El-Khatib, Li Xu, Larry Korba.  ?A Novel Solution for  Achieving Anonymity in Wireless Ad hoc Networks?, 2004.

[4] Stefaan Seys, Bart Preneel.  ?ARM: Anonymous Routing Protocol for Mobile Ad hoc  Networks?, 2005.

[5] Reza Shokri, Nasser Yazdani, Ahmad Khonsari.  ?Chain-based Anonymous Routing for  Wireless Ad hoc Networks?, IEEE, 2007.

[6] J. Kong and X. Hong. ?ANODR: anonymous on demand routing with untraceable routes for  mobile ad-hoc networks?, ACM, 2003.

[7] Bo Zhu, Zhiguo Wan, Mohan S. Kankanhalli, Feng Bao, Robert H. Deng. ?Anonymous  Secure Routing in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks?, IEEE, 2004.

[8] Matt Blaze, John Ioannidis, Angelos D. Keromytis, Tal Malkin, and Avi Rubin. ?WAR:  Wireless Anonymous Routing?, 2005.

[9] Michael G. Reed, Paul F. Syverson, and David M. Goldschlag.  ?Proxies for Anonymous  Routing?, 1996.

