The Modern Approach to Planning and  Implementation of Enterprise Data

Abstract  Nowadays the importance of information exchange, accumulation and processing is increasing in modern business. It is hard to imagine a big company not having tens, hundreds or even thousands terabytes of accumulated data. The server systems of the large multinational corporations demand significant costs to maintain and apply the huge amounts of the accumulated data. How these amounts of data are formed, are they really necessary, and how can they be disposed? Sooner or later any company?s management faces these questions because the storage of information requires certain expenses, which increase depending on the growing amount of data.

Keywords: OLTP (online transaction processing), DWH (data warehouse), BI (business intelligence), data mining, systems analyst, DSS (decision support system), OLAP (online analytical processing), ROLAP (relational online analytical processing), MOLAP (multidimensional online analytical processing), SQL (structured query language), Oracle BI (OBI), Microsoft SQL Server.

INTRODUCTION  To answer these questions it is essential to understand the nature of information and its content. Everything is simple concerning emails, working papers and files: if they are relevant and valuable, they are stored, otherwise they are deleted. In turn, OLTP (online transaction processing) systems contain data on completed transactions and directories necessary for the formation of these transactions. From the point of view of OLTP system the concept of transaction includes any information, generated by any system used by an enterprise for its daily activities. As an example we can consider the situation with the sale of wares in a shop. The system captures the information on each item of goods passing through checkout counter. Thus, the huge amount of  transactions is recorded in OLTP data storage, which accumulates information from all the supermarkets of the chain. Having clarified the source of the formation of data, it is necessary to consider its content. As a rule, initially any sale contains the minimum of information which is useful for analysts. For example, such minimum information may be: the date and the place of purchase, the name of the product, the amount of the sale and tax, the number of wares sold.

Having minimum information, it is worth considering how beneficial its systematization and processing can be. A quite serious analytical system can be designed on the base of the aforementioned example. This analytical system could reflect the dynamics of sales concerning the items of wares, compare the current amounts of sales with the amounts of sales of the previous periods, calculate the average purchase amount, the amount of tax paid, and other useful information.

In practice, the OLTP systems of big enterprises store much more useful information, which lets monitoring warehouse stocks, logistics, perform financial analysis and accounting, develop marketing activities, etc.

METHODS  The data is transformed in information after its representation in ordered, comprehended and focused on BI business intelligence) instruments form.

As a rule, in the majority of the organisations, there are several different groups of users that need various representation of the information. Report readers prefer to receive answers to the questions in the form of the same report that is well familiar to them. Their approaches to the analysis and to the information requirements are usually the same.

Usually, the individual help is required to this group of users to start work. The other group of users which can be defined as information browsers needs a little bit longer training to developm the means to work with data, however having the corresponding means they are able to prepare simple reports independently. Generally, they do not require the powerful         tools for the construction of the reports. Advanced users prefer to build their own queries and reports. The possibilities of the aggregated values search are important to them, as in this case they may quickly prepare reports without deepening into the details of the data model. Power users constantly put forward new demands for the data storage. They make considerable impact on all aspects of DWH (data warehouse) activity and aspire to have the information concerning data units. This group is distinguished by the most intense usage of the metadata repository and is the most interested in data mining.

One of the errors made by the developers of many DWH projects is an attempt to select the only software as a standard to all users. Usually it is better to select several instruments for different DWH users. As a result, the price of these programs will be significantly lower than time costs of system analysts.

The means of data access might also be concerned to various groups. These might be the general purpose means to manipulate the multidimensional data arrays or more complex DSS (decision support system). Data mining means are used to find the regularities in data. Data visualization means represent data in such a way, that will help to reveal these regularities.

Applications that use data from DWH and represent information to end-users are concerned to the means of OLAP (online analytical processing) group. The main reason of OLAP usage for the query processing is the working speed.

OLAP creates a DWH relation snapshot and restructures it into multidimensional model for queries. The declared time for query processing in OLAP is approximately 0.1% from similar queries in the relational database. The means that use data from the relational databases are classified as ROLAP (relational online analytical processing) instruments. ROLAP is an alternative to the MOLAP technology. While both ROLAP and MOLAP analytic tools are designed to allow the analysis of data through the use of a multidimensional data model, ROLAP differs significantly as it does not require the pre-computation and storage of information. Instead, ROLAP tools access the data in a relational database and generate SQL (structured query language) queries to calculate information at an appropriate level when the end-user requests it. The access means that use multidimensional databases are concerned to MOLAP (multidimensional online analytical processing) group. MOLAP is an alternative to the ROLAP technology.

While both MOLAP and ROLAP analytic tools are designed to allow data analysis through the use of multidimensional data model, MOLAP differs significantly as it requires the pre- computation and storage of information in the cube.

To create an analytical system an idea is needed as an integral part of a final product. The correct selection of BI instrument is the other integral part of the successful development of the project. In the modern world various analytical solutions are available from multiple vendors, the most recognized among them are Oracle, Microsoft, SAP, SAS, IBM. Globally they can be divided into off-the shelf solutions (which are installed on clients servers and adjusted to their needs) and development kits (which only provide a development environment and make  it possible to create custom solutions). Oracle?s OBIEE (Oracle Business Intelligence Enterpise Edition) can serve as an example of a off-the-shelf solution, which is necessary to integrate in the existing software environment and to adjust to the requirements of each client. Oracle BI is a business intelligence platform that delivers a full range of analytic and reporting capabilities. Designed for scalability, reliability, and performance, Oracle Business Intelligence Enterprise Edition delivers contextual, relevant and actionable insight to everyone in an organization, resulting in improved decision-making, better-informed actions, and efficient business processes.

Microsoft?s SQL Server 2008 (including SSAS, SSIS, SSRS) can be considered as an example of the development instrument, which is a quite powerful tool to create customized solutions. It is a powerful and reliable data management system that delivers a rich set of features, data protection, and performance for embedded application clients, light Web applications, and local data stores. It is designed for easy deployment and rapid prototyping.

The data storage creation is a long-term and quite expensive enterprise. Buying the data storage, analytical system or any other project, the customer wants to buy not a set of algorithms and ready procedures, but a product that allows minimizing its expenses by optimizing working processes and the quantity of workplaces. Correctly adjusted system is capable to substitute a large number of workers, freeing human and financial resources. In such a way we get to the first and, probably, the most important stage in the creation of any system.

The first stage of any system creation is its projecting.

The customer will not pay anyone for unnecessary options that do not satisfy his requirements. The system must be carefully planned and organized, thereby responding to the requests of the customer. At this stage a plan is created that is a logical structure of the system. This plan is coordinated with the customer and sooner or later after a number of long and painful negotiations is approved.

The next stage is the definition of the necessary configuration of the hardware and software. This stage is also important as without the skilfully chosen hardware and software base the created system will not be stable. As a consequence the periodic unforeseen faults in the system are possible. As a result the customer will bear losses which might be addressed to the developer of the system. Usually the contracts accompanying such projects clearly specify such nuances.

Then when everything is approved, we have the action plan; it is time to realize it. At first it is necessary to choose the team of developers, selecting the specialists with appropriate skills. In practice, the necessary number of specialists with certain (sometimes, specific) skills is not always available. Large companies with a large number of employees in different branches organize multinational groups.

Smaller companies which, as a rule, have smaller capabilities either search for corresponding personal on the labour-market or join with other developers. As large companies have enough       financial resources for their project realization they, usually, cooperate with other large companies.

When the team of developers is created and the responsibilities between them are distributed, it is possible to start the creation of the project. If the customer already possesses any data set, a part of array that is enough to develop software and to perform the test operations is taken from this data set. Then, as a rule, the end product is created as modules.

This is a long-term process that can take a long period of time depending on the desired results. Usually, the average duration of the project is defined by the time period of one or two years.

A large project may take two years or even more.

Of course, that after the creation of the system it should be tested. This is an important step in its creation as poorly working project is useless to anyone. During testing the system is checked according to many parameters. The main testing parameters are the correct operation of mechanisms that form the system as well as the tolerance to stress loads.

Correctness of the mechanisms operations means that they should work without faults. Tolerance to stress loads is a relative concept, although it might be clearly measured.

Initially the system tolerance is checked at the stress level defined by the customer (e.g. the number of transactions or connections). Then its working capabilities are checked at double load. And finally, the testing is performed at the maximum load level in order to understand when the system becomes inoperative.

The last and the final stage is system support.

Usually, after the creation of large-scale project, the customer desires to get not only the warranty of its operability but also to get its support. Generally it is a long-term cooperation which is specified for several years ahead.

Special attention should be devoted to the security question during the project development. The best approach to such question is: ?The confidential information is the information that is not defined as non-confidential information?. Developer company should thoroughly protect clients? data preventing any possibilities of the information leak. Usually, there is a set of clear instructions, the main idea of which is that in order to evade the problems it is better not to create them initially.

CONCLUSION  The choice of the software is one of the key features during the planning of the analytical system, as the functionality, licence costs, development and support costs, development perspectives depend exactly on the software choice.

The implementation of an analytical system at an enterprise is rather expensive activity that requires involvement of significant financial and human resources. If the approach is correct, the return on investment is high and fast. A correctly adjusted system is able to perform a large set of different operations repeatedly, the fulfilment of which could require the work of several departments.

Due to the automation of the calculations the cost of data processing is significantly reduced. Other advantages are as follows:  significant increase in calculation speed, increase in the availability of data (the portal of  reports can be available through the Internet), opportunity to obtain information in the real time  (during the report formation), improvement of security (the data is available only to  those staff members who have access).

The presence of the data array and the lack its usage  strategy are a good reason for the OLAP solution planning.

In the modern world, where in order to be successful  in business it is necessary to be faster, wiser and more flexible than your competitors, exactly OLAP is capable to help to achieve success.

