COMPARISON OF PHOTOVOL TAlC MODULE PERFORMANCE AT PU'U WA' A WA' A

ABSTRACT  Hawaii is experiencing a substantial increase in grid-tied PV installations and utility companies are concerned with the resulting grid management issues. To address these concerns and to enable the utilities to make informed decisions, the Hawaii Natural Energy Institute (HNEI) of the University of Hawaii initiated a PV test program that provides high-resolution data to characterize module and array performance under a variety of local climatic conditions. In the first phase of the project HNEI developed a PV test bed located at Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a ranch on the Kona coast of the Big Island of Hawaii. Initially we selected seven different PV technologies for testing consisting of poly-crystalline, mono-crystalline, amorphous, and mixed technologies. The test modules comprise 200 W units, tilted at 20?, with maximum power point trackers, via small inverters connected to the grid or via charge controllers connected to a battery and load bank. The data is sampled at 1 Hz and stored in a database for visualization and analysis. This paper presents a description of the test bed design, the high data rate Data Acquisition System (DAS), and initial experimental results.

INTRODUCTION  PV performance is very dependent on the PV module's materials, design, and environmental variables (solar radiation, temperature, cloud shadowing, wind, etc.) that make accurate prediction of the PV array performance at any instant in time, difficult. The most severe condition in PV generation is encountered when the sudden passage of a cloudbank sweeps a portion or even the entire PV array, resulting in an immediate loss of power. The negative impact of this abrupt power loss on the electrical grid's stability can be exacerbated if masking of the PV array occurs at a time of sudden change in load demand.

The utility must be able to quickly respond to these variations with its own backup generation (spinning reserve). The effect of PV on grid system dynamics will vary in severity depending on the response characteristics of individual technologies, array designs, geographic location, array size, and distribution (e.g. centralized multi? megawatt arrays vs. smaller distributed residential systems). As the penetration level at any sector of the grid increases, it will become increasingly difficult to regulate grid stability. This is already becoming a problem in Hawaii and will be further exacerbated with the push for more renewable energy systems as a result of the Hawaii Clean Energy Initiative's drive to achieve 70% renewable energy by 2030.

Further exacerbating this problem is the Hawaii electrical utility sector is comprised of small island-based grids with no interconnection between islands. The small isolated grids make it difficult to absorb power fluctuations with the result that the intermittency and variability of PV are causing major grid management issues. For grid-tied PV some utilities are now requiring newly installed inverters to accept a wider range of line frequency. On the Island of Hawaii for example, the Hawaiian Electric Light Company (HELCO) requires the inverter trip frequency to be set to 57 Hz with a 300 second clearing time [1]. The problem on the Big Island reached a point such that in February, 2010 HELCO informed the Hawaii Public Utilities Commission that it wanted to suspend adding new PV to the grid because the growing number of renewable energy systems was posing a threat to the reliability and stability of its transmission system [2]. This generated a large pubic backlash from both individuals wanting to install grid-tied PV to reduce their energy costs, and the PV installers who feared they would be driven out of business.

To address the issues associated with grid-tied PV HNEI and its partners initiated a program to deploy a number of high data rate (1 Hz data intervals) data acquisition systems to characterize the performance of PV modules, arrays and grid-tied inverters under a wide variety of local environments. Expected results of this program are: 1} establish a database for future grid assessment, control algorithm development, and other relevant engineering for public, utility, and solar industry applications, 2} develop tools for prediction of solar performance at different island locations, 3} collect data on a variety of technologies to assist developers in decision making, and 4} better understand the impact of high penetration renewables on the electric grid.

In this paper we present the first PV module test bed installed on the Big Island as a test platform for comparison side-by-side of PV modules from different technologies. We describe the module test facility, the structure of the data base and the data analysis and visualization tool. Initial module performance is also presented.

TEST BED DESCRIPTION  Figure 1 provides an image and location of the test bed.

Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a ranch is located on the Northwest side of the Island of Hawaii (Latitude: 19.77?, Longitude: -155.84?, Altitude: 686 m). The utility power available at the site is 208 Vac, 3 phases, 60 Hz.

Figure 1: Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a test bed & location  Selected PV Modules For the Puu Waa Waa test bed, we selected the top? selling modules in Hawaii. Additional test beds are planned to test other brands and technologies in. different locations throughout Hawaii. Table 1 descnbes the selected modules showing the manufacturer, part number, peak ?ower at standard ?ondi?ions (STC: irradiation 1 kW.m- , cell temperature 25 C, air mass 1.5), cost per watt in Hawaii, and the module efficiency. Module efficiency when not specified by the manufacturer is calculated by dividin? the module peak power by the sun p0v.:?r (?, kW.m- ) received by the module area at STC. The type describes the module technologies including poly? crystalline (Kyocera, BP solar), mono-crystalline (SunPower, Suntech, SolarWorld), amorphous (UNI? SOLAR), and mixed technology such as the HIT module from SANYO coupling m-Si and a-Si layers. The last 2 columns are the voltage of the maximum power point VMPP of the module and the type of MPPT used to test the module (see next section).

Power Efficiency VMPP V Company PIN W $fW (specs@ Type (specs@  STC*) STC*)  SANYO HIP- 210 $4.23 16.7% a/m-Si 41.3 210NKHA5  Suntech STP 175S- 175 $3.00 14.6% m-Si 35.2 24/Ab-1  BP solar BP175B 175 $3.00 13.9% p-Si 35.8  SolarWorl SW175-P 175 $3.60 13.4% m-Si 35.8 d  UNI- PVL-68 6.1% a-Si 33 SOLAR 2 in series 136 $4.00 (2x16.5)  SunPower SPR-215- 215 $4.88 17.3% m-Si 39.8 WHT  Kyocera KD205GX- 205 $2.57 13.8% p-Si 26.6 LPU  , , Table 1: Selected PV modules In test at Pu u Wa a Wa'a  MPPT         Figure 2 plots the module efficiency as a function of the cost as $ per Watt. This efficiency logically tends to be related to the price for most of the modules except for the a-Si module and one m-Si module. The module with best specified efficiency is the m-Si module from Sun Power having back-contact solar cells increasing the active area.

19%  17%  !. 15% ? :5 13% U  ? 11% :;  ? 9% 7%  l .woe;; (p-SI)  5%  Su Tech ?" -- -- BP Solar ,.

"on_ - - -.

- - _.- (!-iIT) SunPowe  - - -- (m-SI) - - -  I sOlarWor? (rl-<>I, I  I  Unlsolar  I (a-51)  53.50 $4.00 $4 50 55.00  Module cost ($/W)  Figure 2: Module efficiency versus cost of the selected modules  Two modules from each manufacturer were purchased anonymously through local suppliers in order to evaluate the performance of commercially available PV modules.

Maximum Power Point Trackers The selected modules are tested outdoors, tilted at 20?, in maximum power point operation in order to draw the maximum available PV power from each module at all times. This experimental set-up has already been used by other laboratories [3], [4] as it gives realistic power production for a location as opposed to the peak powe? at STC specified by the manufacturers. As the technolo.gles for small grid-tied inverters (also called module or mlcro? inverters) have drastically improved within the last couple of years [5], each module can be individually tested with a MPPT via a grid-connected inverter avoiding the cost for energy storage and reducing errors related to testing PV array with a central inverter. The ?elected ?odule inverters are from Enphase with 2 different Units as detailed in the last column of Table 1: MPPT # 1 (2) is the Enphase M210 (M190) micro inverter having a MPPT voltage ranging between 31 V and 50 V (22 V and 40 V).

Even if the Enphase micro-inverter MPP voltage ranges cover most of the standard 72-cells or 84-cells crystalline modules, some of the test modules are not on the Enphase compatibility list. For example, the UN I-SOLAR modules are not on the list but by coupling 2 in series, the combined voltage is in the M190 MPP voltage range. The last 2 modules of Table 1 were not on the list at the test bed design date. The Sun Power modules are now considered electrically compatible with the Enphase M210.

The Kyocera module is still not on the list (but pr?bably electrically compatible with the M190) and requires a different testing set-up. Additional MPPTs have been researched in order to increase the ability of our test beds to evaluate the performance of different modules regardless of their voltage levels.

The second MPPT technology tested at Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a is a charge controller MPPT250HV from BZ Products (MPPT # 3 in Table 1). The charge controller must be connected to a battery and it has two functions: 1) reach the MPP of the module and 2) avoid overcharge of the battery. The     advantage of this unit is it has a wide MPP voltage range from 20 V to 100 V. In order to always reach the MPP of the module, the battery voltage has to be maintained below its float voltage. This parameter is set on the charge controller. To do so, the battery is connected in parallel with a 2 kW TDI Power load bank XBL-100-300-2000-AIR operating at a control voltage set at 14.1 V that is below the charge controller float voltage set point. This test configuration makes the testing of a PV module more expensive and adds additional components to maintain and control. However this solution increases the test bed ability as allowing testing any module with a Vmpp between 20 V and 100 V.

A comparison between the BZ Product and Enphase MPPTs used at Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a have been conducted on the SANYO modules. Both MPPTs do not target the exact same MPP and operate differently at low irradiation. The Enphase MPPT allows slightly higher module performance. The observed gain on the daily PV efficiency when using the Enphase MPPT compared to the BZ charge controller is less than 0.5%.

Measurements for Modules and Auxiliaries Figure 3 is a schematic of the test bed including 4 DC modules tested with the charge controllers and 10 AC modules tested with the grid-tied inverters. Each module is connected to a measurement box (MB - orange rectangle) that includes sensors and signal converters to monitor the performance of the module and its auxiliary (MPPT). Each module has current and voltage measurement sensors as well as a temperature sensor attached on the center rear of the module. Each pair of modules is equipped with one solar radiation sensor (pink circle) giving information on potential local shading. The current and voltage of the 4 charge controllers, the battery and the load bank are also monitored. Finally, two AC modules are equipped with AC power transducers providing 2 signals proportional to the active and reactive power: one power meter is located in MB #14 to characterize a single inverter; the second one is located just before connection to the grid, characterizing the overall chain of the 10 inverters. Details on each measurement including sensor manufacturer, technology, signal conversion and accuracies are summarized in Table 4.

1!!?!!?I ?.il:I I !

?::;;;::F  MB: MeaSllrement box; INV: Inverter; SR: Solar ICIdiation sensor Figure 3: Schematic of Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a test bed   Some signals are converted (electrical isolation and amplification) in the MBs before being connected through wires to an analog input of the DAS located in the outdoor cabinet shown in Figure 3. The isolation is an essential step allowing any module to be grounded or floating if required by the inverter or charge controller.

Weather Station The weather station (Figure 4) collects information on the global irradiation (PYR), the ambient temperature (AT), relative humidity (RH), the wind speed (WS) and direction (WD) as well as the barometric pressure (BP). All sensors are mounted on a pole holding a measurement box (MB) powering all sensors if necessary and connecting signals to the DAS. Details on each sensor are provided in Table 4.

Data Acquisition System All MBs allow the collection of signals characterizing the performance of the PV modules and auxiliaries as a function of the weather conditions. All MBs are hardwired to the DAS located in the outdoor cabinet. The selected DAS is from National Instruments. It consists of a controller (cRIO-9024), and a chassis (NI-9114) hosting 3 modules Figure 4:  (NI-9205) to collect the analog signals Wea!her (32 analog inputs per module). The station  controller programmed with LabVIEW software 1) scans the 76 analog inputs as fast as possible (1 kHz max), 2) averages the signals to have one data per second, 3) scales the signals into values, and 4) saves the data into daily files of around 80 MB for this installation. The 1 Hz data rate was selected with our partners to allow a good understanding of transient PV performance and potential influence on the grid with a reasonable size of data files.

Calibration and Accuracy of measurements The overall accuracy of each measurement in our DAS is evaluated in Table 4. This accuracy cumulates accuracies of the sensor, signal converter and DAS. All measurement boxes connected to the PV modules have been calibrated for current, voltage and temperature. For current and voltage calibration, we used a power supply and a load bank with a second measurement set using a digital multi meter (Fluke 177). For temperature calibration, we used a calibration bath from Hart Scientific (7102 Micro Bath). For each calibration, different levels of signals were tested to cover the complete range of each sensor.

DATA BASE AND DATA ANALYSIS TOOL  One Data Base for all Hawaii PV projects Several PV monitoring stations have already been installed by HNEI and its partners including the PV arrays instrumented within the Hawaii Electric Company's SunPower for Schools project. Other PV test beds such as     Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a will be developed in different locations with diverse PV technologies. Additional PV arrays will be closely monitored to better understand cloud shading on the performance of PV arrays and central inverters.

Weather stations will also be implemented in different locations on the Hawaii islands to analyze weather patterns. Additional projects include studying the influence of the cloud cover on the light wavelengths with a spectroradiometer and using cameras or sky imagers for solar production prediction. All these installations have DASs that synchronize on the same NIST time server and create data files that are sent to a central data server for safe storage, data analysis and visualization.

Data Analysis and Visualization Tool A graphical user interface (GUI) was created under a MatLab environment for data analysis and visualization.

This data analysis and visualization tool (DA VT) has many benefits as it is easy to code, can handle data from any source, is upgradable/customizable and can be used for advanced calculations and modeling. Depending on the test stations, different amounts of data are recorded. The DA VT is able to accommodate any dataset and provides an accurate daily/monthly/geographic display focusing only on the available data. Figure 7 shows the GUI visualizing Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a experimental data. This initial version will be improved in collaboration with the data analysis requirements.

PRELIMINARY PV PERFORMANCES  Due to delays connecting to the grid at the site, only the DC modules were tested starting on April 28th 2010. The following results correspond to the performance of the DC modules (Sun Power and Kyocera) from May 2nd to May 16th, the first 2 weeks of operation. The following description highlights the wide range of information collected at Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a.

Data Analysis Tool Figure 7 shows the Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a experimental results through the MatLab DAVT. Two-day results are plotted.

The selected days correspond to the sunniest day (May 14th with a daily solar energy of 5.77 kWh.m-2) and the cloudiest day (May 16th - 2.34 kWh.m-2) of the analysis period. The average daily solar energy for the reported period is 3.55 kWh.m-2. The GUI shows the time evolution of 1) the solar radiation on the top left graph, 2) the power supplied by the first tested module (C01: SunPower) and proportional to the irradiation (top right graph), 3) the efficiency of that same module varying between 15% and 17% between dawn and dusk when transient effect creates highly variable PV efficiency (bottom left graph) and finally on the bottom right graph 4) the PV module temperature varyin? between 10?C and 50?C on May 14th or 36?C on May 16t .

PV module operation Figure 5 shows the voltage variation of the 4 DC modules and the solar radiation during May 14th, 2010. At dawn and dusk, with solar radiation below 100 W.m-2, the module   voltage varies between 15 V and 30 V for the Kyocera modules and 45 V for the SunPower modules. More stable voltages are observed at higher irradiation. Indeed, module voltage is measured close to the MPP voltage specified by the manufacturers: for the Kyocera (SunPower) modules, VMPP is 26.6 V (39.8 V) at STC and 24.8 V (37.8 V) for cell temperature at 40?C. This data provides information on the MPPT daily operation and its proper ability to reach the MPP of the modules.

900 "i E  750 ? ;  600 i '6 ..

450 E     5:30 7:30 9:30 11:30 13:30 15:30 17:30 19:30  Figure 5: Variation versus time of the voltage of the 4 DC PV modules and solar radiation during May 14th,  PV module efficiency Average performance data has been calculated by dividing the daily PV module energy production by the daily solar energy received by the module area. The result is the daily average PV efficiency for the overall test period detailed in Table 2 with the standard deviation of the values. All modules show an average efficiency very close to the efficiency specified by the manufacturer at STC with the exception of module # 3 from Kyocera showing the most deviation. This low module performance may be due to the experimental set-up, the charge controller or the module itself. This issue will be assessed during the next field trip.

Tested Module Module Standard Efficiency Configuration Company Efficiency Deviation (Specs @ STC)  C01 SunPower 16.40% 0.25% 17.3%  CO2 SunPower 16.45% 0.24%  C03 Kyocera 11.33% 0.61% 13.8%  C04 Kyocera 13.04% 0.12% - .

Table 2: Average dally PV efficiency durmg the test period for the 4 DC modules  Charge controller efficiency The average performance of the charge controllers has been evaluated calculating their daily energy production dividing by the PV production. Table 3 shows the daily average MPPT efficiency and the standard deviation during the test period. It is observed that the MPPTs look more efficient when operating with the low voltage     modules from Kyocera than when connected to the SunPower modules. The experimental results are also lower than the specifications from the supplier (> 95%).

Tested Module MPPT Standard Efficiency  Configuration Company Efficiency Deviation (Specs @  20A)  C01 SunPower 88.05% 0.91%  CO2 SunPower 88.34% 0.93% >95%  C03 Kyocera 92.53% 0.14%  C04 Kyocera 91.81% 0.42% . .

Table 3: Average dally efficiency dUring the test period for the 4 charge controllers  100%  90%  80%  !: 70% ? 60% Ii  ? 50% ... 40% 0.. 0..

? 30%  20%  10%  0%  0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 PVpower(WI  Figure 6: Charge controller efficiency as a function of PV input power (May 16th, 2010)  Figure 6 shows the efficiency of the charge controllers as a function of the PV input power, following a usual efficiency-power curve for electric converters, and reaching around 90% efficiency at maximum input power as described in Table 3. It also shows highly variable results at low PV power. The transient behavior at dusk and dawn may explain the higher average efficiency of the charge controllers when operating with the Kyocera modules, proving the necessity for careful data analysis and conclusions.

CONCLUSIONS  The Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a first test bed has been successfully commissioned. Each PV module, PV auxiliary, sensor, signal converter and DAS have been carefully selected and calibrated. Improvements on the test bed are planned with the addition of a power quality analyzer to evaluate the quality of the inverter power and correlate grid defaults to potential inverter trip off.

The data base has been designed. The MatLab data analysis and visualization tool allows visualizing the data for each test station and comparing the data recorded throughout various selected locations on the Hawaii islands. Data analysis and visualization tools will be further   developed in correlation with the data analysis requirements.

Preliminary results on the Sun Power and Kyocera modules show high module performance that is close to supplier specifications. One module seems to have a lower performance but this may be due to the experimental set-up. Charge controllers show an average efficiency around 90%. The experimental analysis points out the wide range of information collected at Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a as well as the necessity for careful data analysis.

Next generation test beds are already planned for evaluating experimental and emerging modules, arrays and auxiliaries. Weather stations, sky imagers and spectroradiometers will also be implemented. Coupled with a powerful data analysis and visualization tool, these test stations will 1) collect essential information to understand PV installation performance in Hawaii, 2) help in developing accurate simulation tools, and 3) provide the information necessary for the utility to make informed decisions on increasing the level of PV resource penetration on the grid .

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  We acknowledge funding from DOE and DOD in support of this project. We also acknowledge the support of the Hawaiian Electricity Company. Special thanks to Henk B.

Rogers and the Pu'u Wa'a Wa'a ranch team for providing a site and financially supporting the infrastructure for the test bed.

