A Model of Online Attack Detection for Computer Forensics

Abstract-With frequently network attacks, network security  products are practically impossible to guard against the  intrusion methods. A model of online attack detection for  computer forensics is proposed to collect crime evidence of  attack. In this model, an algorithm of association rules mining  is used to mine the association rules of attack event and build  the attack signature database. After gaining network data  package and pattern matching according to the protocol  analysis result of primary data, the attack behavior is detected,  and the signature database is unceasingly updated by new  attack behavior signature. The SSL encryption authentication  is used in data package transmission, which can prevent the  information leakage and falsifying, and the data remain  original. The serious attack behaviors are detected and saved  in the evidence database, which can be used as primitive  evidence for computer forensics. Simulation results show that  the algorithm of association rules mining improves the  efficiency of network attack behavior recognition. After the  new attack behavior being discovered, the safety system  integrally reconstructs the attack behavior. The model can be  used for the next forensic step.

Keywords- Network attacks; attack detection; association rule  mining; pattern match; computer forensics

I. INTRODUCTION  Along with the popularization and development of  internet, network security is confronted with more and more  severe threat. Network security products, such as firewall  and intrusion detection system, which often cause excessive  large false alarm linked to wrong correspondence, are  practically impossible to guard against the intrusion methods.

Kim and Lee used multi-class Support Vector Machines  (SVM) as one of the rule based intrusion prevention system  and anomaly detection system in order to solve these  problems [1]. 100 D and Hong T designed the anomaly  intrusion detection method based on neural network [2].

Ming-Y ang Su proposed a real-time NIDS with incremental  mining for fuzzy association rules [3]. Distinguishing new  attack behavior and network forensics are advantageous to  fundamentally solve the network attacks. Traditional  obtaining evidence methods in which data recovery  technology is used can not monitor or record attack behavior  in real-time, and the evidence which is obtained is inaccurate  and incomplete. With the development of network  technology and computer attack technology, the traditional  methods of obtaining evidence can not get the network  information, and the computer forensics demand could not  be met. Daniel Ayers proposed the use of super computers  and grid computing resources for computer forensic analysis  as the second generation forensic tool [4].



II. TYPITAL NETWORK ATTACKS AND SIGNATURE  A complete attack is usually composed of many  interdependent steps. The preceding step success occurrence  is often the latter step occurrence prerequisite. The preceding  step implementation completes can cause the next attack step  occurrence. There are often certain associations among  attack behaviors. The usual network attack processes are as  follows: first collecting the information, second the network  system reconnaissance, finally carrying on the attack with  the system vulnerability. According to the attack goal,  attacks are divided into four kinds as table 1: Denial-of  Service attacks, utilization attacks, collecting information  attacks, false news attacks [5].

TABLEr. ATTACKS TYPE AND TYPICAL ATTACK  Attacks Type Typical Attack  DoS attacks SynFlood attack, UDP flood, Fraggle attack,  E-mail bomb, ICMP attack, etc.

Utilization attacks Password guessing attacks, Trojan horse,  Buffer overflow, etc.

Collecting Port scan, Finger server, LDAP server, etc.

information attacks  False news attacks False E-mail, etc.

Each kmd of attack can manifest the different signature  in the network data package. For example, the data package  sending from some computer is frequently received in unit  time t, and the data package state flag is value A, the  SynFlood attack may be happen. The attack attempts to fully  occupy the buffer and increases the CPU load. The ports of    TCP package are alternated frequently in Port scanning  attack. In unit time t, the length of data package is larger in  ICMP attack. To the password guessing attacks, Bellovin and  Merritt showed a protocol for password-based authentication  and key agreement, which is capable of bootstrapping a high  entropy cryptographic key from a pre-shared but possibly  weak password for any two communication participants A  and B to protect the password against dictionary attacks [6].

c.c. Chang and Y.F. Chang proposed the CC protocol using  super-poly-to-one trapdoor function which requires no  certificate and can be efficiently constructed from one-way  hash functions [7]. Goyal and Kumara proposed an  authentication protocol which is easy to implement without  978-1-4244-7237-6/10/$26.00 201O IEEE V8-533   any infrastructural changes and yet prevents online  dictionary attacks, their protocol used only one way hash  functions and eliminated online dictionary attacks by  implementing a challenge response system [8].

Once the network invasion event occurred, the attack  analysis involves the massive network data, including the  host data, the network data package, the diary of network  security product like firewall or the intrusion detection  system and the other data equipment diary. The attack  behavior has own signature and there are relationship among  attack behaviors. Using data mining technology, it may  discover the specific attack related data and connect each  kind of information before the final judgment, and computer  forensics carry on to the serious criminality attacks. Some  experts proposed the design frame and the standard of  network forensics analysis tools, which core is developing  the expert system and coordinating with the  intrusion detection system or the firewall. In order to  enhance the detection system efficiency, Stephen proposed  the cyber defense trainer for network defense and computer  forensics [9]. In order to enhance the distinction efficiency to  the new criminality, Thonnard and Dacier described an  analysis framework which specifically developed to gain  insights into honey net data [10]. According to research of  the above attack and forensics, a model of online attack  detection for computer forensics is proposed.

The system gains data package from the network directly,    carries on the analysis at the same time, and unifies network  security products, such as firewall and intrusion detection  system. Then the system achieves the real-time data and  analyzes all possible attack behavior and attacker's attempt,  and adopts the measure to cut off link or lures the enemy in  deep. Finally, guaranteeing the system safety and receiving  the most massive evidence, the evidence is appraised,  preserved, submitted. The system achieves following four  targets: (1) the entire attack process is recorded  simultaneously, including capture account number, password,  IP address, MAC address, time, operation sequence and so  on. (2) It has the strict evidence protection mechanism and  can prevent from revising or deleting on the correct evidence.

(3) It has certain degree versatility and may aim at the  different types of attack to carry on essential custom-made,  especially to constitute crime behavior. (4) System can  distinguish the new attack.



III. THE MODEL OF ONLINE ATTACK DETECTION FOR  COMPUTER FORENSICS  A. System model  The model of online attack detection for computer  forensics is shown in Figure 1. The system mainly consists  of four parts: Data gaining, intrusion detection system, data  mining, data analyzing.

Figure I. The model of online attack detection for computer forensics  The main function of the system is recording the data  package of network truly and completely, analyzing to each  data package according to the protocol, and analyzing TCP,  UDP, IP, ARP, ICMP as well as the partial application layer  protocol. The system defines filtration rules in order to filter  the first floor data package, and analyzes the filtering data  according to the legal science and the information security  analysis technology. The system finally matches the pattern,  detects attack and extracts evidence. In order to establish  user unusual model, the system analyzes program execution  and user's behavior sequence associations with data mining  technology, and analyzes the signature association of crime  time, crime tool technology in the common each kind of  attack. In order to discover the new attack behavior signature,  the system extracts association signature of different attacks,  and excavates the signature of different attack form and  associations of the different evidence in the identical event.

B. Attack detection step  The system skeleton is mainly composed of the attack  computer, monitor and analyzer. The monitor has two  network cards, one network card connects monitoring  network, and the other network card connects the institute  net which the analyzer is in. Monitor records primitive  network data, gains data timely and processes preliminary to  the data. Then it analyzes network data package, deposits  and withdraws each kind of package section information  according to the definition data model. After reading the  network data and the diary which is recorded by the attack  computer, the analyzer does data mining and analyses data,  and displays some unusual data. Meanwhile it promulgates  the method of new attack and produces the new attack  signature database for next data package analysis. The  processes are described as following:  (1) The gathering system information agent on the attack  computer is started. The monitoring machine on the network  data collection module is started simultaneously.

(2) The authentication between the attack computer and  the monitor is established.

(3) The primary data from attack computer to the monitor  is transferred.

(4) The data on the monitor is signed digit.

(5) The authentication is established between the monitor  and the analyzer.

(6) The necessary data is copied from monitor to analyzer.

(7) The analyzer carries on the analysis to the data.

V8-534  2010 International Conforence on Computer Application and System Modeling (ICCASM 2010)  C. Data mining module  For each kind of attack, there is often association in  crime time, crime tool and crime technology. An unusual  model is build utilizing the association, and the model is  added into the attack signature database in order to renew the  attack signature database according to the real-time net data  for the system. The unusual model is utilized in the data  analysis of the attack detection to enhance the data analysis  accuracy and validity. For example, it can mine the rules  from the system log files, and analyze the relation of the  rules to obtain the unusual data model, and judge the current  user behavior with the unusual data model. This method    especially fits into the logic bomb attack analysis.

Association rule analysis technology discovers the useful  dependence or the related knowledge from the massive data.

The common interdependence is found at the system  signature between the procedure execution and the user  operation .For example, the illegal user often illegally  interpolates to the specific input/output data document when  he carries on the data deceit. At the stage of data analysis,  current user behavior is to judge legal or not through match  results of user behavior and association rules which are  stored in databases. From judging that the behavior has the  attack signature orland is related to some attack, attack  evidence which may be constitute crime is withdrawn. The  evidence is transmitted to the database with encryption and  feeds back to the IDS. The association rule mining  technology applies in the magnanimous data analysis to  speed up the data analysis and increase the efficiency of  detection. It also can distinguish the new attacks.

D. safety design  The system uses the SSL technology to safeguard the  data transmission security. The transmission technology  between the different equipment and the system, and the  inner system, is the SSL. The SSL creates key and certificate  by commands. The logical processing is carried on after  bidirectional identity verification between the client and the  server.

In the process, the news origin makes mistake if the  decipher is fail and the logical processing is break off. In  addition, the evidence after encryption is transmitted to the  evidence database through the VPN special line.



IV. MONITOR DESIGN  The monitor network card is set as "the promiscuous  pattern" to gain all network communication data in order to  monitor the network computer.

The monitor mainly completes the function of network  data acquisition and storage. The system is developed on the  Linux+Libpcap+MySql platform. With the library of Jpcap,  the system gathers network data and filtrates, receives the  data package directly from data link layer and saves on time  all network data stream into the MySql database. Thus, all  data current capacity which monitored is saved in the  monitor by form of primary data package and takes as    evidence in the future. The data is transported to the analyzer  and used on the line attack analysis. The concrete processes  mainly are shown as following:  (1) An execution association class jpcap.JpcapHandler is  founded. The monitor network equipment is established and  the monitor network card is set as the promiscuous patter.

(2) The network data is gathered with functions  processPacket( ) and setFilter( ), which are provided by  Jpcap. Monitor receives data package directly from data link  layer and transmits the data package with the send Package  function. The design of the data package which is stored is  shown in table 2. The invasion signature table is established  according to table 2, for example, the ARP deceit attack  signature string is set as"3=arp,4 or 3=arp,5", the "3=arp"  means that the third field value is arp in the memory package  information, namely lprotocol=arp.

TABLE II. FIELD OF DATA PACKAGE  name pid timest len Iproto sreM 9dP .. descrip  amp gth col AC  type Bigint Bigint int VARe VARe ViR: .. text  HAR HAR H'R  size 200 100 10 10 20 2) ..

Java Long Long Int String String SIrq; String  type  (3) Detailed mformatIon IS analyzed directly by class  Package and subclass IPPacket, ARPPacket. The capture  data package is classified and is judged whether it is TCP  package, UDP package, ICMP package, IP package or the  ARP package and so on.

(4) Information field is encapsulated in the entity class  after filtrating data package.

(5) The entity class is deposited to Vector set and  simultaneously saved into MySql database for the next  analysis step.

(6) The key and the certificate in the monitor and the  analyzer are leaded in, and the SSL security connection is  established.

(7) The entity class of data package in the Vector set is  send to the analyzer through the SSL transmission.



V. ANALYZER DESIGN  The analyzer backups and analyzes entity class of data  package that comes from the monitor, and displays the    abnormal data, which takes as the attack invasion evidence.

The analyzer describes the known attack forms,  establishes invasion signature, and forms the corresponding  event patterns which stored in the database. For example, the  signature of the common ARP deceit, SYN FLOOD, the  ICMP attack and so on is established. The analyzer mainly  carries on the analysis from two aspects. On one hand, in  high webpage the analyzer gains network integrated data  package and matches it with signature information table item  of network unusual data package in the database. If match,  the system sends out the warning, notices manager, and  stores connected information in the result database. On the  other hand, it analyzes logs and compares with the new  record item and diary signature information table in unusual  V8-535   databases, and then reports to the manager and stores  connected information to the result database if matched.

E. Produces the strong association rule  The association rule has the following two important  attributes: Support level peA U B), namely the probability of  the two items of collections A and B which simultaneously  appear in business collection D. Confidence level P(BIA),  namely probability that collection A appears in items of in  business collection D, items of collection B also  simultaneously display. The rules which simultaneously  satisfY the smallest support threshold value and the smallest  confidence level threshold value are called the strong rule.

Giving business collection D, the association rule mining  creates the rules whose support and confidence level is  bigger separately than the smallest support and confidence  level which the user assigns.

The first step of the algorithm is to discover all frequency  collection. These appearing frequency of items collections  are not smaller than the pre-definition minimum support. The  second step generates the strong association rule by the  frequency collection [11]. The algorithm produces frequent  record compendium in the system is shown as follows:  (I) Linklist[1 ]=creatC 1 ( dataarray);  (2) getL(\inklist, I);  (3) for(i=2; i<ll;i++) do begin  (4) Linklist[i]=getC(linklist[i-1 ],i);    (5) count(\inklist[i],i,dataarray);  (6) getL(linklist[i],i);  (7) end  Illustration: function creatCIO obtains the first candidate  collection, function getLO obtains the frequent collection,  function getCO obtains the candidate collection, function  countO calculates the record number of the candidate  collection.

The algorithm final outcomes the frequent record  compendium, which corresponds to an instance of Note class.

Its attribute significance is shown as follows: (I) Count  means the quantity of the record appearance. (2)Column is a  Vector set, which indicates the set of dimension and stores  the record field. (3)Data is a Vector set which stored  corresponding value set of field. The frequent record set  produces the strong association rules, which are stored in the  signature database.

F. pattern match to the user's behaviour  The matching process of signature character string is: the  match function "match(cha:String):Boolean" in the Note  entity class is established. Parameter "cha" which will be  matched is signature string. For example, the SYS Flood  attack matching string is "3,1O=A,5", 3 expresses the 3rd  field, "A=lO" expresses the 10th field value is" A", 5  expresses returns values of field 5, which is a Boolean type  and true value means matching. Pattern match process is  shown as follows:  (1) Signature string cha is "nl=sl, n2=s2, ... , ni> si".

(2) Signature string is disassembled to array str[i]= "  ni=si ".

(3) The "ni" whether it is in the dimension collection  columns of Note is judge. It will go to step 4 if in, otherwise  the matching process is stop and the process returns false.

(4) The matching judgment symbol possibly is " = ", ">"  or "< ". Comparing the string of character with the value if  the corresponding value of dimension "ni" from data set in  Note is " = "; Making the mathematical logic comparison if  the value is">" or"<".

(5) It returns true if the matching result is yes, otherwise  returns false and stop the matching process.

G. Case of Use  1) Port scanning attack detection    Before the aggressor carries on the attack to the  destination host, he must scan the each port of destination  host to find loophole. Aggressor must attempt to connect  each port of destination host to observe whether this kind of  service is started or not. Therefore there are many records  that a host receives multiple connections to different ports in  short period of time. In the normal condition, many  accessing services of port are prohibition and the connections  with the port are rejected, which would have much "REJ"  marks in connecting records.

The destination host Takes as the axis attribute,  simultaneously also takes the quotation attribute in order to  discover the frequent sequence pattern of the same destination  host in two seconds window time. The patterns of implicit  attacks are obtained using the frequent sequence mining.

2) SynFlood attack detection  Attacker sends massive SYN connection requests to the  destination host in short time, but each connection is half  connection in direction only. That will cause the connection  request buffer of the destination host occupied completely,  thus make the destination host unable to handle new  connection requests, and the attacker achieves the purpose  that the host will refuse to serve. This kind of situation will  display in connecting records, in short period of time, some  ports on a host can receive a number of "50" connecting state,  which means half connection. The server takes as the axis  attribute and the destination host takes as the quotation  attribute to discover the frequent sequence service pattern of  the same destination host in two seconds window time.

Using frequent sequence mining method obtain patterns of  implicit attacks, this pattern indicated that the HTTP service  of the host has encountered the SynFlood attack.



VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT AND ANALYSIS  A. Test environment  The test has built a simplification network using the  internal laboratory in campus net and the accommodations  area network.

B. Test resultt  The system has realized four functions: (I) Data collect  model receives data package from the data link layer and  saves all network data stream into the MySql database on  time. (2) The system records the attack event to analyze for    the manager. The analysis result and the suspicious data are  V8-536   stored in the result database. (3) Intrusion detection module  realized two functions: One is intrusion detection system  based on the log, another is attack detection based on the  primitive network data package. (4) The manager may query  the related data in the result database, such as IP address,  MAC address, port number, protocol type; and analyze the  saving data after the event, specially analyze the unusual  behavior in the data stream.

The analysis time slice can be set, as shown in Figure 2.

The signature of your own and the smallest support can be  also set. Partial _?!!alx?i?;j.!!!erf?ce is shown in Figure 3.

Forensics_Analyser  Figure 2. Set analysis time slice  Forensics_Analyser  .... oJ><.J. __ .... .. _oJ>'J, ........   ,-......... . , ... .

T ......... _  ,  .-, ......... " .... __ , ......... " .. ..

C:::::':':::::.::::::: :::::: ... - . ...... M 'M ,,-    _," --" -'  Figure 3. Partial analysis results

VII. CONCLUSION  Network attack examination, data security transmission  and data mining algorithm were studied, and the online  attack detection model for computer forensics is presented.

Network data collection, invasion detection based on pattern  matching technology, database saving, analysis and inquiry  of result database are combined together in this model. The  analysis of attack evidence is the important step for computer  forensics. By using pattern matching and protocol analysis  technology, the model analyses the primary data protocol,  and calls the corresponding attack signature database to  match the pattern according to the analysis result.

Association rule mining algorithm is uses to build and update  the signature database. It can reduce the number of matching  times greatly and improve the efficiency of attack detection.

The simulation result illustrates that the association rule  mining algorithm can discover the new invasion behavior,  which make the computer forensics to be initiative. The  invasion behavior is reappeared completely and the  evidences have legal attributes.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT    The authors want to thank the Natural Science  Foundation of Guangdong Province and the Science and  Technology Plan Project of Guangdong Province for their  general support for the research (with grant NO.

9151009001000043 and 0911050400004 respectively).

