Personalized Recommendation based on WAR

Abstract?Personalized recommendation is the process of customizing Web site to meet the requirement of specific user by analyzing user's browsing behavior and extracting knowledge based on Web logs. Association rules mining technology is widely adopted in this field. However, the resulting association patterns can not effectively predict user?s future browsing behavior because of the low similarity degree between resulting rules and user's browsing behavior. In this paper, we assign a weight to each item in a transaction to reflect the interest degree, which extends the traditional association rule method. We also proposed weighted association rule (WAR) through associating a weight with each item in resulting association rules. Each Web page is assigned to a weight according to interest degree and three key factors, i.e. visit frequency, stay duration and operation time. A novel personalized recommendation mechanism is presented based our proposed WAR. The weighted measurement in our personalized recommendation can be used to determine the importance of Web pages for user. We try to acquire user?s requirement more precisely so as to more useful Web pages are discovered and recommended for user.

Keywords-personalizd recommendation; weighted association rule (WAR); data mining; Web personalization

I.  INTRODUCTION In recent year?large amounts of information emerge on  the Internet. It is convenient for users to retrieve information and discover knowledge. However, the dramatic growth and rapid expansion of Internet information often make Internet users suffer from the information overload problem.

Personalization [1] is one of the promising methods to deal with this the problem. Users? visit behaviors can be analyzed to extracted knowledge, which can make the content and structure of websites to adapt to users? need.

Recently, researches on Web mining greatly facilitate us to tackle this problem. Most of developed systems in this field are based on Web usage mining [2]. Many works are very concerned about Web usage mining [3], and it is considered as the most potential method to achieve personalization [1] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8]. The knowledge to describe users? browsing behaviors is found out, which help system to personalize Web sites according to each user?s behaviors and characteristics of each individual site. Web usage mining applies common data mining technology to discovery usage patterns, forms Web data, and makes  recommendations based on them. These systems are mainly focused on analyzing Web usage logs, finding out patterns from the data and making recommendations based the extracted knowledge [5] [7] [9]. The traditional recommender systems make decision mainly based on users? clear feedbacks for different items [10] [11]. Unlike this, these technologies can discovery users? preferences from their implicit feedbacks, such as Web pages they have visited.

In this paper, we concern on the association-mining method in Web usage mining, which is widely used for data analysis [4] [6]. Association Rule (AR) mining has been successfully applied in Web page recommender systems and  Web site personalization, and it is easily to be extended to large data sets [7] [8] [11] [12]. However, the way to combine the weight of Web page with AR is never mentioned in previous studies about personalized recommender system.

Weighted Association Rules mining can distribute different weights for different items to reflect their different importance [13], and it is a viable method of AR model in the process of improving personalization. Two methods are proposed to calculate weight of itemset: total weight and average weigh. Weighted support of an itemset is defined as product of the itemset support and itemset weight [11].

Itemset weight is defined as the average weight of the items in the set. Weighted support of an itemset is defined as the ratio of weight of the transactions containing the itemset relative to weight of all transactions. Both methods are sought to allocate the larger weight to the more important items, so as to discovery important but less frequency itemsets and associated rules. However, both methods assume a fixed weight for each item is assigned, while in Web usage mining and personalized recommender system environment, a Web page may have different importance in different sessions.

In many works about recommendation based on Association rules and personalization, the time spent on each Web page has not been considered as an evaluation criterion for the importance of the Web page. In other words, all Web pages visited in user browsing mode are equally important for themselves, while ignoring the differences of Web page importance in another user session. Binary weight is used to extract matching active user with the rules in the basis of association rule [13]. Similarity measurement is combined with association rule [11]. Similarity between items is measured according to rules so as to make recommendation,   V12-108C978-1-4244-7237-6/$26.00     2010 IEEE    and then the most similar items are discovered for active users [8]. Duration is used to assign weight for each Web page, and significant itemset graph is adopted to improve the efficiency of recommendation [14].

Traditional association rules are extended in our work, each item is assigned a weight to reflect users? interests about each item in the transactions. Then a new recommendation mechanism is put forward based on the proposed weighted association rule mining method.

Operation times, visit frequency, stay duration (i.e. time spent on each Web page) are used to assign a quantitative weight to each Web page. Here, if a Web page is saved, printed, sent, edited and so on, we call it one time operation.

This paper is organized as follows: in section 2, our weighting schema is presented. We give the weighted association rule in section 3. In section 4, we propose personalized recommendation mechanism. At last, we conclude our paper in section 5.



II. WEIGHTING SCHEMA FOR WEB PAGE P={p1, p2, ..., pn} represent the set of Web pages visited  by users and stored in Web server logs, and each Web page is identified by its associated URL. We also let T={t1, t2, ..., tm} denote the set of user transactions, where ti?T and ti?P.

In order to achieve high-quality recommendation, an n- dimensional vector over Web page space is used to indicate each transaction t, and t=<(p1, ?1), (p2, ?2), ..., (pn, ?n)>, where ?i represent the weight of Web page pi in transaction t.

Here ?i also can reflect user?s interest in pi.

As the recommendation is based on previous users? behaviors, so the weight schema must be able to accurately model the user?s interest. However, the recommendation methods mentioned previously do not distinguish the importance of different Web pages. All visited Web page are treated equally regardless of whether it is useful to users or not. The difference of Web page importance is ignored and a page for each user session in the different degrees of interest.

After all, user may have different interest in each Web page in a transaction. Sometimes user finds a Web page is of no value and has no interest in it only after entering into this Web page, which makes irrelevant Web pages to be recorded in the Web logs. Therefore, it is imperfect that all visited Web pages are used equally to obtain user?s interest and predict user?s behavior. Accordingly, a weight is expected to measure user?s interest to a Web page in usage-based recommender system.

In this paper, we proposed a weighting schema, which obtains user?s interest of Web pages by calculating Web logs.

In order to measure users? interests more accurately and recommend more useful Web pages for users, three key factors, i.e. operation times, visit frequency and stay duration are used to estimate the importance of Web pages in a transaction.

Visit frequency is the number of times that a Web page is visited by different users. Obviously, users have more interest in the Web page with a higher visit frequency. When we calculate visit frequency, the number of external links and internal links of a Web page should be considered.

Clearly, a Web page with large number of external links and internal links has greater probability to be visited by users.

Thus, we normalize visit frequency F(p) as follows:  )()( )()(  pLpL pFpF  IE  total  + = .                                               (1)  Where, Ftotal(p) represents user?s total visit times of a Web page p in a transaction. LE(p) and LI(p) are the number of external links and internal links of Web page p respectively.

Stay duration is selected as one of the weighting parameters because it can reflect the relative importance of each Web page. In general, user may spend more time on more useful Web page. However, stay duration is often affected by the length of Web page. Therefore, we normalize stay duration according to the length of Web page, i.e. the total bytes of Web page. The formula of stay duration D(p) is given as follows:  )( )()( pLength  pDpD total= .                                                     (2)  Where, Dtotal(p) represents user?s real stay duration of a Web page p in a transaction. Length(p) is the total bytes of the Web page. D(p) denotes the normalized stay duration.

Operation time of Web page O(p) is the third key factor to assign weight to each Web page. O(p) is the sum of user?s operation of a Web page. The possible operations include saving, editing, copying, adding to favorites, printing, and so on. So it can be obtained as follows:  ? ?  = Pp  t pOpO )()( .                                                          (3)  Where, Ot(p) is each user?s operation time of Web page p in transaction t.

Accordingly, we assign a weight to each Web page in a transaction based on the above three factors as follows:  )()()( pOpDpF ??=? .                                           (4)

III. WEIGHTED ASSOCOATION RULE FOR RECOMMENDATION  The traditional association rule is extended in this section.

Each item in the transaction is assigned a weight to reflect user?s interest. In turn, this makes each item in a resulting association rule to association with a weight, which is called weighted association rule (WAR).

By use of WAR in electronic commerce, the products with high profit margins should be paid more attention.

WAR mining assigns different weights for different items, which can improve the performance of personalized recommendation.

V12-109    A Web page in different sessions may have different importance. So in this paper, a greater weight is assigned to a more important Web page to facilitate us to find important itemsets and association rules but with lower visit frequency and operation times.

First of all, Apriori [11] [12] is extended according to the weighted rules with association parameters described as follows.

In a transaction t, the weight of an itemset ? can be denote as ?t(?), which can be obtained by use of the average weight of all items in itemset ?:  k  k  i i  t  ? == 1)(  ? ?? .                                                               (5)  Where k is the number of items in the itemset ?.

In order to distinguishing the difference between  different transactions, the transaction weight ?(t) is defined to calculate the support of each itemset. ?(t) can be obtained as follows:  kt ???? ???= ...)( 21 .                                          (6)  Accordingly, weighted support of itemset appeared in all transaction can be calculated as follows:  ? ?  ?= Tt  ti i  i tS )()()( ????? .                                           (7)  Now we define weighted confidence of weighted association rule C?(?):  )( )()(  XS YXSYXC  ?  ? ?  ?=? .                                        (8)  Therefore, the rule r in weighted association rule mining can be described as follows:  r= <(b1, b2,?,bk), (hk+1, hk+2,?, hk+n), (?1, ?2,?,?k+n), , C?(?)> ?R  And R is the set of all weighted association rules.



IV. RECOMMENDATION MECHANISM A recommendation set can be calculated for active user  session according to association rule mining. Sliding window [14] is adopted to control the number of Web pages which match with the association rules in the session.

Therefore, it is very important to maintain a historical depth in recommender system.

In previous works [7] [11] [13], a fixed size sliding window is used in the active user session to obtain the historical depth of current user and generate recommendations.

The size of sliding window is n, and move clockwise over the active user session. Recommendation value is affected by only the last visited n Web pages. It is not appropriate to represent user?s current requirement of information by use of the earlier part of user session because most users go back and forth to find what they want when browsing a Website. However, the last visited n Web pages are treated equally in this method, which results in not distinguish the importance of Web pages for user. Therefore, only the Web pages what user is interested in are used to achieve personalized recommendation.

Despite recently visited Web pages in active user session are more suitable for recommendation, but in many cases, user will have unexpected behaviors. Sometimes, user finds a very interesting one after browsing many Web pages, and spends much time on it. And then this process is repeated.

Therefore, the weight and new degree of Web page should be taken into consideration simultaneously when personalized recommendation is made.

In order to signify Web pages in active user session, the new degree of a Web page is defined as follows:  )( 1)(  wsize pN i = .                                                          (9)  Where size(w) is the size of sliding window, and i is the location of Web page in the sliding window. 1 is assigned to the first visited Web page. Obviously, the last visited Web page has the largest new degree value. For the purpose of reflect the impact of new degree, weight of each Web page is normalized as follows:  ? =  = n  j j  i i   *  ?  ?? .                                                                  (10)  The higher user interest of a Web page, the larger the values of new degree and *i? . So the user interest degree of a Web page can be defined as follows:  *  *  )( )(2  ii  ii i pN  pN ?  ?? ?  ??= .                                                   (11)  Now an effective mechanism is given for personalized recommendation based on weighted association rules.

Weighted association rules of each URL are extracted from Web logs, the generated rules express behavior characteristics of user?s browsing on Web site. Before we make recommendations, the n weighted association rules which are most similar to active user sessions are searched out by use of similarity degree.

Each weighted association rule r (described as section 3) can be represented as a set of Web page-weight pairs. Thus, both weighted association rules and active user session are   V12-110    treated as n-dimensional vectors over the Web page space in Web site. Left side of r is denoted as vector rL={?1, ?2,?,?n} if and only if pi?rL.

The active user session is also denoted as a n- dimensional vector: E={e1, e2,?,en}. And ei is a weight association with the corresponding web page. If user has visited pi in this user session, ?(ei)= *i? ; otherwise, ?(ei)=0.

Accordingly, the similarity degree ? between active user session and weighted association rules which illustrate relationships among Web pages can be calculated as follows:  ? = +  ?= n  i ii  ii  e e  1 )( ))((2  ?? ??? .                                                 (12)  In order to determine which items are to be recommended, we also calculate a recommendation degree ? for each Web page as follows:  )(),( pXCpXE ??=? ??? .                           (13)  So the largest recommendation degree is chosen as the recommendation to the active user session.



V. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we proposed a novel personalized  recommendation mechanism based on weighted association rules (WAR) model. Each Web page is assigned to a weight to reflect its importance. The value of weight is decided by three key factors: visit frequency, stay duration and operation times. The Weighted association rules of each URL are extracted from Web logs of, and similarity degree of active user session is calculated according to WAR. Then most similar rules to the active user session with the highest weighted confidence are discovered. Finally, the largest recommendation degree is chosen as the recommendation to the active user session by evaluating each rule in terms of the similarity and weighted confidence. Our method will try to predict which Web pages are most likely to be visited by users, so it can improve the performance of personalized recommendation.

