

RUGGED OPTICAL DATA DISTRIBUTION NETWORK FOR AVIONICS Matthias Gross and Anis Husain  Ziva Corp.

San Diego, CA  Introduction There is a rapidly increasing data flow between sensors and on-board processors in avionic platforms.

Electro-optic (EO) sensors are moving to hyperspectral and radar to phased array to enable precision targeting, wide field of view surveillance and navigation.  These trends call for next generation optical network technology which has to provide increasing high speed data transmission under harsh conditions.  Recent developments go beyond simple point-to-point fiber links towards establishing optical distribution networks to deal with the data traffic [1].  A flexible and potentially low-cost implementation is the passive optical network (PON) which scales easily to increasing needs simply by upgrading the peripheral units without need to change the fiber connections and infrastructure.  PONs are well established in the commercial access market with the increasing push to fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) technologies which has led to the development of a variety of low-cost devices for these networks.  A key enabler in our development of an avionics PON is the reflective semiconductor optical amplifier (RSOA) which combines amplification and modulation into a single device [2].

The RSOA is a non-resonant device, thus wideband with the potential for ruggedness, especially high temperature operation with small or no need for cooling.  At higher data rates up to 20 Gbps a related device, the reflective electro-absorption modulator with integrated amplification (R-SOA-EAM) can be used instead.  To complete the adaptation we replaced the laser, commonly used to provide optical input power in a PON architecture with another non-resonant device, the superluminescent LED (SLED).  To create upgrade flexibility we utilized wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) which allows addition and subtraction of channels without changing hardware.  Coarse WDM (CWDM) was chosen over Dense WDM (DWDM) for two reasons: the large channel width (20nm) of CWDM reduces cost by relaxing fabrication tolerance and renders the use of temperature control unnecessary, thereby increasing reliability.  The concept and current state of development of our optical network is described in this paper.

Concept Utilizing currently available technology our rugged optical network concept has a capacity of up to 360  Gbps by operating all 18 CWDM channels at 20 Gbps over a maximal distance of 100m.  Our first demonstrator with four channels (total capacity: 10 Gbps) is shown in Figure 1 and works as described below.

Figure 1: Concept of rugged optical network  The optical power for all channels is provided by the SLED emitting into a single mode fiber, eliminating the need of a light source on the remote network end.  The wideband spectrum (60nm 3dB bandwidth) is sliced into four CWDM channels by a CWDM Mux/Demux ? each channel can be configured to transmit data forward from the central to the remote node (here channels 1 and 2) or the other way around (here channels 3 and 4).  In the forward channels the light is coupled by a circulator into an RSOA for amplification and modulation and recombined with the cw slices in a second Mux/Demux for transport to the remote node via one singlemode fiber.  At the remote end the channels are demultiplexed into separate fibers connecting to the transmitters and   2:15 PM ? 11:15 AM TuD2     receivers on that end of the network.  The forward channels contain receivers for data detection while the other channels are terminated with RSOAs which amplify the incoming light, modulate it with e.g. sensor data and reflect it back to the central node for detection.  The example shown in Figure 1 is symmetric with two channels in each direction but other configurations with three or four connections in either direction are possible simply by exchanging RSOAs and receivers in the appropriate channels.

Fabrication and Characterization To demonstrate our concept a scaled down prototype with one channel in each direction was fabricated and  characterized.  For this initial effort we used commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) parts with the electronics contained on a printed circuit board (PCB) developed for this application.  The modules are shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Prototype modules.

The sizes of the modules are 175mm x 120mm x 26mm (Central) and 175mm x 60mm x 26mm (Remote).

They both contain one transmitter including RSOA and supporting electronics, one receiver and necessary optics, while the central module additionally holds the SLED light source.  All necessary connectors are on the front panel: one optical input/output connector, two RF connector pairs for differential input/output signals and one DC connector for power supply (5V, 350mA).  The modules were tested at Double Rate Fibre Channel (2GFC ? 2.125Gbps) where a bit error rate (BER) of below 10-12 was measured over a transmission distance of 1km with a link budget of >10dB.  The maximal optical power in the system is 6dBm, making it eye safe.

Conclusion A bidirectional optical link capable of multi-Gbps data transfer was built to demonstrate the concept of an  avionics PON based on non-resonant devices only.  Replacing lasers with wideband devices such as RSOA and SLED leads to ruggedness, especially high temperature tolerance while at the same time enabling robust wavelength multiplexing into CWDM channels.  This solution is potentially low-cost by utilizing high volume FTTH COTS parts, significantly relaxed cooling requirements and reduced device count by utilization of spectral slicing.  Network design and growth is highly modular by using CWDM allowing scalability in number of channels and data rate.  The high output power of the optical devices leads to a big link budget enabling sensor data distribution to multiple boards without the need for optical-electrical-optical (OEO) conversion.

Acknowledgements This project was funded by US ARO under contract number W911NF-06-C-0085.  We acknowledge  fruitful discussions with Lockheed Martin (LM-MS2), especially Charles Kryzak and Anthony Debevec.

