Intrusion Detection System Research Based on Data Mining for IPv6

Abstract: IPv6 will inevitably take the place of IPv4 as the next  generation of the Internet Protocol. Despite IPv6 has better  security than IPv4, but there still have some security issues. So it  is an urgent problem to requirement of IDS for IPv6 networks.

Many intelligent information processing methods, data mining  technology and so on have been applied to improve detection  accuracy for IPv4 network. At first IPv6 security issues has been  analysis in this paper, secondly discussed the IPv6 intrusion  detection model, then we in accordance with such a model  present an intrusion detection model realization for IPv6 network,  and we propose a strategy for the system achieve and  optimization. The system can work well for intrusion detection  for IPv6 network.

KEYWORDS: Libpcap;data analysis;data mining;IPv6

I.  INTRODUCTION  With the vigorous development of Internet, it has  become the focus of global concern to its complexity,  accessibility and openness brought information security  issue. Intrusion detection (ID) is a type of security  management system for computers and networks. An  intrusion detection system (IDS) inspects all inbound and  outbound network activity and identifies patterns that may  indicate a network or system detects attack from someone  attempting to break into or compromise a system.

IPv6 has been definition by the IETF based on the IPv4,  with the development of its security mechanisms, network-  layer security has been enhanced, but also put forward new  demands and challenges to the existing network security  system. IDS system against IPv4networks might also affect  on an IPv6 network, but it is difficult to process new IPv6  functions and security functions such as neighbor discovery  or auto configuration, and so on.



II. IPV6 SECURITY  In this subsection we mainly concentrate on explaining    typical attacks about IPv6 protocol.

A. Misuse of ICMPv6 and multicast  Some important mechanisms in IPv6 networks, such as  neighbor discovery and path maximum-transmission-unit  discovery, are dependent on some types of ICMPv6  messages.

ICMPv6 specification also allows an error notification  response to be sent to multicast addresses (if a packet was  targeted to a multicast address). That fact can be misused by  an attacker. By sending a suitable packet to a multicast  address an attacker can cause multiple responses targeted at  the victim (the spoofed source of the multicast packet).

B. Reconnaissance attacks  Reconnaissance techniques are the same for IPv4 and  IPv6, but the subnet size in the IPv6 network is much larger  than in the IPv4 network (the default size is 64 bits).

Unfortunately, some types of multicast addresses used in  IPv6 networks can help an intruder to identify and attack  some resources in the targeted network. RFC 2375 [4]  defines a node, a link and site-specific use of multicast  addresses (e.g. all routers have a site-specific address  FF05::2).

C. Fragmentation related attacks  IPv6 protocol specification does not allow packet  fragmentation by intermediary devices. The minimum  recommended MTU size for IPv6 is 1280 octets. It is  recommended security practice to drop all fragments with  less than 1280 octets unless the packet is the last in the flow.

Using fragmentation an intruder can achieve that port  numbers are not found in the first fragment and in that way  bypass security monitoring devices (which do not  reassemble fragments) expecting to find transport layer  protocol data in the first fragment. By sending a large  number of small fragments an attacker can cause an  overload of reconstruction buffers on the target system  potentially implying a system to crash.

D. Misuse of routing headers  According to, all IPv6 nodes have to be capable of  processing routing headers. This behavior produces some  security problems. It is possible that an intruder sends a  packet to a publicly accessible address with a routing header  containing a forbidden, address (address on the victim    network). Then the publicly accessible host will forward the  packet to a destination address stated in the routing header  (forbidden address) even though that destination address  is filtered.

In summary, today the intrusion detection system for  IPv4 network, can not effectively detect IPv6 packets,  which need to achieve a new intrusion detection system  model based on IPv6 network.



III.  INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM  Detect and invasion is the central to Intrusion detection  technology, its goal is to provide detection intrusion  function, and take appropriate protective measures. It  2010 International Forum on Information Technology and Applications  978-0-7695-4115-0/10 $26.00  2010 Crown Copyright  DOI 10.1109/IFITA.2010.89   specifically includes data collection, behavior classification,  reporting errors and to respond to counter-attack, etc. In  which data can be used by a specialized network  management system (NMS) or network and system log files  to get, and data derivation and data classification is one of  the core. Data classification is a process of define attack and  identify attack. To realization this process, we have a wide  variety of technology, such as pattern matching, statistical  analysis, integrity analysis, and so on. Most of theirs is find  the differences state between states, as a way to determine  whether the system has been invaded.

There are two kinds of detection methods for network -  based intrusion detection system. it has two kinds of  detection methods: Anomaly detection and misuse detection  method. Anomaly detection method is establishment of  behavior normal standards, if behavior goes beyond the  norms defined, it will be seen as abnormal behavior. Misuse  detection is formally defined as abuses or unethical,  surreptitious, unauthorized, or illegal uses of network  services by those who attempt to mask their uses or presence  that evade the management and monitoring of network or  system administrators. Misuses of network services would  inappropriately use resources of network service providers,  compromise the confidentiality of information maintained in  network service providers, and/or prevent other users from  using the network normally and securely. Network misuse    intrusion detection systems (misuse NIDS) need increase  new kinds of attack signatures to detect malicious network  attacks. However, a very large number of features may  include a number of the current network environment  characteristics but not to need, which cause the system to  spend limit processing resources to solve characteristics of  not related, it would seriously affecting efficiency of the  system. As network traffic increases, too many features  would produce extra packet inspection, it would even affect  online protection by the system provides.

Anomaly detection based on intrusion behavior violate  the normal system behavior. One advantage of anomaly  detection is it can detect unknown attack patterns.

The paper proposed intrusion detection model based on  the data mining technology, it can scan vulnerability from  the semantic level of vulnerability, digging out the normal  behavior then do patterns compare to completion the  anomaly detection.



IV. IPV6 INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM  The work of system divided into two parts, as shown  Fig.1:    Figure 1.  Intrusion detection system mode  The first phase generate pattern mining library according  to the training data. This phase includes data analysis, data  pre-processing, pattern mining.

The second phase is detection current data according to  the model of established by the training phase, to determine  whether there is invasion. Including data analysis, data pre-  processing, pattern comparison.



V. PACKET ANALYSIS AND PRE-PROCESSING  A. A The main function framework for Analysis System  This article catch the IPv6 packets based on Libpcap. The  basic process is: The main function first opens the  corresponding network interface, and then set compile the  filtering rules, then catch packets and call the callback  function, the final closure of the corresponding equipment.

To set filtering rules as follows:  char bpf_filter_string[] = "";  If there is no character inside quotation marks, it said  they did not set the capture conditions, for all packet capture.

If we only want capture IPv6 packet, we can be set to "ip6".

The Libpcap capture packet based on BPF filters, and its  designed in order to user-level programs enable to high  efficient access the original untreated network data packets.

Libpcap only supports BPF interface kernel filter, without  the support of BPF, all data packets will be read into the user  space.

B. Association Rule Mining  Association rule discovery, the area being studied most  actively technique to investigate the possibility of  simultaneous occurrence of the data. Let I={i1,i2,,im} be  a set of literals, called items. Let D be a set of transactions,  where each transaction T is a set of items such that T?I. An  association rule is an implication of the form X?Y, where X  ? I,Y ? I,X ? Y=?. Support and confidence are used to  describe the interestingness or goodnessof a rule as  follows:  support(X?Y)=P(X?Y);  confidence(X?Y)= P(X|Y)  Original network data  Data Analysis?

Pretreatment  Pattern mining library  Pattern comparison  Current network data  Output  Data Analysis?

Pretreatment   or confidence(X?Y)=support(X?Y)/P(X).

The support of the rule X ? Y is proportion of  transactions in D that contain X?Y. The confidence of the  association rule X ? Y is the proportion of transactions  including both X and Y to all the transactions that  association that may happen only among the data that satisfy  the minimum support and minimum confidence set by the  users. All item sets that have support greater than or equal to  the user specified minimum support are generated.

C. Construction of the candidate feature attribute  There is a variety of attribute values in captured  network data packets, The basic property is {DIP, DPort,  Flag, Protocol, Service, State} by extract from the original    network data. A variety of attacks against the network, its  target usually is a host or a service. Thus, the system will  serve type and destination host IP as the primary attribute,  other attributes as a reference attribute. At the same time  account the correlation between network attack and time, the  system uses the statistical properties of time window. Early  experimental result shows (Lee 1998): For the frequent  detection port or denial of service attacks, etc., usually the  time window in 30s completed. At this time the network  state almost stabilized. Therefore, in order to increase the  main attributes impact to the pattern mining, to improve the  accuracy of intrusion detection. The system constructs time-  related primary attribute, its time window is 30s. Table 1:  Property Name Meaning  Host_count In a time window within the  target host with the current  connection records number of  same connect  Same_srv_rate At the same destination host?

its same connect to service  destination port rate  Diff_srv_rate At the same destination host?

its different connect to service  destination port rate  Same_srv_count At the same destination host?

its same connect to Service  Destination Port with currently  connected number  Srv_diff_host_rate At the same service?its  different connect to destination  host rate  TABLE I.  CANDIDATE TIME RELEVANT ATTRIBUTES  In this way, the system have 11 properties by captured  data packets and extract the properties.

D. Data Preprocessing  In association rule mining based on rough set theory,  the rough set theory mainly used in the pretreatment to  conditions attribute data, Data padded and numerical  attributes discrete. The experimental data of missing values  is very few, so we used it by direct deletion. Discretization  of numerical attributes we use Semi Native Scaler algorithm  for discrete. The specific algorithm as follows:    To each attribute value a?A, make breakpoint set Ca=?,  do the following:  1) For a all possible values as a set named Va to sort,  makes the adjacent objects xi?xi+1 follow vai?vai+1, vai,  vai+1?Va.

2) xi?xi+1 belongs to the equivalence classes its  most  number frequency to a collection of decision-making  value in the corresponding decision-making be  calculated Di?Di+1?

Di={v?Vd| v=arg maxv|{x?[xi] a|d(x)=v}|}?

Di+1={v?Vd| v=arg maxv|{x?[xj] a|d(x)=v}|}?

3) if((Di?Di+1)or (Di+1?Di))  then Ca= Ca?{(vai+ vai+1)/2}?



VI. IMPROVE ALGORITHM  We can solve the associate rule mining problem in two  steps:  1)Dig out all the frequent itemsets from transactional  database D.

2)Compute the requisite frequent association rules from  frequent itemsets.

The first step is the most difficult in the mining process.

After discovering all the frequent itemsets, it is easy to  computer the relative association rules. Algorithm Apriori is  the most effective among these mining algorithms. The  algorithm be shown as follows:  Step0. Scan the database D to find out L1.

Step1. Ck, k>1, is generated by joining the itemsets in Lk-  1. The itemsets in Ck which have some(k-1)-subset that is not  in Lk-1 are deleted.

Step2. The support of itemsets in Ck is calculated through  database scan to decide Lk.

Step3. Go to step 1 until Lk=?.

The algorithms implement a method that extracts  frequent items through scanning the transactional database  repeatedly. However, the spending for scanning the database  is so lavish that the efficiency of the algorithm databases.

Therefore, we take the interestingness into account and  improve on the basic algorithm.

In the practical application of association rules,  sometimes excavated in the rules contains some do not want  to get attributes. For example, this rule is derived: "IP  address ? MAC address" or the "Service (HTTP) ? Port    (80)". As this rule is little significance, but increased   complexity of derivation; Increase the size of the pattern  library; affecting the efficiency and accuracy of intrusion  detection. In order to improve efficiency of the algorithm,  association rules to restrict the premise and conclusion in  appear properties (set). The conclusions of the rule only  allowed appearing decision-making attributes and their  corresponding values, other attributes only allowed  appearing in the premise of rules. As this way, association  rule is to be effective rules.



VII. PATTERN COMPARISON  In the pattern comparison, after the pre-recorded the  network connection records as the user's current mode. These  connection records in rule library are called as historical  pattern. Intrusion detection process is the process of model  comparison. In the pattern comparison, we introduce the  concept of similarity level characterized the degree of accord  different behavior patterns. Similarity values range from [0,  1], the higher the value explain the greater the similarity, that  is, own the greater possibility of abnormal.

Using Similarity comparison algorithm, in the first we  assume X and Y represent the connection records as you  want to compare, X(i) express the first i attributes for X link  records (0?i+k?Length(Y)-1), defined functions Equ(i?k)  is results of the comparison for X(i) and Y(i+k). Its function  is described as follows:  F=Max[F(k)]/N?N=Max[Length(X)?Length(Y)]  Which, F(k)=?Equ(i,k); -Length(X)?k?Length(Y).

The greater the results of comparison, the greater link  records similarity. In this system, if set F is greater than 0.7,  we would considered as abnormal behavior.



VIII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  A. Experimental Design  For experimenting purposes at the Institute of Computer  Network, a small IPv6 network has been established. The  network consists of five computer. All computers have been  configured as dual-boot configurations driven by MS  Windows XP (with SP2 included) and Fedora8.0 operating  systems. Also, all computers in the experimental network  have been configured as dual-stack devices supporting both  IPv4 and IPv6 protocols.

In the described experimental network some IPv6  intrusion detection tests have been done. Different types of  DoS attacks have been performed. Through continuous  monitor network streams data in 18 hours, we get the  intrusion behavior and some normal connections. Much real  streams data are also been performed upon this model.

Experimental results and some possibilities for their  successful detection will be analyzed in next subsection.

B. Testing Result  Tests in Table 2 are done with testing data set. In order  to find the relationship between detection accuracy and  minimum supports with the same attributes, experiments are  done with data of different minimum supports. The  classifying result is shown in Table 2.

Support 0.05% 0.06% 0.07% 0.08%  True 72 70 71 69  False 28 30 29 31  Accuracy 72% 70% 71% 69%  TABLE II.  ACCURACY OF EXPERIMENTS  Time consumption is fundamental to evaluate an  algorithm. The time consumption of the two algorithms, base  Apriori algorithm and improved algorithm, is compared in  Fig.2.

0 0. 2 0. 4 0. 6 0. 8 1  Mi ni mum Suppor t  Tim  e C  ost  (ms  )  I mpr oved Apr i or i  Basi c Apr i or i    Figure 2.  Time cost of two algorithms

IX. CONCLUSION    An improved association rule discovering system under  IPv6 network has been studied in this paper. We improved  the base Apriori algorithm, this makes association rule  mining techniques applicable to IPv6 network, and achieved  good experimental results.

After analysis of experimental results found, although  data mining-based intrusion detection model has advantages  in the detection performance and universal, however, the  systems still exist the following difficulties:  1)Detection performance: The system uses anomaly  detection method than the traditional detect has higher false  detection rate;  2)Use of performance: The system requires a lot of  training data, and more complexity than traditional systems;  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  This paper is part of the project supported by Stadholder  Foundation of Guizhou Province (Grant No.2007(14)) and  Graduate Innovation Fund of Guozhou University: Research  key technologies of network management in IPv6 network  environment (Grant No.2010006). The author wishes to  express his appreciation to the supporter.

