Research and Application on Integration Model of  Coal Scientific Data Based on Ontology

Abstract?In the process of data integration, the traditional methods are difficult to solve the problems, what are the large amounts of data redundancy, faintness of Information representation, heterogeneous data and so on. The combination of emerging technology and XML-DTD technology can solve the above problem better. This paper analyzes the characteristics of gas accident of the coalfield, creating an OWL ontology model for the gas accident-related data. The model describes the gas data and its associated attributes by XML Language, making the its data flexible and diverse, describing data attributes more clearly. At the same time, semantic association rules between the concepts of ontology are described by SWRL language, and derived by Jess engine to get new data and new conclusion on the basis of Meta-data.

Thus, In addition to characteristics of the relational model, the model also has the function of semantic inferring. Real-time data based on ontology model is saved into ontology as an entity, relying on semantic reasoning. This method can greatly improve the accuracy and efficiency of gas early warning and ensure the production of coalmine safety.

Keywords-Data Integration; Ontology; SWRL Language; XML ?DTD; Association

I.  INTRODUCTION With the information age, vast amounts of data,  heterogeneous data, semantic confusion and "data island" problem led to difficulty in data integration. These problems seriously troubled experts in various fields, so that they face serious challenges in the process of data mining process. There were many similar problems in the gas accident data mining process. The aforementioned problems have attracted much attention by experts and scholars in the coalfields.

In the data integration process, the traditional relational database and mapping table successfully solved the problems of heterogeneous data and redundancy data, but there were many defects in the semantic description aspects of these methods. Relational database can only constrain data types and basic pattern of relationships, but not semantic description.

Although mapping table can establish mapping between the  different data attributes, it can solve the problem of data heterogeneity and redundancy to a certain extent. However, it is difficult to describe the semantics of data attributes and association rules.

In this article, coal domain ontology model is constructed for gas accident data. The ontology model describes the data and its attributes by XML-DTD. It will extract real-time data from the phenomena of gas, all the data saved into the ontology model as entities. Association is described with SWRL and saved into ontology model to achieve the ontology derivation.

Therefore, ontology data integration can get more comprehensive information to enhance the utilization of data, providing great convenience for the reuse of knowledge. The model provides a rational approach for the field data storage and knowledge reasoning. Experts can access to reasoning data by original data.



II. RELATED RESEARCH  A. Metadata's Role in Data Sharing The most classic definition of metadata is "data about data?.

However, experts and scholars gave different metadata descriptions at different times. Overall, the description can be divided into the following categories; one argument is metadata is the description of the data. The other argument is that metadata is the supporting information of data applications.

The two kinds of definition of Meta-data came from two angles as follows, one is to improve the data value from the point of view, the other is to improve data applications and services from the point of view. In fact, the above two statements on metadata have been reflected in the building of scientific data sharing platform in China.

Rational use of metadata can not only can thorough understanding of data sources, including the quality, format, methods and the details of processing methods, on the other hand, the user can quickly find needed information resources, and then rely on networks and other ways to obtain these data resources and make use of it so as to promote the sharing of data resources. Therefore, metadata can play an extremely important role on scientific data sharing.

Sponsors: National Science and Technology Projects  Project Name: Research on Key Technology of Coal Natural Gas Dust Disaster Monitoring and Warning System  Project Number: 2007BAK29B01   DOI 10.1109/CASoN.2010.135     B. the Concept of Ontology Since  the  90s  of  last  century,  the  concept  of  ontology  has  become Hotspot in the information systems, artificial intelligence and knowledge engineering and other related fields.

In the process of knowledge description, ontology has many unique advantages. For example, it is simple, intuitive, efficient, and its form is standardized, etc. It has a distinct advantage in describing the relationships between concepts in all the relevant areas. Therefore it has an important contribution in the information data integration and semantic description of the network.

Ontology is an integral concept of concepts, attributes that relationship, instance, axiom. The basic modeling primitives of ontology are the following five, class, relation, function, axiom and instance. Classes are usually also known as concepts.

Predicate logic and description logic is the logic basis of ontology language. It is also the basis for realization of semantic features.

C. Ontology Language Currently, the classical framework languages used to  describe ontology have Ontolingua, Cycl, Loom, Flogic. The ontology language generated based on description logic is KL- ONE. The ontology language based on Semantic Web is XOL, OIL, DAML, OWL, etc. OWL language is a kind of description language established based on XML, RDF and RDF Schema. It has a better mechanism to express the semantics. it is also the most commonly used in ontology construction description languages.

SWRL is Semantic Rules Markup Language, which is the expansion of OWL language to expand the language with a lot OWL horn clause. This article will take this language to describe the semantic rules, adding this rule into ontology, making the ontology have the ability to self-derived.

D. Ontology Tools One  of  the  soft  wares  more  commonly  used  to  construct  ontology is prot?g?. It is a kind of tools used for ontology construction based on owl + rdf + NS. It is simple, and can view the ontology structure intuitively. Prot?g?'s search function can search the global ontology. In this paper, prot?g? is used for ontology construction, ontology constructing modeling primitive were gotten by accessing to various related documents and consulting related professionals, and analyzing specific gas accidents results. Ontology is the first attempt applied in coal scientific data integration.



III. CONSTRUCTION OF GAS ACCIDENTS ONTOLOGY MODEL  A. Building UML Class Model Through researching and accessing to a large number of  relevant literatures, we know that mine gas accident has a relationship with many of situations, but the most important factors are as follows, gas state, terrain, mine ventilation and ignition source. Most of the gas safety assessment system generated its own assessment data based on these factors.

First of all, in the basis of aforementioned factors, we will determine the relationship between the concepts. Then, gas- related accident data will be collected to establish the corresponding UML class model.

Second, the gas accident related phenomenon is complex and diverse, needing to refine these phenomena. And then, we can determine the properties of the relevant data to ensure ontology concepts and rules clear. Therefore, gas accidents related phenomena classification must first be given as follows, gas outburst and gas explosion. The following factors determine gas outburst, stress potential, destruction power of coal, throwing power, gas outburst region, gas state, representation of coal strata. The following factors determine gas state, energy of gas, relative amount of gas outburst, absolute amount of gas outburst. The following factors determine representation of coal strata, angle of coal seam, thickness of strata, coefficient of coal firm, whether in the fold or break point, top rock and coal rock types. The following factors determine phenomenon of gas explosion, characteristic time of explosion, flame and air velocity, explosion temperature, explosion blast wave pressure, hermetic wall accept pressure, rate of pressure rising, gas density, explosion source. The following factors determine explosion source, energy of explosive source, and energy release rate of explosive source. Based on the above basis of classification, we can extract the data attributes from these phenomena as class primitives. On this basis, designer can design out the basic structure of ontology, and then providing basic elements for adding the association.

Modeling for collected data gas, the model shown in Figure    Figure 1 UML class model of gas data     B.  Inference Rules Described All the basic elements have been included into the UML  class model, but the four other primitives cannot be described in addition to classes. Therefore, the ontology derivation ability cannot produce a good effect.

If we want add knowledge-inference rule to ontology, we should do the work of the following aspects, at first.

Determine the basic atomic concept of ontology.

In the process of establishing ontology, all of the basic atomic concepts which ontology need are from previous UML class model. Subsequent derivation rules will be the basis of these concept nodes.

Determine the mapping between properties of ontology and properties of UML class model  The class attributes of ontology and should be correspond with class attributes of UML model.

Describe associations with SWRL and save them into ontology  The relationships and rules between above concept classes are as follows.

a) If the coal firm coefficient is greater than 0.12, the relative amount of gas outburst is less than 10m / t, gas outburst will not happen. SWRL rules described as follows.

GasRecord x   HasCoeffcient x y   swrlb: greaterThan( y,0.12)   HasPourAbsolutely x z  swrlb: lessThan( z,10) GasOutburst x  b) If  the  sum  of  stress  potential  and  energy  of  gas   is more than sum of destruction power of coal and throwing power, gas outburst will happen. SWRL rules described as follows.

GasRecord x HasCrustalStressLatentEnergy x y  HasEnergyValueGasIncludeing x z HasCoalCastEnergy x w HasCoalDestroyedEnergy x t  swrlb: add( p, y, z) swrlb: add( q, w, t) swrlb: greaterThan( p, q)  GasOutburst x  c) If absolute amount of gas outburst  is less than 50t, it will be minitype gas outburst. If absolute amount of gas outburst exist between the 50t to 100t, it will be medium-sized gas outburst. If absolute amount of gas outburst  is more than 100t, it will be large-sized gas outburst. SWRL rules described as follows.

GasRecord x HasAmountGasAbsolutelyOutburst x y swrlb:greaterThan( y, 50) MinitypeGasOutburst x  GasRecord x HasAmountGasAbsolutelyOutburst x y  swrlb: greaterThan( y, 50)  swrlb: lessThan( y, 100) Medium-sizedGasOutburst x  GasRecord x HasAmountGasAbsolutelyOutburst x y swrlb:greaterThan ( y, 100) large- sizedGasOutburst x    d) If energy of gas  is more than stress potential, gas outburst will be spontaneous gas outburst. If energy of gas  is less than stress potential, gas outburst will be crustal stress gas outburst. If the gas outburst is affected by the gravity, it will be pour gas outburst. SWRL rules described as follows.

GasRecord x HasCrustalStressLatentEnergy x y  HasEnergy ValueGasIncludeing x z swrlb: greaterThan( y, z)  CrustalStressOutburst x  GasRecord x  HasCrustalStressLatentEnergy x y HasEnergy ValueGasIncludeing x z swrlb: lessThan( y, z)       SpontaneousOutburst x  GasOutburst x WhetherGravityCause( x true) PourGasOutburst x  e) If the ignition source is present, gas concentration is greater than 3.5%, gas explosion will take place.

GasRecord x  HasGasDensity x y swrlb:greaterThan( y, 3.5)  WhetherAttractFireSource x true   GasExplosion x  The associations were saved into gas accident ontology model shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 View of Gas Accident Ontology Model     Gas accident ontology model makes each specific gas data linked with each other by concept rules. In the modeling process, the abstract natural semantics changed into the knowledge which computer can identify with describing the semantic rules. In the future development of system, the relevant ready-made semantic rules can be used. Ready-made jess inference engine can draw many conclusions and data that you want by aforementioned rules.

The ontology recorded a lot of gas data, which contained many reasoning information. The data we want can be derived by certain information and ontology rules for each real-time measurement of gas data. This information provides a reliable basis to deal with gas accident. Therefore, the seemingly unrelated gas phenomenon data can be integrated to get more reliable data and information.



IV. ONTOLOGY-BASED WARNING OF ACCIDENTS AND GAS SAFETY  A. ApplicationBackground of Ontology-based Gas Warning Gas accident has been the threat to the safety of coal  production. Currently, China has a deeper research for the mechanism of gas accident, forming a lot of related knowledge.

They play a very important role in reasoning gas accident relevant information. However, the traditional analysis patterns of gas safety warning lack of accuracy and efficiency. The basic conceptual meta-language and association rules between the concepts were described accurately by XML language and SWRL language, and then stored into the ontology model to achieve semantic ontology reasoning. Real-time data based on ontology model is restored into ontology as an entity. We can get useful information for early warning of gas, relying on semantic reasoning. Comparing with wavelet neural network and the grey system theory, this method can greatly improve the accuracy and efficiency of gas early warning and ensure the production of coal mine safety.

In coal mine safety production, gas accidents have become a problem which cannot be ignored, and seriously endanger the lives  of  miners  and  the  state  property.  The  causes  of  the accident are variable, such as gas their own state, ignition source, the factors of geological structure and so on. Random factor is inevitable, but if the monitoring equipment can monitor the underground in time, system could access and analyze it. The experts can found risks in the shortest time possibly, taking appropriate measures to reduce losses to minimum.

In the process of gas accident prediction, the data of traditional forecasting methods is not complete. Its reliability is low. Its evaluation methods are too strong subjective, and the predicted results are also non-dynamic. All of this will lead to the failure of gas early warning.

Ontology is an integral concept of concepts, attributes that relationship, instance, axiom. The basic modeling primitives of ontology are the following five, class, relation, function, axiom and instance. Classes are usually also known as concepts.

Predicate logic and description logic is the logic basis of ontology language, and it is also the basis of achievement of ontology semantic features. In the process of gas early warning,  ontology reasoning achieves self-treatment of real-time data and improves the prediction efficiency. This article will present the comparison between two kinds of most important gas warning methods and ontology-based gas warning to find the advantage of ontology-based gas warning.

B. The Process of Ontology-based Gas Accident Warning The language describing ontology is OWL language, which  is a XML-based extension language. Therefore, many data platforms provide API for OWL model to process data, save files and search files. Coal monitor equipment provides real- time gas monitor data, which will be imported into ontology model as entities. The new information can be derived from these real-time data by ontology jess engine inference. Java- based jess engine API can handle derived information and extract gas-warning data. The gas warning data can be fed back to the corresponding user interface in order to achieve the effect of real-time warning. The warning data flow as shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3 Data Flow Diagram of Gas Accident Ontology Model Warning  The traditional gas accident warning is often based on loss of accuracy and efficiency, which is a fuzzy process so that the effect of warning will be negative. Compared with the former, ontology warning is more real-time and universality, because the data importing into ontology model is real-time, which will derive more information from the process of ontology model reasoning. This information is accurate and reliable. When external conditions changed, the data importing into ontology model would also be changed into new warning information.

Ontology gas warning is accurate and reliable, because it is based on precise rules of reasoning and real-time data.



V. FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF MODEL Gas accident ontology model linked gas data with  specific concept of incident, realizing their semantic associations. It generates the links between the original data which was originally isolated, scattered, unrelated. It improves the efficiency of gas data integration and the ability to derive information. This data integration model based on ontology applied to coal scientific data integration. It provides a feasible solution for coal scientific data integration and retrieval of domain knowledge. It provides further foundation for the realization of ontology-based retrieval of scientific data sharing platform.

The amount of gas data produced in China is massive every year. This traditional way to save data is not conducive to search the data, while how to save knowledge and information is also difficult to achieve. If you use the appropriate ontology to save data, combining with description of ontology semantic can enhance the readability of natural language, all of this making use of data and knowledge extraction more intuitive and simple.

Ontology unique function adding individual make the future gas data can be added to it. With the increase of data, the correlation between the data will be more obvious. On this basis, it is very helpful to find the key incentive of gas accidents.



VI. COMPARISON BETWEEN TRADITIONAL GAS WARNING AND ONTOLOGY-BASED GAS  WARNING This article will present the comparison between two kinds  of most important gas warning methods and ontology-based gas warning to find the advantage of ontology-based gas warning.

Comparison and analysis of the ontology-based warning and wavelet neural network forecasting method  Judging from the amount of data and information, ontology model and wavelet neural network forecasting method is similar. Some data of wavelet neural network forecasting method was shown in Table 1.

However, judging from the forecast efficiency, wavelet neural network is far less than ontology model; because the neural network prediction accuracy is closely related arrangement of hidden layer. If the hidden node is small, convergence speed will be rapid and efficient. Accuracy will be reduced. The fault tolerance of wavelet neural network will be worse. In contrast, the forecast would need a very long time. It would make efficiency of early warning relatively low.

However, the gas safety-related data are varied. In this case, it is difficult to achieve real-time forecast. The way of ontology model how to deal with the data is based on the existing rules to realize self-knowledge reasoning. Ontology warning process is simple and reliable and efficient. Therefore, in order to obtain real-time monitoring results. Selecting the ontology model is a better method.

Table 4.1 Data of Wavelet Neural Network Forecasting Method  NName Unit Name Unit  the content of rock gas m3/t  the depth of coal seam m  seam thickness m coal spacing m  average daily  progress of working section  m/d daily production t/d  amount of gas  absolutely outburst  m3/min mining depth m  Comparison and analysis of the ontology-based warning and forecast of grey system theory  Despite the prediction of gray system theory is more targeted, it is some kind of data in a series of gas measured on the basis of the data value of future changes in gas disaster prediction. The reliability of gray system theory prediction is high, and its algorithm is simple, its gray generation model (first-order gray differential equation) as follows.

uax dt  dx )1()1(  (1-1)  Note: x (1) is generated sequence. It was generated through an accumulation based on original discrete data. a, u is the unknown parameter .

Judging from the amount of data generated by the gray system theory prediction, it is not more than ontology model, and this prediction can only predict some results for some data.

The most serious shortcoming of this approach is that it blurs the mining method and change of mine geological conditions.

If the mining methods and geological conditions change, the change would lead that prediction was meaningless. In contrast, ontology model predictions are real-time and more universal, because the data incoming ontology model is a real-time. The data in ontology model as reasoning to derive more information. All of the information is accurate and reliable.

When external conditions are changed, the data incoming ontology will also be changed and form new early warning information.

Ontology model method had compared with wavelet neural network method and grey system theory method. Comparison shows that the forecast of traditional gas accidents are often based on the loss of accuracy and efficiency or the fuzzy processing of problem. This will have adverse effects on the effectiveness of early warning. However, ontology-based gas     warning is based on precise reasoning rules and real-time data.

It is the accuracy and reliability.



VII. CONCLUSION The design of ontology model is a process of gradual  improvement. In the process of coal scientific data integration, the problems existing in association of several properties also need to be solved at first. The further work will be improvement of gas data properties, while we can also do further research for the rationality of association rules.

The incentive of gas accident is vague. Gas accident depends on many factors. A number of factors are usually uncertain, so it is difficult to determine the main reasons and induced probability. In the process of massive data integration, ontology has a self-derived capacity, but it is directly related to the amount of data.

