Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy based Soft Starting of DC Motor

Abstract?Soft starters is necessary for dc motors for its big starting current. This paper presents a novel neuro fuzzy based dc voltage controller which modulate the pulses width of the IGBT when the motor is starting. An ANFIS (Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inference System) model has been designed to achieve the proposed algorithm. MATLAB/SIMULINK package has been used to simulate the proposed method. Simulation results presented in this paper explain the advantages of proposed soft starting method over conventional method. The advantages of proposed method are its simplicity, stability, and accuracy and fast response.

Keywords- Soft starter, ANFIS, IGBT and dc motor.



I.  INTRODUCTION The direct-current(dc) machine is not as widely used  today as it was in the past. Nevertheless, in some place dc motors still been used because the speed-torque relationship of dc motor can be varied to almost any useful form, and its continuous operation is commonly available over a speed range of 8:1.Dc motor also can be applied where it  momentarily deliver three or more times its rated torque. The starting current of dc motor is very big if it is direct started. So only small dc motor can be direct started. For medium and high power dc motors, it is necessary to control the starting current. The soft starter based on the technology of PWM is more appropriate than other means.

If soft starters are substituted in such applications, reduction of inrush current can be achieved and on the other hand, energy saving can also be possible. Energy savings by voltage control through soft starter is achieved by reducing the core loss and copper loss [1] [2]. In soft starter fed dc motor system, smooth acceleration with reduced stress on the mechanical drive system is achieved. This is due to high starting torque hence increase the life and reliability of belts, gear boxes, chain drives, motor bearings and shafts [3].

Soft starters allow the machine to start, vary its speed and stop with minimum mechanical electric stresses on the equipment. This can be done by appropriate adjustment of the dc motor terminal voltage. However, adjusting the voltage for a given operating condition of speed and torque is not a simple task. To adjust the voltage, the pulse width of the IGBT shall be calculated for each operating condition. Some methods of closed loop control technique to achieve this have been developed and presented in [5]. In this method, speed sensor is required to acquire the signal feedback. Some researchers have  proposed and developed a method of optimal soft starting without a speed sensor in which sensing of IGBT voltages is very much required [6][7].

This paper proposes a new adaptive neuro fuzzy based soft starting strategy for modulating of the pulse width for IGBT in voltage controlled dc motor drive system. The proposed strategy is mainly operates in open loop and speed and voltage sensors are not required. In this paper simulation procedures and results have been presented for the proposed method and they have been compared with the conventional soft starter results.



II. PRINCIPLE OF SOFT STARTER A soft starter is a dc voltage controller in which the voltage  is adjusted through modulating the pulse width which control the IGBT to be on or off. Fig. 1 shows the typical schematic of a dc voltage controller or soft starter. The starting IGBT sequentially switches on and off the armature coil and the starting coil. This causes to change the voltage between the two  Fig. 1 Schematic of a soft starter of dc motor  sides of the armature coil and the starting coil, respectively to the change of the rotor currents and machine speed. Switching of IGBT are provided by micro-controller. Micro-controller allows to realize PWM regulation of IGBT. In addition the micro-controller realizes a feedback function with current sensor. Comparison of currents, measured with desirable   DOI 10.1109/iCECE.2010.796    DOI 10.1109/iCECE.2010.796     allows to close a feedback loop. After the dc motor started, the starting IGBT and the starting coil are shut off. The operating IGBT is worked.



III. ANFIS MODEL The adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) is a  fuzzy system and used in classification, modeling and control problems [9]. It is based on Takagi and Sugeno?s fuzzy if-then rules representation[7][9][11], which is different from commonly used fuzzy logic controllers [11][12].The ANFIS neuro-fuzzy system [8][10][11] uses the training data set to build the fuzzy system in which, membership functions are adjusted using the back propagation algorithm, allowing that the system learns with the data that it is modeling. A network- type structure similar to that of a neural network, which maps inputs through input membership functions and associated parameters, and then through output membership functions and associated parameters to outputs, can be used to interpret the input/output map is shown in the fig. 2.

The adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) has total four layers. Nodes in layer one are input nodes representing input linguistic variables. Nodes in layer two are membership nodes. Here, the Gaussian function is used as the membership function(MF). Each membership node is responsible for mapping an input linguistic variable into a possibility distribution for that variable. The rule nodes reside in layer three. The last layer contains the out put variable nodes. More details about ANFIS convergent theorems and the learning algorithm can be found in[6-9].

Fig. 2 Structure of ANFIS dc soft starter

IV. SYSTEM MODELING Fig. 3 shows the proposed system and which is modeled  mathematically using software package MATLAB/SIMULINK. The motor parameters are as given in tabel 1.

It is important to note that the system has a good modeling if the training set is enough representative, i.e., it has a good data distribution to make possible to interpolate all necessary values to the system?s operation. After set the number of clusters that are estimated to compose the data, the cluster?s centers are searched in an iterative way based on minimizing an objective function. This represents the distance between a data value to the cluster?s center. In this paper, the  technique of subtractive clustering has been used to estimate the number of clusters.

Table1. Parameters of given dc motor  rated voltage(V) 250 rated torque(Nm) 2375 rated current(A) 633 armature resistance(?) and inductance(L) [0.012 0.00035] field resistance(?) and inductance(L) [12 9] field-armature mutual inductance Laf(L) 0.18 total inertia J(kgm^2) 30 viscous friction coeffient Bm(Nms) 0.006216   Fig. 3 Matlab/Simulink model of soft starter of dc motor  ?. SIMULATION PROCEDURE In this paper, the ANFIS system is used at the MATLAB  environment. Its operation can be resumed in two steps: 1) The set of membership functions has to be chosen:  their number and corresponding shape.

2) The input-output training data is used by the ANFIS. It  starts making a clustering study of the data to obtain a concise and significant representation of the system's behavior.

The ANFIS model and the drive system have been implemented with MATLAB / SIMULINK package. ANFIS considers two inputs such as armature current and the previous pulse width of the motor and one output namely pulse width of the IGBT. Iterative training of the neuro fuzzy system has been done to achieve the desired output. The presence of this iteration comes from the capability of the training program to simulate the system and, after a pre-defined simulation time, to obtain the simulation results and use them to the training.

The initialization for ANFIS training was done by grid partition[9]. The training data obtained from off line simulation of the motor with different armature current and pulse width and the corresponding steady state speed was recorded for each set. The training was done for 150 epochs, after which the sum of squared error was reached to 0.006, which is within acceptable limit. The final membership functions after the training is shown in Fig. 4. It can be noted that the membership functions crowded near the rated value. This may be due to overlapping and bunching of the curves in this region. More rules are required to classify large training data.

Fig.4(a)Final membership of current functions after training.

Fig.4(b)Final membership of previous pulse width current functions after training  ?. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS   Simulation results of the proposed system are shown from Fig.5 and Fig6.

Fig.5(a) the starting speed curve with PID control     Fig.5(b) the starting current curve with PID control     Fig.6(a) the starting speed curve with ANFIS control   Fig.6(b) the starting current curve with ANFIS control   Fig.5 shows the starting current and the speed of dc motor  with conventiolal PIDcontrol. Fig.6 shows the starting current and the the speed with ANFIS control. Comparing the current curve and the pulse width of the ANFIS control and the PID control, the ANFIS control can reach the stable speed within  shorter time, and has obvious advantage than the conventional PID control system with shorter adjusting time and less over  adjustment volume.

?. CONCLUSION In this paper, a new method of controlling soft starter  fed dc motor drive system using ANFIS has been introduced.

This method has a back propagation based neuro-fuzzy structure with four layers and clusters. This model was simulated using set of data obtained by simulations. The generated data are amature current and previous pulse width patterns as inputs an their corresponding pulse width patterns as output of the ANFIS model. The results obtained by this ANFIS model shown in this paper are more accurate and this approach has solved the problem of the complexity of the online determination of the pulse width of IGBT for any operating condition.

