A novel chance model for building innovation  diffusion scenario

Abstract-In order to stay in business, nowadays companies frequently face the problem of choosing new technologies in making new products. To stay in the trend, firms need to sift out useful new technologies from available technologies to gain competitive edges. In this research, we propose a chance model to help creating an innovation diffusion scenario. Three different filtering methods were developed in this model: first, frequent knowledge and outlier were ruled out using upper bound and lower bound of rare chances which were determined by the statistical distribution of skewness. Second, a new event detection method filtered out rare but older event while maximum entropy method filtered out rare but inactive technologies. Third, the diffusion path crossing chasm was discovered and its social influence guaranteeing a successful scenario was estimated. Case study showed the trend of DVD, which followed our model to discover an innovation diffusion scenario; the weak-tie, LIETON? IT, is the diffusion path for diffusing the new technology, H-H DVD-DUAL, into the DVD-DUAL social network. Besides, our model also discovered LIETON-IT owns stronger social influence power to diffuse H-H DVD-DUAL into the social network. The experimental results evidence the usefulness of our model in building innovation diffusion scenario.

Keywords-Chance Discovery, Chance Building, Rare Association Rules Mining, Weak-Tie, Innovation Diffusion

I. INTRODUCTION  Following the economic growth, customers are apt to choose products of their preference. To catch up with this trend, firms must produce products accordingly. Furthermore, in order to provide better services, companies must realize the actual need of their target customers. This problem is achieved by analyzing the target customers' transaction using segmentation market theory.

In recent years, as more customers recognized the importance of easiness in buying products, more efforts have firms invested to overcome this managing problem. Of course, this new problem is not solved by the previous segmentation   Mu-HuaLin Department of Management Information System  National Chengchi University Taipei City, Taiwan  95356503@nccu.edu.tw  Chien-Jen Huang Department of Information Management  Aletheia University Taipei County, Taiwan  norman@mail.au.edu.tw  service scheme. Meanwhile, chain convenience stores were established to solve this problem, they were set up to better serve the lifestyle of their customers. Because the space of convenience store is limited, it could be bottleneck of running convenience stores. The management strategy here would be understanding the customers' need and put the right product in the right spot at the right timing to gain maximum profit, as the niche market does.

In today's booming web market, website connects remote customers together to form a micro market. With low fixed cost, manager of the website can post many products and bring the long tail economic effect. But before posting any product, manager needs to decide the posted items from the product long tail to keep the store beneficial. There goes the same type of problem: a firm needs to fIlter out a new and useful technology from many new technologies in making new product to gain a competitive edge.

In this study, we combine the new event model with information retrieve and association rules mining to create innovation clusters. Based on Rogers [5] innovation diffusion model, we first use association rules mining to recognize many strong heterogeneous clusters. We then search the innovation cluster to discover diffusing path(s) that connects to the strong heterogeneous clusters, like the short-cut in Small World.

Finally, we intend to discover the innovative technology that is able to diffuse into the strong heterogeneous clusters and, at the end, produce popular product. If all goes well, the firm has a chance to create innovative market and becomes leading company in the blue sea market.



II. LITERATURE REVIEW  A. Market Segmentation and Association Rules Mining  Market segmentation is a concept in economics and marketing. A market segment is a sub-set of a market made up     of customers sharing one or more characteristics that cause them to demand similar product and/or services. After a market segment has been identified (via segmentation), and targeted (in which the viability of servicing the market intended), the segment is then subject to positioning. Before positioning, the basic approach to tagging customers is to utilize historical retention data to make predictions about the concerns of active customers. The idea is to match up active customers with customers from historic retention data who share similar attributes. Observing the proverb "birds of a feather flock together", this approach based on the assumption that active customers will have similar retention outcomes as those of their comparable predecessors.

Agrawal, Imielinski and Swami [1] proposed the association rules mining to understand the customer behavior.

Let {t], t2, ... , tn} be the set of all possible transactions T. A transaction database D is a set of transactions, such that D !;;; T.

In effect, D is really a multiset of itemset. An association rule is an implication of the form X -- Y, where X c I, Y c I, and X n Y = fl. Let sup(X) be the number of transactions containing all the items in itemset X. The rule X -- Y has support of s in the transaction set D, if s = sup(xy), where XY refers to an itemset that contains all of the items in X and all of the items of Y. Alternatively, sup(X) can be expressed in relative terms, as the percentage of transactions that contain X in the dataset.

The rule X -- Y holds in the transaction set D with confidence c where c = corif(X -- y), the confidence of the rule X -- Y.

This may be expressed as sup(XY)/sup(X). Note that in the calculation of confidence, it does not matter whether support is absolute or relative.

The Apriori algorithm [2] is the most well known algorithm for mining the association rules from a transactional database, which satisfies the minimum support and confidence levels specified by users. Using this algorithm, the extracted association rules can represent the meaningful customers' behaviors. Since association rules are useful and easy to understand, there have been many successful business applications, including finance, telecommunication, marketing, and retailing ... etc,.

In reality, some items may appear more frequently while others only appear from time to time. Traditional association rules mining uses higher support to filter out noise, and treats the lower support items as noise, we will discuss the problem cause by this treatment.

B. Niche market and segmentation association rules mining  A niche market is a subset of the market on which a specific product is focusing; therefore the market niche defmes the specific product features aimed at satisfying specific market needs. In practice, product vendors and trade businesses are commonly referred as mainstream providers or narrow demographics niche market providers. Small capital providers usually opt for a niche market with narrow demographics as a measure of increasing their gain margins.

For Example in the office building area, we observed that many lunch boxes are sold with soft drinks in the convenience store at lunch time. But at time, this lunch itemset does not appear on the shelf of convenience stores located in pure  residential area. Because housewives need bread, vegetables and meat to cook lunch. In order to satisfy customers' need, managers of convenience stores have to understand the lifestyle and characteristics of their customers at every differential time. Due to limited space, there is no space to put all of needed products on the shelves. Every convenience store has to develop their niche marketing. At this time, if we use traditional association rules mining, the unique support threshold value will filter out the rare itemset, the local necessities such as lunch boxes and soft drinks sold only in the office building area may not be filtered out. In data mining, rare itemset may be obscured by common cases. Weiss [3] called this relative rarity. This means that items may not be rare in the absolute sense but are rare relative to other items.

Since rare cases may depend on the conjunction of many conditions, analyzing any single condition alone may not be interesting [3].

C. Micromarketing From association rules mining to segmentation association  rules mining, we keep narrowing down the segmentation to mine the association rules mining. Its limit is micro association rules mining. The term Micromarketing was coined in 1988 by Ross Nelson Kay as a marketing technique to describe a form of "Target" marketing that is more precise and focused than typical "Niche" Marketing techniques. As standard pricing policy, it ignores the differences in customer segments of specific stores within a regional of chain stores.

This marketing strategy appeals to specific customers or customer segments. For example, consider the association mining problem where we need to determine if there is an association between buying a food processor and buying a cooking pan [4]. The problem is that both items are rarely purchased in a supermarket. Thus, even if the two items are almost always purchased together, the association may not be found. It seems that the data mining has a lower support but higher confidence searching method, therefore, the problem is solvable.

D. Micro Marketing and Innovation Disffusion  From previous description, it can be seen that customer's satisfaction of a product is capable of improving his purchase intention. But the logic of purchasing shows the character of a customer can also influence his purchasing behavior. Here an innovation is defined as a new concept, behavior or event [5],  r never see it before J or r the new product form factory J [6], or being recognized as a novel commercial product or service [7]. Based on perceiving of new product value and risk, Rogers [8] proposed innovation diffusion concept to analyze how customer recognize the value of innovation and accept the innovation. He divides the customer into five categories: innovator, early adaptor, early majority, late majority and laggard. Holak [9] proposed a new product adoption model. In his experimental results, he demonstrated that when a customer buys the new product, he compares the similarity between the attributes of product and his consuming characters and decides whether to buy or not. From the above discussion, we find that both the attributes of new product and the consuming characters are important factors to induce consuming action.

Analyzing the micro association rules mining, if we sift out the transactions of new product, we actually just collect data from innovator and early adaptor. From previous section, when the segmentation association rules mining narrows down to micro segmentation, the transaction data of new product is very few. As in Rogers model [5], only about 16% of the customers belong to this category (innovator and early adaptor). Customers in this category are apt to buy new products. Also, based on Holak's model [9], when a micro customer appears, he preferred buying new products.

Firms are supportive to micro market if it is commercially viable. In fact, as previously described, the micromarketing is not viable for firm selling low cost products. Because the profit earned from selling these products is not enough to manage this type of marketing. There is only one thing the manager can try to develop the market from micro to niche or segmentation market, which will meet the chasm [10].

Therefore, how to cross the chasm between the early adaptor and early majority is very important. In his study, Granovetter [11] proposed the weak-tie concept and searched many weak nodes and weak links to break through the isolation between clusters. Although rare association rules mining works for lower support but higher confidence, it may be used to search the weak-tie connection. Therefore, to fmd out which weak-tie has a maximum probability to cross the chasm and to design an market growing alternative from micro market to niche market are new research topics.

E. Chance Discovery and Qualitative Chance Discovery  Ohsawa, Benson and Yachida [12] proposed KeyGraph algorithm to solve the weak-tie heterogeneous connection problem. Similar to the Apriori algorithm: The sentence base analyzing method was utilized to calculate item frequency and the frequency of item to item co-occurrence was used to format the strong association clusters. Then the connectivity for every item was calculated. The concept of KeyGraph algorithm uses heterogeneous clusters to sift out items which have lower frequency but higher connectivity connecting to the strong clusters, which are treated as the potential candidates. This process of discovering rare but important item is called chance discovery by Ohsawa [13]. Afterwards, this rare but important item is called "chance". It can help expert to recognize the chance environment. However, when we operate the chance discovery process, owing to the complexity of the data, analysts can't understand the context of the event clearly. How to reduce the information complexity becomes an important topic in chance discovery applications.

Hong [14] proposed qualitative chance discovery model to solve this problem. The association analysis was used to segment the topic in this model. First, problem of interest was designated and its attribute was used to extract the relevant data. Second, focusing on every topic in the problem space, the reduced complexity hierarchical trees were extracted to help the analyst to understand the topic. Finally, based on preferred environment, the analyst integrate the topic trees. At this moment, if a tree has a leaf connecting to other trees, this leaf is treated as a heterogeneous weak-tie (i.e., chance).

Based on specific domain knowledge, the analyst sifts out  several chance candidates from the database. The system then calculates every candidate's social value to decide which is the most executable one(s).

Though both of the two previous models use connecting logic to compare candidates' potential, neither of them employs innovation diffusion path to discuss the market growth. If the qualitative chance discovery model starts from innovation and searches weak-tie diffusion path (leaf/chance) for innovation clusters. It becomes an innovation diffusion of crossing chasm model, which would demonstrate how the micro market grows to the niche market. Next section describes how to build this model in detail.



III. METHODOLOGY  According to innovation diffusion model [5], customers are categorized to five categories, innovators, early adopters, early majority, late majority and laggards. In addition, from inside of tornado, chasm stands between the early adopters and early majority and obstructs innovative diffusion. How the early adopters cross the chasm and connect to the early majority would be our interest.

The purpose of this study is to find the early adopters. At this stage, the innovation frequency is as low as the new event.

Because the keyword DVD+RW and 2003 is the problem of interest, it is apply to the news database (Knowledge Management Winner.) 176 news are collected referring to this new event, described as following:  A. Step one: rare data sampling  Because the news frequency of innovation is relative low, the rare character is used to discover the innovation. Therefore, skewness of statistical distribution is used to determine the upper bound and lower bound of rare event.

The upper bound of rare event: the average is the upper bound of the rare. As shown in Figure 3, the horizontal axis depicts the data frequency, the vertical axis depicts the frequency, and the average is the upper bound of the rare event.

Data under the average is used to determine the lower bound of rare event. Therefore, the new average is the lower bound and data under this new average is deleted to filter out noise.

B. Step2: time and diffusion potential  After step one, collected candidates of innovation diffusion are used to decide which candidates are associated to the new event. Because the new event only attracts early adopters, the method that Wu, Hong and Huang [15] proposed is used to label frequency of every word and to estimate the new event in this step. Finally, entropy calculation [16] is used to calculate the word's diffusion potential.

E=-p -1)- log -1}- ? ( D J ( D J  Dall Dall (1)  Where DiJ stands for the co-occurrence frequency of the ith term and the jth term in document D. Dall is the number of all documents and p stands for probability function.

C. Step three: environment bUilding and social influence calculating  Only the competitions of supplier and rivalry are discussed in this study. First, the environment of every rivalry/fmn must be built. Then all environments are integrated together to form the rivalry environment. Second, based on the rivalry environment, each fmn's social position can be calculated to estimate its influence. This process is described in the following:  1) Environment building Innovative cluster formatting:  Based on the new event detection method, if a word never appear before, it is a new event. If a sentence contains a new word (event), it will be collected in the innovative cluster.

Rivalry cluster formatting:  Term of rivalry fmn are also treated as keywords. If this term appears in the same sentence, it will be collected in the rivalry cluster.

2) Influence Based on the graph of rivalry fmn environment, where VI,  v2 belong to the rivalry set V, and d(vr V2) denoted the shortest distance between VI and V2. Consider a weighed graph G with

V. When node VI can't link to node V2 directly, the diameter of cluster is set to the distance between VI and v], d(vr V2) equals to the diameter of cluster. The average path length of the whole graph is shown in the following formula.

In this study, the position of fmn i's social network is used to represent its social influence. Firm i's social position is defmed as the difference between AP Lo and AP LO-jirmi' Where AP Lo is the social network including fmn i and AP Lo.firmi is the social network not including fmn i shown in the following formula:  SC firm; = AP LG - AP LG_ firm; . (3)  If the value of SCfirmi is negative then fmn i has strong social influence power. When the value of SCfirmi is positive then fmn i's social influence is negligible.



IV. CASE STUDY  From MIC 2007 report, the yearly production of optical disk driver machine of Taiwan fmns in 2001 to 2003 was the No. 1 of the world. After 2003, HLDS (Hitachi LG Data Storage) and TSST (Toshiba Samsung Storage Technology Corporation) used strategy of cost down and patent power to decrease Taiwan fmns' market share. The purpose of this study is to help Taiwan's fmn to create an surviving innovative path. For this reason, the DVD news is collected and analyzed.

TABLE I. THE GLOBAL RANKING OF YEARLY PRODUCTION IN OPTICAL DISK DRIVER IDUSTR Y  Year 1001 1003 1004 1005  Yearly production (1000 units) 79,409 98,980 105,835 1l0,322  Global market share 37.5% 42.3% 41.7% 39.6%  Ratio of aboard production 94.4% 97.7% 98.5% 100%  Global Ranking 1 1 2 2  Year 1006 1007 1008 1005  Yearly production (1000 units) 93,355 88,671 76,971  Global market share 33.1% 29.0% 25.2%  Ratio of aboard production 100% 100% 100%  Global Ranking 2 2 2  Data source: MIC IT IS Reporter, 2004/5, 2007/4 and 200913  A. Step 0: data preparation 1. The purpose of this study is to find early adopters who  easily adopt the innovation. At this time, the innovation appearing frequency is very few, as low as the new event.

2003 news database (Knowledge Management Winner) and the keyword (DVD+-RW, CD-ROM, CD-RW and DVD ROM et al.), are used to detect the new event and 176 news are collected. After the association analysis, the result is shown as following:  Figure I. The environment of DVD industry  2. In Fig. 1, there are too much information in the associative graph, that makes the graph too complexity to understand. Therefore, to narrow down the data space on the DVD+RW is necessary. Because DVD+RW is the most hot technology at the time, to avoid the data appearing by chance, the keyword DVD+RW appears twice is set to be the criteria for sifting out the valid news. The number of valid news is thus decrease to 90.

3. These valid news are applied to the associative analysis.

The analyzed result is shown in Fig. 2. After decision maker reviewed these technologies, he finds except for DVD-DUAL and DVD-MUL TI other technologies/keywords belong to the hot technologies of DVD industry in 2003. He also fmds that only DVD-DUAL is the new technology in 2003. Therefore, he tries to focus on DVD-DUAL news for discovering new event.

Figure 2. The environment of DVD+RW industry  Step I: data sampling  In this step the system determines the upper bound and the lower bound of rare item. First, keywords are sorted by their frequencies. The average frequency (7.493) is set to be the upper bound of rare item as shown in Fig. 3. Data items hgher than the upper bound are removed. As shown in Fig. 4., the new average frequency (2.725) is the lower bound of rare item.

Finally, the system sift out the rare itemset, as shown on table II.

Figure 3. The upper bound of words  No.

I         keQUe? ? r-- . ,--  ---  Figure 4. Words between the upper bound and the lower bound  TABLE II. THE RARE ITEMSET  Item No. Item No.

OPTICAL- 9 CD-RW 17  DISK  DVD-PLAYER 10 CD-  ROM  DVD-ROM I I  OEM 19  CHIPSETS 12 CD-R 20  DVD-MULTI 13 DVD+R 21  OPTICAL- 14 12X 22  SYSTEM  DVD 15 DVD-R 23  H-H 16 SLIM 24  Step two: time and diffusion potential

I. Time: new event detection  Item  EXTRA  HD-BURN  DVD-MUL TIMEDIA- RECORDER  OPTICAL-DISK - RECORDER  DVD-DUAL-LA YER  PICK-UP-HEAD  PC  NB  After step one, the rare itemset is collected. The method proposed by Hong [15] is used to label word's frequency and to estimate the new event as shown in Fig. 5. From this experimental result, decision maker can easily find that H-H and DVD-DUAL are the new technology.

BllJ.RAV  Ho.ovo ,-  ., OVO.OUAl 1999 2002  .L OV[).MUlTl  ,." 'OIl " .. 2000 2(0, H'"  Time  Figure 5. Technology road map The upper bound of words     2. Diffusion potential: entropy calculating  Equation (1) is used to estimate the technologic entropy for deciding its diffusion potential [16]. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 6. After step 1 and step 2, the decision maker can sift out H-H easily, which is the only candidate in this case.

Entropy  0.045.----------------------  0.04 t-.------------------- 0.035 HI __ ----------------- 0.03 HI-IH.._.---=--------------  0.025 HI-IH.._.-____ --1HI-______ r--------- 0.02 HI-IH.._.-____ --1HI-________ HI-.._.-____ --1Ha--  0.015 HI-IH.._.-____ --1HI-________ HI-.._.-____ --1Ha-- 0.01 HI-II----' ____________ I--II-______ I-I..-____________ I-I._  0.005 HI-II----' ____________ I--II-______ I-I..-____________ I-I._  Figure 6. Above average entropy's words  Step 3: environment building and social influence calculating Innovative cluster formatting:  Based on new event detection method, H-H is used to sift out the valid sentences. The associative analysis is used to create the innovative cluster, as shown in Fig. 7.

3.0  LlTEON-IT  Figure 7. The environment of new technology  Rivalry cluster formatting:  The name of rivalry fIrms are treated as the keywords, sentences included these keywords are also collected. The associative analysis method is used to format and visualize the rivalry cluster. At this stage, the decision maker just wants to know the social network of DVD-DUAL in Taiwan.

Experimental result is shown in Fig. 8, where the technologic relations are hidden.

Taiwan Company  Figure 8. The social network of DVD-DUAL in Taiwan  Diffusion path analysis and Diffusion scenario:  The purpose of this study is to develop a diffusion path to cross the chasm from micro market to niche or segmentation market [10]. Granovetter [11] proposed the weak-tie concept and searched many weak nodes and weak links to break through the isolation between clusters. To create the diffusion scenario, the Innovative cluster and Rivalry cluster are fIrst combined. This combined cluster is helpful fInding the weak? tieldiffusion path to cross the chasm and to design an alternative for market growing from micro market to niche market. The combined graph is represented in Fig. 9.

In Fig. 9, the scenario shows that if the fIrm wants to grow H-H DVD-DUAL from micro market to niche market. Then LITEON-IT is a very important fIrm, because it is a pioneer in manufacturing H-H DVD-DUAL, and it is also a member of the DVD-DUAL social network. This maybe a weak-tiel diffusion path to cross the chasm. But if LITEON-IT is not important in DVD-DUAL social network, then alternative of H-H DVD-DUAL will not be accepted by other fIrms., In the next step, our model will check every fIrm's influence in DVD-DUAL social network to solve this problem.

Figure 9. The scenario of DVD-DUAL and H-H DVD-DUAL  2. Social Influence and innovative scenario  Based on Fig.S, Equation (2) is used to estimate the shortest distance between VI and V2. Equation (3) is used to calculate each fIrm's social influence power. The more negative the value of SCjirmi means a fIrm's social influence power is strong. If the value of SCjirmi is positive then its social influence power is none. The calculation result of SCjirmi value is represented on Table III.

Table III shows the ranking of fIrm's social influence, and LITEON-IT ranked as second place. This experimental result shows that in all Taiwanese fIrms, LITEON-IT is the most powerful company in DVD-DUAL social network. Therefore, it is a weak-tie/diffusion path to cross the chasm, because it has social diffusing influence to other Taiwanese fIrms in manufacturing H-H DVD-DUAL.

Concluding the case study, the new event usually has very low frequency, our model overcomes the rare and noise embedded problem to create a successful innovation diffusion scenario by three kinds of fIltering methods. First, using statistical distribution of skewness to determine the upper bound and lower bound of rareness and fIlter out the outlier and frequent knowledge. Second, new event detection method fIlters out rare but older event; maximum entropy method  fIlters out rare but not-active technology. Third, the diffusion path crossing the chasm is discovered and its social influence is estimated to guarantee a successful innovation diffusion scenario.

TABLE III. SOCIAL INFLUENCE  com SI. rank com Sf. rank  PHILIPS -0.0579 I ASUS -0.OI I9 17  LITEON-IT -0.0563 2 RICOH -0.0021 18  MEDIATEK -0.0561 3 GISH -0.0007 19  QSI -0.0551 4 CMC -0.0007 19  BTC -0.0490 5 ACTIMA -0.0007 19  HP -0.0477 6 MATSUSHITA O.O I IO 22  BENQ -0.0474 7 MEl O.O I IO 22  LITEON -0.0454 8 TEAC O.O I IO 22  SONY -0.0449 9 LG 0.01368 25  SANYO -0.0399 10 TOSHIBA 0.0137 26  HITACHI -0.0392 I I  AOPEN 0.0352 27  DELL -0.0328 12 MUSTEK 0.0352 27  HLDS -0.0286 13 MSI 0.0409 29  ACCESSTEK -0.0210 14 M-ETEL 0.13l9 30  PIONEER -0.0203 15 ITRI-EOL 0.13l9 30  ULTIMA -0.0126 16  com. :company, SI. :social influence

V. CONCLUSION  In the recent years, information technology advances in an unprecedented speed, which has a profound impact on the consumers' purchasing habit, they expect to get new product in a short cycle, far more shorter than traditional consumer product industry can support. From this point view, a fIrm must acquire new technology as fast as possible to produce the needed new product in order to maintain its market share. The decision maker in this study tried to extract new technology information from DVD industry news for the fIrm in planning its next step product. Since the most frequently reported news would cover popular products on the market, when the decision maker focused on the collected 2003 DVD industry news, he would fmd out that DVD+RW technical specifIcation was the most emphasized news in the market of 2003. If the fIrm invested into DVD+RW market without second thought, it could only segment the market and occupy a small portion of it. For this reason, like the new event detection, the frequent technologies/items are removed. And then the new technology will be found easily. After previously describing, the outlier and rare data always is the noise which must be removed, too [17]. The time analysis is used to select the new event; the diffusion potential analysis is used to guarantee the innovative technology has the chance in becoming future trend.

Experimental results pointed out that the H-H is a more innovative technology than the DVD-DUAL. In addition, the maximum entropy analyzing result also showed that H-H     belonged to a higher potential diffusion item set. The constraint of our experiment is that we only collected news in Taiwan due to the time frame, and thus, the analyzing space is restricted in Taiwan. After calculating social influence, the decision maker realized that LITEON-IT is the runner-up company in DVD industry. So it has a stronger social influence to support the H-H developing. Since all three kind of experimental results supported our model, we believe this novel model can help firms in fmding the new technological trend and bring a chance to implementing the needed technology in time and increase its competitive advantage.

