Generation of Classification Rules using Artificial  Immune System for Fault Diagnosis

Abstract- This paper presents an artificial immune system based classification rules generation for fault diagnosis of induction motors. To implement the proposed method effectively, a feature extraction and fuzzificiation processes are used for choosing fault-related attributes from motor current signals. The  idea behind the method is mainly based on both concepts of data mining and artificial immune system. Association rule set is generated using clonal selection based on confidence and support measures of each rule. Afterwards, an efficiency evaluation  method is utilized to construct memory set of classification rules.

Each rule is evaluated based on three measures, sensitivity, simplicity, and coverage, to select an optimal rule for classification. The proposed approach was experimentally  implemented on a 0.37 kW induction motor and its performance verified on various working conditions of the induction motors.

The performance results have shown that a high accuracy rate has been achieved.

Keywords- Association rule mmmg, artificial immune system, clonal selection, fault diagnosis, induction motor.



I. INTRODUCTION  Induction motors are one of the most utilized electrical machines in industrial applications. These motors play an important role in continuing of a process. A fault of an induction motor may cause a serious problem in a plant if it cannot be detected in an early stage [1]. Therefore, the preventive maintenance with fault diagnosis techniques is required to insure a continuous and safety operation of these motors. Induction motors are subject to three different types of faults. These faults include stator faults, rotor faults, and bearing faults [2].

Several diagnosis techniques have been proposed to detect and diagnose the induction motor faults, which can be found in some surveys such as [2], [3]. These techniques are based on the monitoring of vibration, temperature, motor voltage, and current signals. Vibration and thermal transducers are expensive and they should be carefully mounted to the motor.

An ideal fault diagnosis method should require a minimum amount of information obtained from the motor and determine its condition quickly in order to minimize the costs of the detection system and lost of production. The fault detection based on motor current relies on examining the fault-related frequency components in the motor current spectrum. This method, called motor current signature analysis (MCSA),    evaluates the magnitude of certain frequency components of the stator current to detect broken rotor bar faults [4], [5].

When an imbalanced machine is fed with a balanced three? phase voltage, some specific components in the power spectrum of the current are produced [6]. MCSA gives efficient results when the motor is being operated under robust load conditions, but for low load conditions the characteristic sideband components are very close to the line frequency, and the normal spectral leakage can obscure frequency components characteristic of the fault [2]. This problem can be solved by increasing the sampling rate; however, load variations during sampling may decrease the quality of the spectrum [7], [8].

When the motor is operated under no-load condition, the standard MCSA method fails to detect rotor faults. Briz et al.

[9] and Supangat et al. [10] proposed wavelet transform analysis of the startup current to detect broken rotor bar faults.

Tsoumas et al. [11] introduced a novel wavelet-based approach for detection of rotor faults in induction motors.

In order to automate the detection of faults, a number of artificial intelligence approaches to induction motor have been developed. The conventional fault diagnosis techniques have been recently replaced with artificial intelligence techniques which increase the generalization of the fault detection methods. Artificial neural networks do not require the mathematical model of a motor and has a flexibility to learn different conditions. With these features, supervised and unsupervised neural network models were proposed to detect broken rotor bar faults [4], [7], stator faults [12], and bearing faults [13]. Fuzzy logic was used to detect voltage unbalance and stator faults [14]. Aydin et al. [15] proposed an artificial inunune based model to detect broken rotor bar faults under full load condition. Cakir et al. [16] evaluated different data mining techniques such as neural networks, linear regression, M model tree, and Kstar to detect supply unbalance condition.

All data mining algorithms were applied using WEKA software. The induction motor faults were classified based on time series data mining using torque and current signal as time series [17], [18]. Artificial intelligent techniques have been intensively applied to fault diagnosis problem and good results have been obtained.

In this study, a novel artificial intelligence method is proposed for fault diagnosis of induction motors. Many feature extraction methods have been developed to detect broken rotor    bar fault under strength load conditions. Transient current was also used to detect broken rotor bars. However, there is not any method in literature to detect broken rotor bar using steady? state current under no-load condition. All proposed method depends on rotor frequency estimation. In this study, time domain based new feature extraction method is proposed to detect broken rotor bar faults under no-load condition.

Although some data mining techniques were implemented to detect different types of motor faults, it is the fIrst time that immune based classifIcation rule generation has been employed to fault diagnosis of induction motors. The basic idea of implementing artifIcial immune system is to generate association relationships between a set of features and motor condition, i.e. faulty conditions and healthy conditions, by analyzing extracted features. The rules ensured minimum confIdence and support are selected as memory cell, and then these rules are interpreted as a set of association rules, which can be used for classifIcation of motor faults.



II. ARTIFICIAL IMMUNE SYSTEM  Natural immune system consists of complex cells, molecules and organs that protect our body against foreign cells. These cells are known as pathogens. Immune system recognizes a part of these cells called as antigen. The immune system uses a huge variety of antibodies to detect these antigens [19]. These antibodies, which are proteins produced in B-cells, recognize any antigen with cell receptors. The immune system has capabilities of pattern recognition and classifIcation [20]. The immune system is able to learn the structure of the pathogens and remember these structures in self memory cells.

ArtifIcial immune system has been developed to use these functions in engineering and science problems. ArtifIcial immune system, a type of soft computing method, imitates the principles and behaviors of the human immune system. There are three fundamental models of the artifIcial immune system.

These models are clonal selection, negative selection, and artifIcial immune network models.

A. Clonal Selection ArtifIcial immune system has been successfully applied to  optimization problems with superior performance [12]. The clonal optimization method is based on the clonal selection principle. An antigen is known as any molecule that can be recognized by immune system. Clonal selection is based on the idea that only those cells that recognize the antigens are selected to proliferate [13]. Clonal optimization is different from genetic algorithm with two distinctive features. There is no crossover method in the clonal selection, and the mutation rate is proportional to the cell affmity. With these features, clonal optimization converges faster than the genetic algorithm to the optimum solution. Fig. 1 shows the schematic diagram of the clonal selection. ArtifIcial immune system algorithms have been used in many applications such as fault detection [15], optimization [20], classifIcation [21], etc. ArtifIcial immune algorithms were also applied to data mining area.

Frequent itemset was discovered by developed artifIcial immune system [22]. Instead of conventional support measure, stimulation based new support measure was specifIed.

Figure I. Schematic diagram of clonal selection.

ArtifIcial immune system model gives better results than conventional approaches for frequent item set discovery.



III. ARTIFICIAL IMMUNE BASED CLASSIFICATION RULES GENERATION FOR FAULT DIAGNOSIS  The proposed method includes three steps: obtaining and preprocessing signals, immune based rule generation, and classifIcation. In the fIrst step, the main tasks are obtaining signals from motor, feature extraction, and fuzzy membership function construction for training data set. Then, in the second step, association rules are generated using clonal selection algorithm. The memory set of useful association rules are obtained using rule fItness evaluation in each generation. The classifIer is constructed with a set of obtained rules in the last step. The schematic diagram of the proposed method is given in Fig. 2.

11 8 r ______ ? __ ?bl __ J?c _______ --  I  hI.

la Ib ? -... Feature -... extraction I I I I I  I I Signal acqulsllIon Fuzzy membership I I Signal preprocessing construction I  . . .

?----------------------_._----------------------? I Immune based Rule set I I rule generation I I I I Classification rule generation I  Rule based classification of faults  Figure 2. Schematic diagram of immune based classification rules generation.

A. Signal Preprocessing In this study, a new feature extraction method is proposed  to detect broken rotor bar faults under no-load condition. The fault related features are extracted from one-phase current signal. The obtained features can be used to separate broken rotor bar faults under full-load condition. Hilbert transform based feature extraction method is used to construct new feature signal. Mathematically, Hilbert transform of a real sequence I(t) is a convolution between original signal and lI1tt as shown in (1).

+00  HT(I(t)) =.!. J I(t) dT (1) Jr t - T  -co The analytic signal is constructed using a real signal I(t)  and its Hilbert transform as follows:  AS(t) = I(t) + jH(I(t)) = a(t)ej8(t) (2) where  a(t) = J[I 2 (t) + H 2 (t)] B(t) = arctan( I(t) / H(t))  (3)  The imaginary part of the analytical signal is a version of the original real sequence with a 90? phase shift. The advantage of the analytic signal is that all negative frequencies of the original signal have been filtered. The feature signal is constructed from the absolute value of Hilbert transform on motor phase current. This feature is given in (4).

H(I(t)) = abs(- * I(t)) (4)  1lt Hilbert transform is applied to a determined size of phase  current. This series is taken as window. Each window consists of a specified number of periods of the phase current. The window size w is determined according to (5).

- * ? * ( ) w -Isampling Is n 5  Where Isampling is sampling rate of the current signals, Is is the line frequency (50 Hz) and n is the number of periods. The features extracted from Hilbert transform are energy, maxima, skewness, kurtosis, and entropy information of the feature signal. The energy of feature signal can be mathematically computed as  w FI = LHl (6) k=1  where Hk is the kth sample of feature signal, w is the number of samples in window. The absolute maxima value of feature signal is obtained as F2 = max {IH k I, k = 1. . .w} (7)  The other two features are kurtosis and skewness parameter and they can be computed as  w L(Hk -mH)4  F3 = k=1 -3 (w-l)a? (8)   w L(Hk -mH)3  ?=? 00 (w-l)ak  where m H and cr H represent the mean and standard deviation of each window, respectively. The last feature is information entropy. After the feature signal is obtained, the symbol sequence is constructed. Given the Hilbert transform H (t), t=1,2, . . .  n, symbolization is to partition H(t) by a median over data range. The partition criterion is given in (10).

S(t) - ,t -l. . n _ {I, H(t) > median(H(t)) _  0, H(t) < median(H(t)) (10)  After symbolization, the symbol tree is constructed. The tree is composed of parallel branches which represent all possible sequences of symbols. The information entropy of tree is calculated as follows.

1 n Hs =--- LPm 10gPm logn m=1 (11)  where n is the number of symbol sequences, Pm is the probability of symbol sequence that is not equal to zero. Hs represent the information entropy of tree and its value is between zero and one. The faults are determined applying sliding window symbol sequence to extracted feature. The complexity of sliding window is based on window size and level of symbol tree [23]. The information entropy of a new window is given in (12).

L F5 = _ _ 1_(" (" Pmold-I log Pmold+1 +  log n L..J L..Jmold w W 1=1 " Pmnew+1 log Pmnew+I)+ (12) L..Jmnew w w  Lmin ternalPmin ternal logPmin ternal where n is the total number of symbol sequences. The  parameter L and w indicate the depth of symbol tree and the window size, respectively. P mold is the probability of the first i symbols for the ith level of the symbol tree in the old window, P mnew and P minterval is same parameter used for new and interval window, respectively. After the features are extracted, these features will be fuzzified using fuzzy membership functions given in Fig. 3. As shown in Fig.3 , two membership functions represent the first two features, while three membership functions is used to represent remained three features.

S B  1.0 (a) Membership (b) Membership functions  functions for F I and F 2 for F 2, F 3, F 4, and F 5  Figure 3. Fuzzy membership function for features.

B. Classification Rules Generation This section explains the implementation of the proposed  artificial immune based model for classification rule discovery. These rules are generated based on clonal selection.

Support and confidence value are two important parameters for rules evaluation. The rules that remain below a specified confidence value are eliminated. Affmity of each rule is calculated using confidence value. The evolution of the population is insured by cloning, mutation, selection, and diversity processes. The memory set is updated moving the best rules in the population. At each generation, a new measure for each rule in memory set is calculated using simplicity and completeness factors. Then, the classification accuracy is measured with obtained rule set in memory set.

The algorithm is continued until an optimal classification rule set is obtained. The proposed algorithm is given in Fig. 4. A fuzzy classification rule can be denoted by a binary string.

Each antibody in population is encoded into a binary string.

So, each antibody represents a candidate rule. Fig. 5 shows the encoding of each antibody.

Inw!1i Training data: Each training data has a featurevector and a class label minsupp, minconf, mineff: minimum thresholds for support, confidence and efficiency measures Maxiteration, n, c1onerate: parameters for clonal selection ? M:Memorv set containing the set of association rules for classification Load antigen population {D, training data} Randomly initialize antibody population (P) Repeat  Calculate affmity of each individual in population PS? select n highest confidence rules in P C? Clone PS with c10nerate CM?Mutate C Calculate affmity, support and efficiency of each rule in CM P? Replace worse individuals in P with mutated C with better  performance For each individual p in P  If( (affinity(p ?minaf) and (efficiency(p ?minefl) M?MUp  end  end  accuracy=c1assification(M,D) Until maxiteration and bestaccuracy  Figure 4. The proposed algorithm.

An antibody  Feature vector  Figure 5. Rule encoding example.

As shown in Fig. 5, a feature is expressed as two bit binary string. If the value of a feature is 00, this feature is not represented in rule. A feature takes 0 I value for S membership function. The selection process selects n highest confidence antibodies for cloning process. An classification rule R is given as: R = PI /\ P2 /\ .... /\ Pn ? c . In R, the antecedent is a conjunction of literals Ph P2, .... , Po and consequent is the class c. The clonal rate of a rule is proportional to the confidence (or affmity) of the rule. This is calculated as follows.

A n crate=round(- Lcon!(Ri?  n i=1 (13)  where A is a constant value. In order to generate better antibodies, the mutation process are applied each cloning individual. The mutation rate is equal to one bit for every rule.

In other words, when a rule is mutated, the mutated rule will differ from the parent rule only by one bit. After the mutated clone population is generated, the affmity of each individual in mutated clones will be calculated. Then the worse antibodies in old population are replaced with new mutated clones. The confidence value does not give sufficient results for evaluating the predictive accuracy of a classification rule. If only one training data matches a generated rule, the confidence value of rule is calculated as P (BIA)=lIl=IOO%. Therefore, this obtained rule by using only confidence value cannot guarantee covering of other test data sets. To improve the efficiency of a rule on training data set, a new parameter, called as efficiency, are proposed. This parameter is evaluated based on three individual parameters, namely coverage, simplicity, and sensitivity. TABLE I will be used to determine the values of coverage and sensitivity parameters for a rule represented as A=>B.

The meanings of symbols used in TABLE I are given below.

TP: Number of true positive training data satisfying A and B.

FP: Number of false positive training data satisfying A but not B.

FN: Number of false negative training data not satisfying A but satisfying B.

TN: Number of true negative training data satisfying neither A and B.

Sensitivity, coverage, and simplicity parameters are calculated as follows.

S .. .

TP  ensltlVlty = --? TP+ FP  TP Coverage = ---  TP+ FN  S? I" I Imp IClty=- N  (14)  (15)  (16)  In Simplicity calculation, N represent the number of features existed in the antecedent of a rule. The efficiency of a rule is depicted as Efficiency ( Antibody) = WI x(Sensitivity x Coverage) + w2 x Simplicity  (17)    TABLE !. CONFUSION MATRIX FOR EVALUATING A CLASSIFICATION RULE  Diagnosed consequent : ?ot B Actual consequent  B NotB TP FP FN TN  where WI and W2 are weight coefficients and they are selected as 0.8 and 0.2 in this study, respectively. In each generation of the  . ? lgorithm, u?dated memory cells are used to classify  tram?ng data. FITst, memory set is sorted according to efficIency value of each cell. Then, the rule which own the highest efficiency value is chosen as the optimal rule and utilized to classify the training data. The overall accuracy rate of the memory set is calculated as follows.

Good classifications Accuracy rate = x 100  Number of training data

IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS  (18)  The experiments are performed on an actual induction motor for our analyses. The characteristics of the three phase induction motor used in our experiment are listed in TABLE II.

The motor phase currents are saved with 3 kHz sampling frequency f?r duration 3 seconds. Tests were made in a healthy motor and m a faulty motor condition in which one and two broken rotor bars were broken by drilling. In both cases, motor signals were acquired at no-load conditions, keeping the motor shaft free, to test the feasibility of fault diagnosis method at very low slip. The used test equipment is given in Fig. 6. The healthy and faulty motor currents acquired at the sampling rate of 3 kHz are given in Fig. 7.

TABLE I!. INDUCTION MOTOR CHARACTERISTICS  Description Power Inout Voltage Full Load Current Suoolv Frequencv Number of Poles Number of Rotor bars Full Load Speed  0.37 kW Induction motor  Value 0.37 kW 380 V 1.2 A 50 Hz 1390 rpm  Data Acquisition Card  Detection and diagnosis results ._-------------------"  Figure 6. Experimental setup.

(a)  (b)  (c)  0.1  0.1  -1 ?-----':?::--?---L.-_?'--- --??_ ? o 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1  time (second) Figure 7. The current signals of healthy and fault motors at 380 V supply  voltage (brl: One broken rotor bar fault, br2: Two broken rotor bar faults).

As shown in Fig. 7, the phase currents of healthy and faulty motors are quite similar and discrimination of them may be difficult. So, these signals cannot be directly applied to classification and diagnosis of motor faults. Hilbert transform of current window is given in Fig. 8 for healthy and faulty motors. Fig. 8 shows a strong difference between each healthy and faulty condition of motor. The feature extracted from Hilbert transform are energy, maxima, skewness, kurtosis, and entropy between two consecutive windows of the feature signal. For information entropy, the symbol sequence of the feature signal is generated using (5). After the symbolization, the symbol tree is constructed. The depth of symbol tree affects the performance of the entropy. In this study, the depth of symbol tree is selected as three. The entropy is calculated applying the sliding window to Hilbert transform of phase current. Window size is taken as ten periods of the phase c?ent. The windo? size can be calculated as 600 sample usmg (5) for ten penods. The entropy results are given in Fig. 9 for ten periods.

r---?----?----?----?-----(.) rr (b)  (c)  0.9 ?. ___ L--___ L-_ ---''--------'----- o 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1  time (second)  0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 time (second)  0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 time (second)  Figure 8. The Hilbert transform of ten periods of phase current for healthy and faulty conditions.

- - 4l- - , Heatthy --.--, One broken rotor bar fautt  0.8 r-----j-----j __ Two broken rotor bar fautts  lime sample Figure 9. Information entropy for ten periods.

The training data set for 3-D representation is given in Fig.

10.

0.8 , .. ' Healthy o One broken bar ,., o g. 0.6  ? ?--,---,-??-- w 0.4  0.2  0.8  Skewness o Kurtosis  Figure 10. 3-D representation of training data set.

The system parameters used by artificial immune system are shown in Table III. The algorithm is iterated until a specified classification performance has been obtained. Fig. 11 shows the accuracy rate of rule based classifier during rule generation.

TABLE III. SYSTEM PARAMETERS OF ARTIFICIAL IMMUNE SYSTEM  Name Value Population size 40  Maxiteration 100 A 10  Minaff 0.1 MinefY 0.2 Minsup 10   100? [ i f f ..

:--------------------------------------{ oo ? [ 80 f-r' --+---?--_r--_+----  ;R 70 ?i---+----+----+-----1---?rl Qj" 1 i :: :'!-I --+---+------+---+----.?11 ? 40 ?' ?--_+--?---?--+_---  1 1 30 ?1--_+--?---?--+_--  1 1  :: ._--"----''-----<-----'---_.[ o 20 40 60 80 100  Iterations  Figure 11. Convergence speed of the algorithm.

The highest ten rules generated by artificial immune system is given in TABLE IV. As shown in TABLE IV, the efficiency value of each rule falls down when the number of features in the rule increases. TABLE V shows the classification results for different confidence values.

The minconf parameter affects the performance of the algorithm in point of number of rules and classification accuracy. Classification rules give efficient results when training data set is adequately large. Other artificial intelligence techniques such as artificial neural networks, support vector machines, and artificial immune classification also needs a large training data set. However, these techniques do not give linguistic information about condition of motor.

The proposed method adapts other types of faults by changing only membership functions. It is the first time that association rule based classification has been applied to fault diagnosis of induction motors. Another novelty of the method is that broken rotor bar faults are diagnosed under no-load condition without slip estimation and using only short-time time-domain signals.

TABLE IV.

Rules generated  CLASSIFICATION RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT CONFIDENCE VALUES  Mincof?IO% Minconf?30% Minconf? 70% 63 57 45  Correctly diagnosed 142 116 110 Wrongly diagnosed 2 28 34 Accuracy (%) 98.61 80.55 76.38  TABLE V. THE BEST TEN RULES  No Efficiency Antecedent of Rule Consequent of Rule  Fl Fl F3 F4 F5 Fault TVDe 1 0.85 B - - - S Healthy 2 0.80 - - - M S Healthy 3 0.80 - B - - S Healthy 4 0.80 - - S M - Two broken bars 5 0.77 - B S M - Two broken bars 6 0.76 - B - M S Healthy 7 0.73 - S B - M One broken bar 8 0,70 - B - S M One broken bar 9 0.66 S - S M - Two broken bars  10 0.53 - S S M B Two broken bars

V. CONCLUSIONS  An immune based classification rule generation approach to induction motor faults has been presented in this paper. The fundamental principles of the method are based on clonal selection theory of artificial immune system. A group of fuzzy rules is successfully extracted from training data set throughout clonal selection. The key point of our method lies in the design of confidence and efficiency measures comprised by simplicity, sensitivity, and coverage. The method has also the capability of dealing with complex search space of classification rules. The memory set of generated rules can be evaluated after each generation of the evolutionary process for predicting the classification accuracy. Thus, the approach integrates rule generation and selection process. Another novelty of our method is the used signal preprocessing on current signals for fault diagnosis. The short-time current monitoring is used to detect the broken rotor bar under no-load condition. The method does not need the slip computation.

The performance evaluation results have shown that the proposed approach has achieved good accuracy and runtime.

