Study and Analysis of Data Mining Technology in College Courses

Abstract-This article based on the basic situation of college students' current performance management and elective guidance, introduce the knowledge of data mining, and select the association rules mining algorithm using in the analysis of students failed courses. Find the Associated factors affecting students achievement factors, and provide decision support information for educators. So promote to carry out the intervention scientifically, and improve education quality and the scientific level of University Students work.

Keywords-Data Mining; college; course; Score; Decision

I. INTRODUCTION  Higher Education undertakes the mojore task of training highly qualified specialistsdepveloping science&technology culture and promoting modernization.

Improve the quality is a core mission of the development of higher education development, and it is the basic requirements of constructing our higher education.

National Program for long-term reform and development which Will be implemented puts forward, the level of higher education will get further improvement and the gross enrollment rate of 40% up to 2020. How to guide students to study especially how to guide students who failed more elective the courses is one of the difficulties and focal points for college student work. Currently most universities make the Students of education management develop in the direction of "standardization, information technology, network" with modem information technology, MIS applicate in student management& educational management have been rolled out continuously. The database has been accumulating more and more data. But Most of these data is currently only used for simple report and statistical analysis in routine work, and many important information and rules hiddenning behind. The use of data mining technology can quickly and accurately extract valuable but often been overlooked information or rules from the vast data resources.

Data mining is the process of extracting useful information and knowledge which potentially from the vast, incomplete, noisy, ambiguous data, and it Statistics, analysis, synthesis and reasoning the data from micro to macro, guides to solve practical problems, finds the links between things and then makes predictions[l). In this paper, it makes use of the decision tree and the rough set algorithm in the data mining to extract the Characteristics of the data in educational system, and then generate forecast and classification models according to the system    characteristics, in order to find the real reason that affecting students mark and the association rules among failing courses and be good for helping guide students in course selection.



II. DATA MINING TECHNOLOGY  Data mining extracts information and knowledge that people interested in appling a series of technology from large databases or data warehouse. These knowledge or information is implied, unknown in advance and useful potentially, the knowledge expresses as the concepts, rules, laws, models and so on[2).

The association analysis is a key of data mining. The values among two or more items exist some regularities, called association, so can establish the association rules.

One of the property value can be predicted based on other attribute values If there are links between two or more attributes.

The association rules mining in Data mining is a multi-stage process. It can be divided into three main stages generally: Data Preparation, Data Mining, Expression and Interpretation of the results.

A. Data preparation  This process can be further divided into three sub-steps[3] : Data Selection, Data Processing, Data Transformation. Data Selection Select mainly means of extracting relevant data from existing database or data warehouse to form Target Data. Data Pre-Processing deals with the extracted data, so that can conform to the requirements of data mining. The main purpose of data transformation is to eliminate data dimension, which is finding out the truly useful features from the initial characteristics to reduce the features or the number of variables to consider when doing data mining.

B. Data mining  This section is mainly about planning algorithms, that is select one algorithm for the selected mining methods, which influences the quality of the mining model directly.

We can run data mining algorithms after selecting the algorithm method. It's one of the Most concerned section the data mining analysis and Experts in related fields care about, which can also be called the truly data mining.

C. Stage of expression and interpretation of the results  According to end-user decision-making purposes to analysis the information extraction, distinguish the most valuable information, and then get the expressions that user can understand and accept.



III. BUILDING DATA MINING MODEL  This article is mainly mining and analyzing the case  ?bout the courses students do not pass, and getting its mherent potential rules, Thence through query statistics in the Educational System, Summary the information table of students' all fail courses (compulsory), based on this build the model.

A. Data Preparation  Query the student achievements in a database and access to get the basic data of Coursescore, whi?h is shown as following:  Select * from CourseScore where CourseScore.courseType = '1' and CourseScore.score < 60  . Where CourseScore is student transcript, courseType IS course character, score is course score.

At .the same . time, follow the steps of data mining, ex?ra?tmg cleanmg and checking the required data, bmldmg data warehouse tables and views, the table structures are as follows:  No.

No.

No.

TABLE I: Course Field Name Explaination  StudentID StudentID  Term Term  CourseID CourseID  TABLE II: CourseType Field Name Explaination  CourseJD CourseID  Name CourseName  Type CourseType  TABLE III: CourseScore Field Name Explaination  StudentlD StudentlD  CourseID CourseID  Score CourseScore  B. Algorithm selection and parameter setting l'.:1icrosoft ?qLserver2005 Analysis services(SSAS)  provI.des aSSOCIatIOn rules algorithm [4 Jin data mining solutIons. The association algorithm explains the rules generated by the algorithm using two parameters (support and probability). The parameter support called the "correlation", which controls the number of itemsets that can be generated, parameter probability called "confidence", which controls the number of rules can be generated.

At the same time describe the importance of rules using the parameter importance mportance:  If importance(A,B) ? 1, A and B are two independent   or negatively related cases, that means course A and course B are two separate programs, less likely to interact each other;  If iI?portance(A,B) > 1, A and B have a positive correlatIOn, means that courses A and course B must exist the interaction relationship.

The calculation process of parameter importance is shown as follows:  Importance (A, B) = probability (A, B)/ (probability (A) * probability (B)) (1)  The setting of all other parameters as follows: TABLE IV : the association algorithm parameter  sett mg Fitl4?Nun." Vol .. " s.tting??)aiJI1n.."  MINIMUMJUPPORT" 0.03<' 8efore generating rules must include the items  sixluldnctIessthOl]%"  MAXMUM SUPPORT" I" Cases to 0lJlII0!! i1emsets tota! percettageof 101m"  MINIMUM JTEMSET JIZE" I" The minimum number of items aD.owed is one"  MAXMUN JTEMSET JIZE" 3" The maximum allowed nwnber of items is three"  MAXIMUM JTEMSET _COUNT" 2000" The maximum number has to gener .. is 2000,>  MINIMUM }R08A8ILITY" 0.40' Appoint that can mt generat. the rules that the  probability is less than 41% "  OPTIMIZED }REDICTION _COUNT" 2" The number of needing to predict and "'? or  optimizing is two,>  Accordmg to the settmg parameters, usmg aSSOCIatIon rule? mining in Microsoft SQLserver2005 Analysis servIces (SSAS) to do the recursive algorithm, logic flowcharts is shown as flows:  y  he last recorrcD--'--....I  c. Rule Mining&Results Analysis To a school from 2008 to 2009 academic base on the  students achievement data of some univesary in the years of 2008 to 2009, through the processing of 3.1 and 3.2, and carry out in Microsoft SQLserver2005 Analysis services (SSAS), we get the results shown as follows:  The failure courses in foundation concentrated in the cous?s of Advanced Mathematics (1021 students), College p?ysIcs(786 students), Probability Theory(744 students), Lmear Algebra(603), Fundamentals of Circuit Analysis and El?ctrotechnical (the number together is 594), Mechamcs of Construction( 408), College English( 415), College Physics Experiment and Advanced Programming Language C Experiment total is 421 students the number of failure courses in Liberal arts is 108 which is much fewer.

The simple analysis of the relationship between several categories of students and courses is as follows:  (l)Failed course credits accumulated more than 25 students: The possibility of failing the mathematics courses is 100%, College Physics 100%, College English 80%,Basic major Courses 100%, Experimental courses is more than 80%, Liberal arts courses is more than 60%.

(2)Students' failed course credits accumulated are 15 to 25: Failed courses focus on the courses Mathematics, College Physics, College English and some basic major courses.

(3)Students' failed course credits accumulated are 5 to 15: Failed courses focus on the courses Mathematics, College Physics, College English and some basic major courses.

(4) Curriculum Relevance: if failed in Mathematics, the possibility of failuring in College Physics and Linear Algebra is more than 60%; If failured in Advanced Mathematics and Linear Algebra, the possibility of failuring in College Physics is more than 80%; if failed in College English and the make-up, the possibility of failuring in Advanced Mathematics and College Physics is 100%

IV. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE MINING RESULTS AND GUIDING OF COURSE SELECTION  Form the mining results we can easly know that the students' grasping level of courses' fundamental knowledge and study attitudes for same kind of courses have relationship to courses score. It is important that how students are guided to choose courses for having solid basic. Before fundamental knowledge has not reached a certain level it has less possibility that students can learn   any courses or have a high score. So we must enhance the understanding of curriculum of appropriate professional.

We can guide contrapuntally students to choose courses that can avoid the consequence cursed by blindy course-selecting though fully know the relationship among courses.



V. CONCLUSION  There are many factors affecting student performance.

The traditional analysis of students' achievement generally concerned only the mean, variance ,significant difference test, reliability and validity and so on which are frequently considered teaching-based and neglect the elective relevance of the student-led curriculum . This article combinates of data mining technology and achievement management, extracte the useful information hiddenning in the data from Large amounts of data, dig out the correct, reliable and credible association rules, and carry out the students work ,and improve the professional level of student work continuously, Guiding significance of student work.

