A New KDD Method Based On Hypergraph Clustering  Model For Farmland Evaluation

Abstract- There are some shortages in usual methods  for land evaluation that too many manual interferences into the calculating procession. A hypergraph clustering model is designed with the knowledge discovery method in this paper based on fuzzy frequent item sets to conduct the evaluation for quality of farmland. It executes the mining association rules to the fuzzy item sets given by the definition of evaluation factors, and analyzes the clusters with the HMETIS segmentation method, finally devises the transactions similarity function to cluster the services. In the result, this method could not only determine the quality rating of each units of farmland, but also give the quality description for each grade. With the following example in Guangdong Province, China, the result is testified.

Index Terms- knowledge discovery in database; data mining;  farmland evaluation; hypergraph clustering model; fuzzy frequent  itemsets  1. INTRODUCTION  Knowledge discovery in database (KDD) is defined as a way which turns the effective, novel, potentially useful information into knowledge. KDD can be generalized as 3 processes, data preparation, data mining and expression of results. Data preparation includes data input, data preprocessing and the definitions of data; data mining is defined as a method which analyse information in the database by constructing mathematical models. It often consists of data classification, data clustering, data description and so on. And expression of results is testing and evaluating the discoveries and conclusions which come out of KDD in real life.

With applying the KDD method, in this paper we design a method which composes 2 steps, establishing the hypergraph model and clustering data based on hypergraph. Firstly, the transaction database is constructed from the evaluation units database. During this process, we set index description of evaluation factor as an data item, and express it as a vertex in hypergraph. The correlated items would be connected by weighted hyperedges. A hyperedge represents a relationship in the subset of evaluation units data. The weight of hyperedge shows the intensity of the relationship. Then applying the hypergraph partitioning algorithm to cluster the vertexes, and we will get the corresponding index for evaluation factors-clusters of items. Finally, these items from the cluster is used to describe the cluster which the transaction belongs.(Fig. l)   Shiyi Zhang School of Resource and Environmental Science  Wuhan University  Wuhan, China  E-mail: cherieI989912@yahoo.com.cn

II. THE CONSTRUCTION OF HYPERGRAPH  CLUSTERING MODEL  A. Related definitions  Definitionl: The number of transactions which involved itemset X in transaction database D is defined as support number, denoted as AX. The supporting degree of item set X is denoted as Support(x):  Support(x) = AxilDI xlOO% (or Support(x) = AxilDI ) Among which IDI is the transaction number of database D,  if Support(x) is not less than minimum supporting degree(Minsupport) which set by the user, then X is called as a frequent item set, other X is a non-frequent itemset.

Frequent iitenset 1  Clusters of items Clusters of transactions  Fig.! The hypergraph clustering method based on frequent itemsets  Definition 2: if X and Y are itemsets, and XnY=q>, the formula X = > Y is called association rules. X and Y are the premise and conclusion of the association rules. The supporting degree of association rules X = > Y is the same as the itemset X U Y, which denoted as:  Support(X = > Y) = Support(X U Y) The credibility of association rules X = > Y is denoted as: Confidence(X = > Y) = Support(X = > Y)/Support(X) xl 00%  FITME20l0    The attribute value of farmland units might be continuous or discrete. We need to apply the fuzzy sets theory to create the membership function for each attribute, and change attribute data to the dimensionless items which show the monotonically increasing tendency. The continuous property membership data is divided into several intervals. Each interval composes a subset of the certain property which called a fuzzy itemset. If the supporting degree of the fuzzy item set is higher than the setting threshold, this item set is called a fuzzy frequent itemset. Mining the association rules according to the fuzzy frequent item sets would be agreeable to show the fuzzy phenomena in the land quality of evaluation units.

B. Constructing the model  It is assumed that there are m evaluation units of farmland in a certain region. n evaluation factors, the index data with multi-resource of evaluation unit i is defined as Xj ( j=l ... n) ; (XiI' Xi2' . . . ? Xin). A membership function of each evaluation factors is established in the discussed area, which subjects to Yj=llj (X) (j=l ... n). And the value of membership from each index of factors for a evaluation unit is derived. Getting Yij =Ilj  (xij) ? Yi= (YiP Yi2' . . . ? Yin) is regarded as the fuzzy feature vector of evaluation unit Xi. The transaction database is composed by the fuzzy feature vectors.

For a weighted hypergraph H= (V. E) (Fig.2), vertex set V is constituted of fuzzy itemsets, and hyperedge E is composed of fuzzy frequent item sets. A hyperedge is expressed by a fuzzy frequent itemset, and the weight of each hyperedge is defined as the average value of all the main association rules' credibilities of the hyperedge. The main association rule is a formula which includes all the items of hyper edge and there is only one item on the right side. The way to get the main association rules will be introduced behind.

v  "-y------J y  Fig.2 The binary hypergraph of farmland evaluation based on fuzzy itemsets  Ill. ASSOCIA TlON RULES AND THE MINING  ALGORITHM  A. Mining algorithm of Association rule  Mining association rules is aimed at obtaining all the association rules which satisty the minimum supporting   degree-Minsupport and the mInImum credibility? Minconfidence. Firstly all the frequent item sets in dataset D can be quickly searched according to the minimum supporting degree, then the association rules will be get from the frequent item sets and the minimum credibility.

B. Generation of association rules  After mining all the frequent item sets in the dataset, the strong association rules which satisty the minimum supporting and credibility can be produced. The specific operating introductions is followed: for each frequent itemset 1 to generate all the non-empty subsets of 1, if  sup por count (I) . if ---''---'---=----'--.:... ;::: mm con sup por _ count (s) -  We get an association rule s =>(1 - s) ? among which sup por _ count(1) is the number of transaction records which contained itemset 1; sup port _ count(s) is the number of transaction records which contained item set S; min_ conf is the threshold of minimum credibility. The association rules are directly produced by the frequent itemsets, therefore all the item sets that involve in the rules will satisty the threshold of minimum supporting degree.



IV. TOP-DOWN HIERARCHICAL CLUSTERING  ALGORITHM BASED ON HYPERGRAPH  Hypergraph partitioning algorithm HMETlS is applied in the cluster analysis which belongs to divisive hierarchical clustering methods. HMETlS is a efficient layered hypergraph partitioning algorithm. It divides the vertices of hypergraph into k parts which are roughly the same and makes the least number of hyper edges which connect different parts.

A Item clustering-the classification offuzzy frequent items for  evaluation factors  To purity the division results, we need to eliminate meaningless classes at first. Higher quality value of class implies that the inside edge of division has a greater weight. If the quality value of class is higher than the setting division threshold, the clusters are considered to be fine.

It is assumed that e represents a vertex set of hyperedge.

The standard for measuring whether division c is good or bad is defmed as follows:  Quality(c) = Lec;;cWeight(e)ILlencl>oWeight(e) After obtaining the good division, we need to check the  vertices in the division and filter those vertices which are not strong correlated with others. The vertex with high correlation value shows it has many edges which connect with other vertices .If the correlation value of a vertex is higher than the given threshold, the vertex would be considered that it belongs to the division, or the vertices would be eliminated from the division. The correlation function of vertex v is defined as follows:  Re levancy(v, c) =I{e I e ? c,vEe} I I I{e I e EC} I    After puritying the division by the 2 standards above, we can get high quality division of the vertices, in other words, the clusters that fuzzy items belong.

B. Transactions cluster-evaluation units classification The hypergraph clustering model constructed in this paper  is clustering the transactions of evaluation units by clustering the items of evaluation factors. That is to say, the description of the transactions clusters can also belong with the data items of factors in the classification. And we can decide which the cluster that evaluation units belong to through computing the similarity between transactions and clusters.

n  d(t, CJ = L wjdj (tj' CJ j?1 j=1  Among which d (t, C s) represents the similarity between the fuzzy feature vector of evaluation unit No.t and the class of fuzzy clustering data items of evaluation factor No.s; Wj represents the weight of each evaluation factor; d/tj, Cs) represents whether the membership property value of evaluation unit No.j belongs to the fuzzy data items in the cluster Cs. { 1 y. E C  d/tj,Cs)= 0 '  IJ C  s  ,Y Ij!l k qk

V. FARMLAND QUALITY EV ALUA nON OF HESHAN  CITY  According to the natural and economIC attributes of farmland in Heshan City, we make comprehensive assessments for the farmland quality and divide the results into several grades. In this case, 10 factors are chosen to be analyzed (Table I). The land polygons act as the evaluation units which come from the land use database with the scale of 1: 1 0000. There are 7149 evaluation units in the database.

TABLE I CLASSIFIC ATI ON FOR MEMBERSHIP FUNCTIONS OF  EVALU ATION FACTORS Function Types Name of Factors  Discrete Surface texture\ Configuration profile\ Drainage\ I rrigation guaranteed rate  Positive Layer thickness\ Organic matter content correlation for S  Threshold Negative Terrain slope\ Field surface slope  correlation for S Trapezoidal Groundwater level\ PH value  A. Creating the hypergraph clustering model for farmland  quality evaluation  1) Constructing transaction database The farmland evaluation units are taken as the transactions  in the cluster analysis. Firstly, the membership functions of each evaluation factor are established. Then, the factor index values of all the evaluation units are substituted into the membership functions of each factor. Therefore the membership value can be obtained according to the index value, the transaction database is successfully established.

2) Miningfuzzy frequent itemsets   K-means algorithm is applied in the cluster analysis for the membership value of evaluation factors for the threshold-type farmland transactions. The clusters' interval range is determined by the distribution of data. Fuzzy data itemsets of continuous evaluation factors are established which the number of the items is the number of clusters. For those discrete evaluation factor, the fuzzy items are divided according their index value. (Table II)  Evaluation  factor  Layer  thickness  PH value  Irrigation  guaranteed  rate  Terrain slope  ...

TABLE II FUZZY ITEMSETS LIST (PART)  Fuzzy  itemset  V7  V8  V9  VIO  VII  V12  Vll  VI4  VIS  VI6  V17  VIS  VI9  V24  V2S  V26  V27  V28  V29  . ..

Membership  interval  [0.870, 1]  [0.522, 0.870)  [0.261, 0.522)  [0.002, 0.261)  [0.870, 1]  [0.797 , 0.870)  [0.724, 0.797)  [0.652, 0.724)  [0.002, 0.625)   0.8  0.6  0.2  (0.933, 1]  (0.833, 0.933]  (0.733, 0.833)  (0.500, 0.733)  (0.166, 0.5)  (0.002, 0.166  . ..

Descriptions for  the index  ?lOOcm  60?100cm  30?60cm  <30cm  6.0?7.9  5.5?6.0  5.0?5.5,  7.9?8.5  4.5?5.0  <4.5, >8.5  Complete  Basic  General  No conditions  <20  2??5?  5??8?  8??15?  15??25?  ?25?  . ..

All the evaluatIOn factors are dIVIded mto 48 fuzzy Items.

Because of membership uniqueness of each index for farmland units, the maximum possible total number of fuzzy itemsets in the transaction database would be: C16* C14* cIS* C14* C14* C16* C14* cIS* C17*C13 = 4838400  Assumed that the minimum supporting degree minsup=O.Ol. There are 15552 frequent item sets mined by the Apriori algorithm. The credibility of main association rules can be computed.

3) Constructing the hypergraph clustering model for farmland quality evaluation based on fuzzy itemsets  Constructing a weighted hypergraph H= (V, E) , vertex set V is composed of 48 fuzzy item sets from aIJ evaluation factors, hyperedge E is the fuzzy frequent itemset, and the total number of the hyperedges is 15552. The weight for each hyperedge equals to the average value of all the main association rules' credibility.

Setting the evaluation results number 4 as the given cluster number, that is to say, existing a segmentation N which can evenly divide the hypergraph H into 4 relatively independent subdivisions Hi' H2? H3? H4 approximately, means that there are 4 data cluster classes. We establish evaluation function f= ? among wh? T#; s is the weight of hyperedge  ( es E E ) linking vertices between different subdivisions.

Then a segmentation is searched which obtaining the minimum can be function value, so that making the sum of correlation value between each subdivision to the least.

B. Cluster analysis based on fuzzy frequent itemsets 1) Item clustering  Purifying the division with the HMETIS algorithm. and the standards is designed for quality and correlation function.

Then we can get the clustering results for the fuzzy items of farmland quality evaluation factors. (TableIII)  TABLElII ITEM CLUSTERING RESULTS  Cluster Data Items Contained Quality Rating  HI V2 V7 Vll VI6 V20 V24 I V30 V34 V39 V46  H2 VI V8 V12 Vl3 V17 V21 II  V25 V31 V35 V36 V40 V41  H3 V4 V9 VI4 VI8 V22 V26 III  V32 V37 V42 V43 V47 V5 V6 VIO VI5 VI9 V23 IV  H4 V27 V28 V29 V33 V38 V44 V45 V48  Summanzmg the descnptlons for mdex range of each cluster's data items, we could tell the characters of each cluster and determine the corresponding quality rating of the cluster.

2) Transaction clustering  The weighted similarity computing formula is applied in this part, which use the similarity between transactions to determine the cluster that evaluation unit belongs, among which the weight value is the impact weight of each evaluation factor (TABLE IV) . At last, substituting the property membership value of each farmland unit into the formula, we can get the quality level of each unit. (T ABLE V)  TABLE IV.

WEIGHT FOR EVALU ATION FACTORS  Layer Surface Configura Organic PH value  Thickness Texture -tion matter 0.15 0.14 0.10 0.06 0.08  Field Ground- Surface Terrain water Irrigation Drainage  Slope Level  0.06 0.07 0.05 0.14 0.15  TABLE V L AND QU ALITY ASSESSMENT RESULTS  Level I II TTl IV Total Area I 17.54 4274.02 5904.62 2806.44 13102.62 Number  332 2479 2831 1507 7149 of Units

VI. CONCLUSIONS  The substance of target item clustering is that it definites the range or value for the factors of a certain type or level farmland. This kind of evaluation ideas is more in line with the characters of farmland use type.

Establishing the corresponding relationship for the index range and clustering results from a certain group or some groups of correlated evaluation factors, we can fully reflect the leading role of the main evaluation factors act in determining the unit's level. At the same time, each cluster (level) would have an explicit description which is very meaningful in the farmland quality evaluation and land suitability evaluation.

