A new method to find the most suitable syndrome healed by commonly paired herbs

Abstract-The purpose of this paper is to find the most suitable syndrome healed by commonly paired herbs in Chinese  compound formula. A new method based on Chinese medicine literature and association rule technique is proposed, which solves the disadvantage of the minimum support degree in  many studies. The results are validated by the theory of traditional Chinese medicine. The results illustrate that the  new method is effective and suitable to be used generally.

Keywords-data mining; prescription association rule; paired herbs

I. INTRODUCTION  compatibility;  Recently literature of traditional Chinese medicine research based on association rules mainly focused on the association among herbs, but herb and syndrome or syndromes. However, there are two disadvantages in most literatures in this field. One of them was that the subjects developed were limited to homogeneous formulas or a formula applicable to one kind of syndrome [1-3]. The other was that the minimum support degree is about 0.1[4-7], which was too small to make the results convinced.

In fact, the relationship between herb and prescription, prescription and syndrome, and prescription and symptoms are also important to find the insight of Chinese medicine.

Association rule which can report the interesting relation among dataset is an important technique in data mining. It is one of the most classical methods to research traditional Chinese medicine composition rules now.

This goal of this paper is to find the most suitable syndrome healed by commonly paired herbs in traditional Chinese medicine. Firstly the strong correlation paired herbs with each syndrome is mined through the whole database where most of prescriptions for universal relief called pujifang[8] are, then commonly used paired herbs are identified based on the number of syndromes healed by the strong correlation herbs. Finally the most suitable syndrome for commonly paired herbs is estimated by the degree of confidence and support and validated by the theory of traditional Chinese medicine.

Lin Zhang, Maoxin Liang Basic Medicine College  Liaoning University of Chinese Medicine Shenyang, China, 110032  Imxin@126.com

II. METHOD OF A S SOCIATION RULES  A. Data model Data model is developed based on the content of  prescriptions for universal relief. There are two kinds of data model. One is for describing the entities and the other is for presenting the relations between the entities. Table I , Table II and Table III are about the prescription, herb and syndrome separately. TableN is to save the relation between prescription and herb, and Table V is to save the relation between prescription and syndrome.

B. Data mining methods Generally a syndrome could be healed by several  prescriptions, and each prescription is composed of several herbs. Firstly, Strong associated herbs of each syndrome are mined by associated rule algorithm through the whole database or the part of database specified by the user.

Secondly, commonly used associated herbs are confirmed based on their frequency in the syndrome of the whole database. Thirdly, the most suitable syndrome with coupled herbs is confirmed based on the support degree and confidence degree. Finally the traditional Chinese medicine theory is used to valid this result. The associated rule algorithm used in step one is described as follows:  1) Model of associated rule There are a lot of prescriptions in the database, each of  which is as a transaction T. Set I = {II' 12 ,.Ii'" In} is a set of herbs. Support degree Support(I;) is equal to the frequency of herb Ii in specified transactions P(Ii) .

Confidence degree Confidence(Ii ? I j ) is equal to Support(1i U Ij) / Support(1i) .

2) Algorithm of associated rule A basic algorithm called Apriori proposed by Agrawal in  1993 is used for this model. This algorithm is based on the computations of frequent sets in two stages. The first stage is to find the frequent sets and the second one is to generate association rules.

TABLE !. PRESCRIPTION ATTRIBUTE  Column 3 Column 4 Volume Branch  TABLE II. HERBS ATTRIBUTE  Column 3 Column 4 Column 6 Herb category Four properties Meridian entry  TABLE II!. SYNDROMES ATTRIBUTE  Column 1 Syndrome ID I  Column 2 Syndrome name  TABLE IV. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PRESCRIPTION AND HERB  I Column 1  rrescription ID I Colnmn 2 Herb ID TABLE V. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PRESCRIPTION AND SYNDROME  a) To find the frequent sets This step is to find all frequent sets based on the minimum support degree which has been specified by the user at the beginning of this algorithm. In other words, the support degree of each frequent set must be bigger than minimum support degree. Apriori is a kind of iteration method. Firstly, frequent set L 1 which includes an herb is got. Secondly  frequent set L2 which includes two herbs is got. Then  continue this iterative until can't find frequent setLk.

b) To find the associate rules This step is to find all the associated rules sets based on the minimum confidence degree which has been specified by the user at the beginning of this algorithm. At first, all non? empty subsets of each frequent set are generated. At second, the confidence degree of each two non-empty subsets is computed. At last, the associated rules are those subsets whose confidence degree is bigger than the minimum confidence degree.



III. EXPERIMENT ANALYSES  A. Experiment design The sensitivity analysis of the algorithm parameters is  used to find the suitable parameters. Figure 1 presents the change of the number of associated rules with the decreasing minimum support degree when the minimum confidence degree is set to 0.7. Figure 2 presents the change of the number of associated rules with the decreasing minimum confidence degree when the minimum support degree is set to 0.4.

Colnmn2 S drome ID   The algorithm parameters are confirmed based on Figure and 2 to make the algorithm find enough effective  associated rules. The arrange of the minimum support degree is from 0.3 to 0.5 and the arrange of the minimum confidence degree is from 0.7 to 0.9. Moreover, the number of prescriptions for each syndrome is at least 20. The uncommon syndrome is excluded in this way. Finally, three experiments are set to find the most suitable syndrome with commonly paired herbs in Table VI.

B. Results of Experiment The results of three experiments illustrates in Table VB  that the number of associated rules becomes less with the increasing minimum support degree and confidence degree.

Three mostly common paired herbs in Table VIII are gotten based on the frequency in all syndromes from three experiments. For example, the paired herb of Poria cocos and Panax ginseng are used for healing fourteen different syndromes in experiment one, eight different syndromes in experiment two, and two different syndromes in experiment three. Poria cocos and Panax ginseng are associated, and they might be used more commonly than other associated herbs. In this way, Poria cocos and Panax ginseng are called commonly paired herbs based on the experiments.

The support and confidence degree of Poria cocos and Panax ginseng for different syndrome are listed in TableIX.

Chill and fever in consumptive disease and palpitation and alarm due to wind are the suitable syndromes healed by Poria cocos and Panax ginseng.

(/) 600 ? 550 &! 500 "0 450 (1) 400 ? 350 '8 300 ;;; 250 (/) 200  <C 150 'b 100  :@ 5?  Confidence degree=O. 7  O. 2 O. 3 0.4 O. 5 O. 6 O. 7 O. 8 0.9  (/) (1)  .---< '" p,:: "0 (1) +-' cti ' '-; C.l 0 (/j (/j  <t: 'H ci  z  I  Support Degree  Figure I. The change trend of the number of associated rules as the minimum confidence degree is 0.7.

Support degree=0.4          -- ?  - "- '"  - ?   o O. 1 O. 2 O. 3 0.4 O. 5 O. 6 O. 7 0.8 O. 9 Confidence degree  Figure 2. The change trend of the number of associated rules as the minimum support degree is 0.4.

No. of Experiment  I  TABLE VI. THE PARAMETERS OF THE EXPERIMENT  Minimum support Minimum confidence Minimum the number of  0.3 0.4 0.5  del(ree del(ree 0.8 0.8 0.9  TABLE VII. ASSOCIATION RULES NUMBER  prescriptions  No. of Experiment The number of Association rules  TABLE VIII. COMMON PAIRED HERBS FROM THE EXPERIMENTS  No. of Experiment  Poria cocos? Panax ginseug peony? angelica Cortex cinnamomi? Panax ginseng  14 13 8 8 5 3  TABLE IX. THE SUPPORT AND CONFIDENCE DEGREE OF PORIA COCOS AND PANAX GINSENG IN DIFFERENT SYNDROMES     tidal fever in consumptive disease hiccup and aphal(ia poor appetite in consumptive disease palpitation and alarm due to heart disturbed by wind emaciation due to deficiency of spleen qi and stomach qi palpitation and alarm due to wind qi insufficiency in consumptive disease distention and fullness of epil(astrium in consumptive disease palpitation and alarm due to heart deficiency Insonmia by gallbladder insufficiency fever in infant over-exertion of heart over-exertion of lung  C. Discussion The experiment results show that Poria cocos and Panax  ginseng are the commonly used paired herbs in prescriptions for universal relief database. Syndrome chill and fever in consumptive disease and syndrome palpitation and alarm due to wind are the most suitable syndromes for Poria cocos and Panax ginseng. It is well known that poria cocos and panax ginseng are both sweet in taste, meridian entry to spleen, lung, heart and kidney. According to theory of herbs nature in traditional Chinese medicine, the common function of these two herbs are strengthening spleen, replenishing qi, calming the heart and tranquilizing the mind. So Panax ginseng is usually used together with Poria cocos to cure such diseases as asthenia, consumptive disease, thinness and weakness, no thought of food and drink, distention and fullness and lack of qi induced by syndrome of deficiency of spleen qi and stomach qi. They can also be used to cure palpitation due to alarm and insomnia belongs to the heart mind malnutrition. Panax ginseng associated Poria cocos are common coupled medicine in ancient and modem clinic. So the experiment proved that association rules can discover the strong relationship between two herbs.

D. Conclusions Before you begin to format your paper, first write and  save the content as a separate text file. Keep your text and graphic files separate until after the text has been formatted and styled. Do not use hard tabs, and limit use of hard returns to only one return at the end of a paragraph. Do not add any kind of pagination anywhere in the paper. Do not number text heads-the template will do that for you.

