A Visual Analytics Approach to Identifying Protein Structural Constraints

ABSTRACT  Predicting protein structures has long been a grand-challenge prob-  lem. Fine-grained computational simulation of folding events from  a proteins synthesis to its final stable structure remains computa-  tionally intractable. Therefore, methods which derive constraints  from other sources are attractive. To date, constraints derived from  known structures have proven to be highly successful. However,  these cannot be applied to molecules with no identifiable neighbors  having already-determined structures. For such molecules, struc-  tural constraints must be derived in other ways. One popular ap-  proach has been the statistical analysis of large families of proteins,  with the hope that residues that change together (co-evolve) im-  ply that those residues are in contact. Unfortunately, despite re-  peated attempts to use this data to deduce structural constraints, this  approach has met with minimal success. The consensus of current  literature concludes that there is simply too little information con-  tained within the correlated mutations of many protein families to  reliably and generally predict structural constraints.

Recent work in my laboratory challenges this conclusion. For  some time we have been developing methods (MAVL/StickWRLD)  to visualize the pattern of co-evolved mutations within sequence  families. While our analysis of individual correlations agrees with  the literature consensus, we have recently discovered that the vi-  sualized pattern of correlations is highly suggestive of structural  relationships. In our preliminary test cases, human researchers can  unambiguously determine many positive structural constraints by  visual analysis of statistical sequence information alone, often with  no training on interpretation of the visualization results.

Herein we report the visualization design that supports this Vi-  sual Analytics approach to identifying high-confidence hypotheses  about protein folding from protein sequence, and illustrate prelim-  inary results from this research. Our approach entails a higher-  dimensional extension of parallel coordinates which illuminates  distant shared sub-tuples of the vectors representing each protein  sequence when these sub-tuples occur with an over abundance com-  pared to expectations. It simultaneously eliminates all representa-  tions of tuples which occur with frequency near the expected norm.

The result is a minimally-occluded representation of outlier, and    only outlier co-occurrences within the sequence families.

Keywords: Bioinformatics; Clustering Classification and Associ-  ation Rules; Interactive Data Exploration  Index Terms: I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and  TechniquesGraphics data structures and data types E.1 [Data]:  Data StructuresGraphs and Networks; J.3 [Computer Applica-  tions]: Life and Medical SciencesBiology and Genetics  1 INTRODUCTION  The ability to reliably predict protein structures would open many  doors in biomedical research and treatment. This task remains a  grand-challenge problem in computational biology because it is  ?e-mail: ray.29@osu.edu  Figure 1: A Visual Analytics approach can suggest structural relation-  ships in a molecule of unknown structure, directly from the correlated  mutational patterns in its sequence family. Every user, regardless  of training, is immediately drawn to the left, right, top and bottom re-  gions of this StickWRLD diagram. These residues are in fact contact-  ing. The surprising ease with which this hypothesis can be reached  visually, and the surprising reliability of the hypotheses generated  this way, belies the tremendous difficulty encountered in making the  same types of predictions on purely statistical grounds. For visual  tractability in printed form, this figure is drawn from Archaeal tRNAs.

Residue identities and propensities are indicated by colored spheres  around the periphery. Positive and Negative associations between  residues are shown by white and red lines. The diameter of the lines  indicates the strength of the association. The live visualization is ac-  tually an interactive explorable 3-dimensional data space.

fundamentally intractable from physical first principles. The richest  purely-bioinformatic source of constraints that could simplify the  calculation has long been expected to be the patterns of co-evolved  mutations. Such mutations can be extracted from an aligned se-  quence family alone, and do not require any structural data. Despite  extensive work by many researchers, constraints of this nature have  proven surprisingly difficult to accurately identify[1].

2 EXPOSITION  In the hope of understanding why these correlations are so difficult  to find, my lab has, for several years, been exploring visualization  techniques to assist our analysis of the correlation patterns[3]. The  technique upon which we have settled treats each protein sequence  as a high-dimensional vector, with each serial position along the se-  quence being a dimension, and the amino-acid used at the ith posi-     IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology  October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA  978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 2010 IEEE  tion in a particular protein sequence in the family being the categor-  ical value for that sequence at the ith coordinate. We represent this  data using an extension and adaptation of parallel-coordinates[2].

The canonical parallel coordinates representation makes it easy to  see general family trends, and also nearest-neighbor correlations (in  fact, it forms a visual representation of the statistical construct that  would be familiar to the Biologist as a Hidden Markov Model), but  it does not capture or represent correlations between coordinates  that are sequentially distant. Because interacting residues within  proteins are not constrained to be nearest sequential neighbors, and  in fact can occur anywhere across the length of the sequence, we  also need to represent distant relationships. To do this, we aug-  ment the canonical parallel coordinates representation. In addition  to the traditional representation of a vector as a single trace through  the diagram, we add every other pairwise edge that occurs for each  vector. That is, where the traditional parallel coordinates diagram  represents each vector as a polyline with a segment connecting the  values at each sequential ith and jth position, we represent the vec-  tor as a properly complete undirected graph on the parallel coor-  dinates space, with an edge connecting the values at every kth and  nth position, regardless of whether k and n are sequential. It is easy  to imagine that this representation quickly becomes too chaotic to  be useful  however, we employ three other extensions which, in  application to real biological data, reduce the clutter to such an ex-  tent that the representation is clarified. The first of these is that we  subtract from this representation, all edges which are statistically  expected. If a particular sequence position in the protein family  always uses one particular amino acid (every vector has the same  value at its mth coordinate), the edges detailing that positions rela-  tionships to every other position are completely uninformative, so  we remove them. Likewise, a statistical expectation can be calcu-  lated (from the protein sequence statistics) for the number of edges  that should occur between category A at position k and category B at  position n, so we remove that expected sub-population as well. Sec-  ondly, because our values are categorical, there are numerous sub-  sets of edges that are colinear and share both endpoints. For each  such subset we aggregate all member edges into a single fat edge,  with a weight that represents the count of members that composed  it. Finally, we transform the canonical parallel coordinates planar    space onto the surface of a cylinder. This transformation makes  every possible coordinate:value to coordinate:value pair lie upon a  unique line, thereby eliminating overlaps and creating a minimally  occluded representation of the remaining edges.

The result is that we are left with a 3-dimensional geometric  representation (browsable, for example in VRML) of the statisti-  cally unexpected co-occurrences within our protein sequence vector  space. These unexpected co-occurrences tend to be relatively few  in number. Even after aggregation which reduces the edge count  to roughly 6n where n is the number of proteins in the family, the  proper complete graph version of the diagram, for a medium-  sized protein that is 300 amino acids in length, contains over 39  million edges. After subtracting expectations, this reduces to typi-  cally a few thousand remaining interesting edges.

We have recently discovered, through a serindipitous accident,  that visualizing these remaining interesting edges at particularly  low statistical stringency, results in the appearance of visually dis-  tinct clouds of edges. This phenomenon is shown in Figure 2.

Despite the fact that the majority of the edges shown in 2(d) are  within the noise floor, the handful of visually distinct features are  actually real structural contacts. This can be contrasted with the few  edges shown in the much more statistically reliable 2(a), where only  3 of the 4 edges are real contacts. Preliminary analysis suggests that  these clouds are both a statistical phenomenon, and a biophysical  consequence of a particular type of protein contact.

(a) The most significant correla-  tions, with p? 0.005, have no ob-  vious visual pattern.

(b) As the significance is weak-  ened, here p ? 0.010, more corre-  lations appear.

(c) When correlations with p as  poor as 0.050 are shown, distinct  patterns begin to appear in the  cloud of minimal-significance cor-  relations.

(d) Even when the significance is  only p? 0.100, the cloud of weak  correlations remains visually fo-  cused around certain areas in the  diagram.

Figure 2: These diagrams show StickWRLD visualizations for the    correlated mutations within Adenylate Kinase. They are arranged in  order of decreasing statistical significance. While it is far less obvious  in a small image on paper, the users eye is immediately drawn to the  dense cluster of correlation lines to the right side of the circle, then  to the more diffuse region of vertical correlation lines at the left of  the circle, and finally to the diagonals from the top of the left bundle  into the dense right bundle, and from the bottom of the left bundle to  the dense bundle. These are in fact interacting clusters of residues.

Other features of the diagrams are described in detail in [3].

3 CONCLUSION  We are convinced from our preliminary experiments with our sys-  tem, that this visual analytics approach to structural prediction gen-  eralizes well. While the parameters are not identical from protein  to protein, it is easy for a user to tune the visualization to detect  these low significance clouds of associations. They appear to oc-  cur in most proteins. We are further optimistic that this approach  will identify a subclass of correlation patterns that are amenable  to discovery by machine learning, thereby augmenting the ability  of the computational biology community, and helping to explain  why unbiased statistical methods have so-far proven unsuccessful  in making these predictions.

