Mining Frequent Development Patterns of roles in  Open Source Software

Abstract?Participants of a software project have a significant impact on whether the project could achieve success, and the relevant information can reflect some trustworthy properties of software. By studying a large number of OSS projects in SourceForge, the role configuration of these projects is analyzed, and some latent frequent patterns are discovered in this paper. It prepares the ground for quantification and utilization of the  1.  INTRODUCTION  software trustworthiness evidence from the roles information.

Keywords : trusted software; trustworthiness evidence; association rules; metrics;  Since the software appeared, how to assess the quality of software objectively and efficiently and prevent huge losses caused by software problems has been one of the core issues in software engineering. With the development of the Internet and appearance of trusted software conception, trustworthy evaluation technology of software has become an urgent problem in the field of software trustworthy research. Software trustworthy assessment is a complex, multi-angle, multi-level issue, which is influenced by the software application, domain, environment, and many factors outside software itself, and the process of evaluating the trustworthiness of software is very sophisticated and tedious.

With the rapid development of open source software (OSS), OSS attracts more and more attention of researchers. OSS provides free and vast software resources ranging from low- quality individual efforts to high-quality enterprise solutions. In their whole life cycle, OSS produced a very large amount of data with various types. These data may provide some new ideas for software trustworthy assessment, yet up to now they still have not been made full use of  In the OSS software repository, some information about participants of project development can reflect some trustworthy properties of software authentically and effectively [  in the field of software trustworthy assessment.

1][2]. So, if we can quantify and make use of the information about participants of software reasonably, it should be able to improve the limitation of some metrics in software trustworthy assessment to some extent. Therefore, this would be very significant for producing an objective, accurate and easy-to-use  assessment mechanism of software trustworthy in the future.

On the basis of previous work, by mining a large amount of OSS projects in SourceForge, we will continue analyzing the information about the roles that participants acted as in OSS projects with association rules and making an intensive study of role configuration of OSS.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Some conceptions and definitions are described in Section 2.

Previous and related work are concluded in Section 3. The famous Apriori algorithm and our computation model are introduced in Section 4. In section 5, the results analyzed by Apriori algorithm are presented and the frequent patterns of roles in OSS projects are discussed. Section 8 concludes and mentions of the future work.

2. RELATED CONCEPTIONS  2.1. TRUSTED SOFTWARE Since the early 70s in the 20th century, the conception of  trusted system was presented for the first time by Anderson.

After that, the trustworthiness of information system is always concerned by the academia and industry.

Trusted software usually refers to the software whose behavior and results are always consistent with peoples? expectation and would be able to provide continuous service even if it was interfered [3]. As appearance of the trusted software conception, the quality of software is no longer limited to traditional software properties, such as the reliability, maintainability, availability, security and so on, and it attempts to understand the essence of software quality to a deeper extent.

2.2. SOFTWARE TRUSTWORTHINESS EVIDENCE Software trustworthiness evidence is the evidence which  could be validated and can be used to affirm   the facts of software quality. It must satisfy the following three conditions [ ].

1. Objectivity: Evidence is objective facts and independent of peoples? will. T  2. Relevance: Evidence is real relevance to the trustworthy properties to be proved.

his is the essential feature of evidence.

2010 Symposia and Workshops on Ubiquitous, Autonomic and Trusted Computing  DOI 10.1109/UIC-ATC.2010.113     3. Availability: Evidence could be collected, reviewed, judged, accessed and inspected in accordance with established procedure.

2.3. EVALUATION MODELS OF OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE Different approaches have been presented to evaluate OSS  projects. The Open Source Maturity Model developed by Bernard Golden of Navicasoft [5] and the CapGemini Open Source Maturity Model [6] aim to offer a methodology for assessing and evaluating the suitability of open source software.

The Center for Open Source Investigation at Carnegie Mellon West, and Intel Corporation have developed the Business Readiness Rating model (BRR) [7], which lets IT managers quickly make informed and educated decisions about open source software. Atos Origin Corporation conceived and formalized the method for Qualification and Selection of Open Source software (QSOS) [8].

TABLE I.   ASSESSMENT CATEGORIES OF OPENBRR  These models adopt almost similar evaluation process: scoring and weighting all of the related metrics and properties of OSS projects, comparing and selecting the project which is considered the most suitable. The assessment categories of BRR are listed in Table .

IIndex  AAssessment CCategory  DDescr iption  1 Functionality  How well will the software meet the average user?s requirements?

2 Usability  How good is the UI? How easy to use is the software for end-users?

How easy is the software to install, configure, deploy, and maintain?

3 Quality  Of what quality are the design, the code, and the tests? How complete and error-free are they?

4 Security  How well does the software handle security issues? How secure is it?

5 Performance  How well does the software perform?

6 Scalability  How well does the software scale to a large  environment?

7 Architecture How well is the software architected? How  modular, portable, flexible, extensible, open, and easy to integrate is it?

8 Support  How well is the software component supported?

9 Documentation  Of what quality is any documentation for the  software?

10 Adoption  How well is the component adopted by  community, market, and industry?

11 Community  How active and lively is the community for the  software?

12 professionalism  What is the level of the professionalism of the  development process and of the project organization as a whole?

I  3. RELATED WORK  n the process of evaluating OSS projects, many metrics in these models are not only hard to obtain, but also difficult to score even after they had been obtained, such as end-user UI experience, quality of professional support, number of books in Amazon, leading team, training, documentations, and so on.

Therefore it is very important to find some evidence in software repository, which would be obtained easily and quantified convincingly.

SourceForge is the largest OSS development web site in the world. By June 2009, more than 230,000 software projects have been registered by more than 2 million users. It provides large amounts of real data covering the entire software life cycle for academic research.

In SourceForge, the recommendation and rank of projects are determined by activity scores. It means the rank of project is actually one kind of quantization of project?s recent activity, in generally, we are able to consider that the projects with higher ranks indicate that they have enjoyed higher popularity and won more widespread applications. So the rank can reflect the some facets of projects quality.

There are 7 kinds of projects statuses in SourceForge, which are planning, pre_alpha, alpla, beta, production/stable, mature, and inactive.

During OSS software development, roles are used to distinguish different development tasks. After combining the roles which actually undertaking the same activities,  28 kinds of roles were found in all SourceForge projects, which are listed in Table  TABLE II.  THE ROLES IN SOURCEFORGE  .

IIndex  RRole Name  IIndex  RRole Name 1 Advisor/Mentor/Consultant 2 Cross Platform Development 3 All-Hands Person 4 Project Manager 5 Analysis/Design 6 Requirements Engineering 7 Build Engineer 8 Researcher 9 Content Management 10 Sr. Customer Support Manager 11 Database Administrator 12 Support Manager 13 Developer 14 Support Technician 15 Director of Operations 16 Tester 17 Distributor/Promoter 18 Translator (I18N/L10N) 19 Doc Writer 20 Systems Programmer/Analyst 21 Editorial/Content Writer 22 Unix Admin 23 Graphic/Other Designer 24 UI Designer 25 Packager(.rpm, .deb, etc) 26 VP of Media Operations 27 Web Designer 28 No specific role  By analyzing the OSS projects in SourceForge[1], it can be concluded that the maximum  In the further work[  number of roles in one project is 13, and the number of projects with number of roles more than 8 is very small, so only those projects with no more than 7 roles are considered in this paper. It has been proved that there is strong relationship between the number of roles in projects and the rank of projects. The projects with higher rank would be inclined to have more roles. In other words, it means that the projects with higher rank would be organized better and the work of these projects would be divided and assigned better.

2], in order to retrieve the role structure model that can provide better support (e.g. helping projects to get higher rank) for the development of OSS projects, the absolute centralities and relative centralities of each role in different rank intervals are calculated by social network analysis. And for the purpose of characterizing the role structure of OSS projects in SourecForge rationally, the relative centralities of some major roles were compared and the role structure of OSS projects is constructed.

The previous work mentioned above prepared the ground for quantification and utilization of the  4. MINING FREQUENT PATTERNS OF ROLES  software trustworthiness evidence based on role information.

In the field of data mining, association rule mining is a popular and well researched method. Association rule mining could discover interesting associations and/or correlation relationships among large set of data items. Association rules show attributes value conditions that occur frequently together in a given dataset. A typical and widely-used example of association rule mining is ?market basket analysis?. An example of such an association rule is the statement that 90% of transactions that purchase bread and butter also purchase milk.

4.1. FORMAL MODEL OF MINING ASSOCIATION RULES Given a set of transactions D, the problem of mining  association rules is to generate all association rules that have support and confidence greater than the user-specified minimum support (minsupport) and minimum confidence ( minconfidence ) respectively.

The formal model of mining association rules [9] is given as follows.

= I1, I2, ..., Im be a set of binary attributes, called items. Let T be a database of transactions. Each transaction t is represented as a binary vector, with t[k] = 1 if t bought the item Ik, and t[k] = 0 otherwise. There is one tuple in the database for each transaction. Let X be a set of items in . So a transaction t satisfies X if for all items Ik  An association rule is defined as the form X  I  in X, t[k] = 1.

j, where X is a set of items in , and Ij  The rule X  I  is a single item in  that is not present in X.

j is satisfied in the set of transactions T with the confidence factor 0  c  1 iff at least c% of transactions in T that satisfy X also satisfy Ij. The notation X  Ij | c is used to specify that the rule X  Ij  4.2. APRIORI ALGORITHM  has a confidence factor of c.

The minconfidence is a threshold of confidence factor defined by user.

The support for a rule is defined to be the fraction of transactions in T that satisfy the union of items in the consequent and antecedent of the rule. The minsupport is defined as a threshold, which is used to generate all rules which were concerned about. Those combinations in concerned rules which meet the threshold are called large itemsets, and all the other combinations that do not meet the threshold are called small itemsets.

Another motivation for support constraints comes from the fact that we are usually interested only in the rules with the support above some minimum threshold. If the support is not large enough, it means that the rule is not worth consideration or that it is simply less preferred.

Apriori[10] is the best-known algorithm to mine association rules and frequent itemsets in transaction database. It uses a breadth-first search strategy to counting the support of itemsets and uses a candidate generation function which exploits the downward closure property of support.

The Apriori algorithm is described as follows:  L1 for ( k = 2; L  = {large 1-itemsets}; k-1   ; k++ ) do begin  Ck = apriori-gen(Lk-1 ); // New candidates forall transactions t  D do begin Ct = subset(Ck,t); // Candidates contained in t forall candidates c  Ct do c.count++; end Lk = {c  Ck | c.count  minsup } end Answer = k Lk  D: transactions database; each database record is a <TID, item> pair, where TID is the identifier of the corresponding transaction.

; The notations used in the algorithms are explained below:  Lk  C  : Set of large k-itemsets (those with minimum support). Each member of this set has two fields: i) itemset and ii) support count.

k  : Set of candidate k-itemsets when the TIDs of the generating transactions are kept associated with the candidates.

: Set of candidate k-itemsets (potentially large itemsets). Each member of this set has two fields: i) itemset and ii) support count.

The first pass of the algorithm simply counts item occurrences to determine the large 1-itemsets. A subsequent pass, say pass k, consists of two phases. First, the large itemsets Lk-1 found in the (k-1)th pass are used to generate the candidate itemsets Ck. Next, the database is scanned and the support of candidates in Ck is counted. For fast counting, we need to efficiently determine the candidates in Ck    that are contained in a given transaction t.

The mining process is described in Fig.1.

Figure 1.  Process of mining association rules with Apriori     4.3. MINING FREQUENT PATTERNS IN OSS WITH APRIORI  4.3.1.  Data selection  In our studies, the selection of data source relies on two factors: project status and its rank. We selected the projects which are beta, production/stable, or mature status, and before 10000 in rank list. There are total 7,779 projects meeting both conditions in SourceForge in Jun 2009. As we are only concerned about the difference of role structure in different rank intervals, and in order to observe the difference clearly, then we choose 2 rank extent, [1,3000] and [7000,10000], for mining the frequent patterns.

We collected all related data of projects satisfied above conditions, which include all participants in target projects and roles information about what each participant acted as in every project.

4.3.2. Data Structure  For analyzing the relationship among roles and revealing the frequent patterns in OSS projects, the data structure is built as follows.

The information about roles of projects is defined as a matrix and it can be described as Tn?m .

Tn?m = t1,1 t1,2 t1,3 t1,mt2,1 t2,2 t2,3 t2,mt3,1 t3,2 t3,3 t3,mtn,1 tn,2 tn,3 tn,m Where ti,j can be calculated as follows  ti,j =  1;     if there is at least one  rj  in developers of project pi;0;      otherwise;  The variables n, m represent the total numbers of projects selected and role types respectively.

The set of target projects is denoted by P = {p1,p2,?,pn}, and the same to roles by R = {r1,r2,?,rn  In order to find all the frequent patterns of roles in target OSS projects, association rules are set as R  I, where the R R . During the mining process, the problem of mining frequent patterns could be transformed into the form as follows.

}. The sets P and R are taken as the transaction database and items respectively.

For all target projects to be analyzed, the new specific item i which is always set as 1 is added into transaction database. In the association rules R  I, only those rules in which the consequent satisfy I =  [i] is considered. As a consequence of this method, the minconfidence can be neglected and we can only focus on the minsupport of association rules. This allows us to pay major attention to the combination of antecedents. In other words, we can concentrate on the question of role configuration itself.

In practice, if we expect to explore the projects before 3000 in rank list, we only need to set the item i of these projects as 1, and set i of others projects as 0. This method could greatly reduce the workload of analysis and conduce to mining the frequent patterns of roles in a large number of OSS projects.

5. EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS The number of participants within an OSS project would  determine the configuration of roles greatly, so projects with different number of participants may have different frequent patterns of roles. Consequently, all of the target projects are divided into 5 groups based on the number of participants, which are described in Table  TABLE III.  GROUPS DIVIDED BY THE NUMBER OF PARITCIPANTS  .

index Number of developers G1 2-4 G2 5-10 G3 11-20 G4 21-30 G5 31  5.1. DISTRIBUTION OF FREQUENT PATTERNS OF ROLES Each group is analyzed respectively in two different rank  extent by Apriori algorithm with the minsupport = 5%, and the conclusion is given in Table  TABLE IV.  STATISTIC OF FREQUENT PATTERNS WITH MINSUPPORT 5%  .

Group_id Rank range Number of projects  Number of frequent patterns 1* 2 3 4 5 6  G1 [1,3000] 591 3 2 0 0 0 0 [7000,10000] 1094 3 2 0 0 0 0  G2 [1,3000] 470 10 10 2 0 0 0 [7000,10000] 443 5 5 0 0 0 0  G3 [1,3000] 287 11 27 7 0 0 0 [7000,10000] 339 11 18 7 0 0 0  G4 [1,3000] 95 15 46 44 12 0 0 [7000,10000] 76 11 24 15 1 0 0  G5 [1,3000] 117 20 86 143 103 29 2 [7000,10000] 58 17 51 48 14 0 0  *  The number represents the quantity of  antecedent in association rules  5.2. RESULT ANALYSIS There are some reasons in the statistical perspective to  believe that the projects with higher rank would be more trustworthy than others, so we only inspect the frequent patterns of roles appearing in rank [1,3000]. Limited by the paper length, we take the G5, in which the data about roles is the most reasonable, as example, and the support of frequent patterns in top5 is listed in Table  1. To the role configuration, only the support of ProjectManager & Developer is beyond 70%, and the support of the rest patterns is not high. The highest support in the case of 3 roles is about 35%, in case of 4 roles is about15%, and 5 is even lower than 5%.

.

Based on the mining result, several observations can be discovered and be discussion:  2. In the G1 group, there is no obvious difference of role configuration between the rank extent [1, 3000] and [7000, 10000]. There are only 3 kinds of frequent patterns of roles with support more than 30%, which are ProjectManager     (35.36%,36.02%) , Developer (92.72%,93.42%), and ProjectManager & Developer (30.46%,30.35%). The reason may be that in these projects the number of total participants is no more than 4. And so it can be concluded that in this kind of projects the labor division is not clearly, most kinds of development are undertook by few developers or project managers.

3. Except G1 and the case with only 1 role, the number of frequent patterns in rank extent [1,3000] is obvious greater than in the extent [7000,10000]. The phenomenon shows that the projects with higher rank usually own more kinds of roles, and it may be judged that these projects generally were well organized. Such as in G2, the support of frequent patterns with TranslatorI18NL10N, DocWriter, Tester, WebDesigner in rank extent [1,3000] is higher than the extent [7000,10000]. There is similar  Except G1, it can be believed that the frequent patterns in rank extent [1,3000] could reflect the most reasonable role configuration in OSS projects.

phenomenon in other groups.

TABLE V.  FREQUENT PATTERNS OF G5 IN TOP5  6.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Some information related to participators and role structure  of projects can reflect some properties of OSS projects and be  obtained from software repository automatically, so they could be taken as a kind of evidence in software trustworthy assessment. Through a large number of OSS projects in SourcForge, some interesting frequent patterns of roles are discovered by association rules. Based on the work in this paper, it can be believed that the data about roles and participators from software repository can be used to improve or even replace some metrics in the existing evaluation models, and will help evaluate OSS projects efficiently and automatically. This work is part of the research on evaluation of OSS projects by using the roles, tasks and contributions of projects participators, and can be regarded as a further step of previous work.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work was partially funded by National High-Tech  Research and Development Plan of China under Grant (2007AA010301), National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant (No.60903043), and the Core electronic devices, high-end general chip and fundamental software Major Project(2009ZX01043-001-04).

