A Recommendation Model for   Personalized Book Lists

Abstract? In this study, we present a novel approach to recommend the personalized book lists for the university members. Our approach consists of clustering the university members into different clusters based on their recent circulation activities and discovering the interest patterns of members in the cluster. In the first step, we clustered members sharing the common interests to the same cluster by using K-means algorithm, after that we explored the possible interest patterns performed by members in each cluster by association rules.

Finally, we provided the recommended booklists that satisfy their individual needs and interest patterns. A questionnaire survey was performed to evaluate the accuracy satisfaction of predicting the satisfy booklist to an individual. The evaluation results reveal the possibility of using circulation activity history to predict the current interest of an individual member and construct the personalized book lists that satisfy their interests.



I. INTRODUCTION  Many online businesses are trying to improve their marketing approach by discovering the customer interest and delivering the personalized recommendation list of the products that satisfy the customer needs. The personalized recommendation lists capitalize in motivating the new customers and retaining the existing customers [1].

Similarly, to improve the personal efficiency in the academic organizer consisting of members with variety in interests, the organizer should provide the information satisfying their interests.  This work applies the personalized recommendation system to the library?s circulation activities for generating the personal book list for its members. The problem of personalized book recommendation system is the enormous number of members and books. Under this circumstance, we cannot create the specific booklist for an individual member. To solve this problem, we categorized the members into clusters based on the similarity of their interests and assigned the suitable book categories to the members within the cluster. A book categorization system that is widely used in libraries is the LC call number. This system classifies the books into different subject areas. For member clustering, we adopt the concept of data mining techniques such as K- means clustering algorithm to cluster the members based on their transaction history. This technique is similar to the news feed service of Carvalho et al [2] which used an internet  access log file to cluster the users with similar behavior and deliver the suitable news to the cluster members.

We also extended the book recommendation system by studying the interest patterns of members in different clusters.

The interest patterns are discovered by analyzing the patterns of circulation activities performed by the members through the association rules. To approach the current interest of an individual, we considered both explicit and implicit patterns by using Apriori and Tertius association algorithm to analyze the circulation data.

In order to generate the recommendation list for the members, we adopt the concept of collaboration by aggregating the favorite from all members similar to the work of Romero et al. [3] which used the web usage pattern of one group of student to construct the web travelling recommendation system for other students in the self learning environment.

In the end of our study, we evaluate the user satisfaction to their personal book recommendation list. The evaluation results reveal the possibility of using circulation activity history to predict the current interest of an individual member and construct the personalized book recommendation lists.



II. PROPOSED BOOK RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM  The processes of our proposed book recommendation system can be divided into 2 main steps?patron clustering and interest pattern discovery. In the first step, the library circulation history data is preprocessed to eliminate noise.

After that the cleansed data is passed through the patron clustering process. In this state, we clustered patrons with similar interest into the same cluster and differentiates patrons with unrelated interest into other clusters. In the second step, the possible interest patterns performed by patrons in each cluster were discovered. We can generate the cluster preference lists and discover the cluster interest patterns via the association rules. Finally, the personalized book recommendation list was generated for an individual member of the cluster. The diagram representing the process of our proposed system is shown in Fig. 1. The detail of our proposed system is explained below.

389978-1-4244-7010-5/10/$26.00 c2010 IEEE ISCIT 2010    Circulation History  Preprocessing  Patron Clustering  Circulation Matrix  Patron Cluster  Association Rule Generation  Preference List Creation  Book Recommendation  List Generation  Personalized Book Recommendation List  Circulation Matrix  Cluster i  Patron Clustering Based on Circulation Activities  Interest Pattern Discovery  Cluster j  ...

Fig.1 Diagram representing the process of the proposed book recommendation system  A. Book Categorization based on LC call number[4] The Library of Congress Classification (LCC) is a system  of library classification developed by the Library of Congress.

LC call number divides subjects into boards categories (classes) represented by an English capital letter are shown in Table I.

TABLE   I  CLASSES OF LC CALL NUMBER AND THE RELATED SUBJECT AREA.

Class Subject area Class Subject area A General Works   M Music  B Philosophy, Psychology, and  Religion  N Fine Arts  C Auxiliary Sciences of History  P Language and Literature  D General and Old World History  Q Science  E History of America R Medicine F History of the United  States and British, Dutch, French, and  Latin America  S Agriculture  G Geography, Anthropology, and  Recreation  T Technology  H Social Sciences U Military Science J Political Science V Naval Science K Law Z Bibliography, Library  Science, and General Information Resources  L Education  Each class contains subclasses representing more specific  categories. The example of subclasses for class Q can be shown in Table II.

TABLE   II  SUBCLASSES FOR CLASS Q AND THE RELATED SUBJECT AREA.

Subclass Subject Area Subclass Subject Area Q Science  (General) QH Natural history -  Biology QA Mathematics QK Botany QB Astronomy QL Zoology QC Physics QM Human anatomy QD Chemistry QP Physiology QE Geology QR Microbiology   In this study, we categorized books at the level of LC call  subclasses. The total number of subclasses is 219 subclasses.

There are other types of proprietary systems of library  classification such as Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) that can be used to categorize the book in the library. Our concept can be applied to any of those which hierarchically divide subjects into classes and subclasses.

B. Data Collection The data of circulation activities are collected from the  circulation history database of the Library Management (LM) system of King Mongkut?s University of Technology Thonburi. Circulation activities consist of check in, check out, reservation, renew, fine related activities, etc. However, we used only check out, reservation, and renew transactions since other activities do not represent the member interest on particular subject. The transactions were collected during 20/12/2008-12/10/2009. There are 70,720 transactions performed by 4,421 patrons. The information for each transaction consists of patron ID, and the LC call number of item.

After collecting the history of circulation activities, we constructed the feature vector of circulation activities for an individual member by counting the numbers of transactions related to both patron ID and LC call subclass (see Table III).

For example, a member with patron ID 100001 has 5 circulation activities on books of subclass QA. Initially, the     feature vector has 219 elements corresponding to LC subclasses.

TABLE III  AN EXAMPLE OF FEATURE VECTORS REPRESENTING THE NUMBERS OF TRANSACTIONS FOR DIFFERENT LC CALL SUBCLASSES OF AN INDIVIDUAL  PATRON.

ptnID AC AE AG ? QA ? TP ? ZA 1000000 0 0 0 ? 0 ? 4 ? 0 1000001 0 0 0 ? 5 ? 0 ? 0 1000003 0 0 0 ? 2 ? 0 ? 0 1000006 0 0 0 ? 1 ? 0 ? 0 1000019 0 0 0 ? 0 ? 0 ? 0 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 1040433 0 0 0 ? 0 ? 0 ? 0  C. Data Preprocess The feature vectors of circulation activity give the  information of the number of transactions that an individual member employed the items in each subclass. We filtered the trivial data by removing the feature vector of members that have the total number of transactions less than 5. Moreover, we also removed the subclasses that have the total number of transaction less than 5. Finally, we have the number of members and LC call subclass equal to 2031 members and 90 subclasses, respectively.

After filter the insignificant data, the next step is data normalization. We normalized the number of transactions that an individual member performed in each subclass by dividing it with the total number of transactions for an individual member. Hence, we got the circulation matrix which is feature vectors consist of the proportion of transactions that a member made in each subclass from their total transactions.

D. Patron Clustering Based on Library Circulation Activities  K-Means algorithm  The K-means algorithm is the most prominent clustering technique measuring the distance between each data object and the centroid (or medoid) of each cluster. The data object is assigned to the cluster with the smallest distance.

The basic K-means algorithm can be described by the following algorithm [5].

Algorithm: Basic K-means algorithm.

1: Select K points as initial centroids.

2: repeat 3: Assigning each instance to its closest centroid.

4: Recompute the centroid for each cluster.

5: until Centroids do not change.

Patron Clustering  In order to group the members based on the similarity in circulation activities, we conceptualized and viewed each patron ID as a transaction deal and the LC call subclass as the items of this transaction. We clustered the members into 10  clusters by using K-means algorithm of the software WEKA [6]. The results of clustering are the list of cluster assignments of each individual member. Moreover, the centroid for each cluster is calculated. After that the dominant subclasses in a certain cluster are selected. These subclasses can be detected as the outliers of the normal probability plot of centroid values in that cluster and can be represented by the histogram of Fig. 2.

Fig.2 Histogram of the cluster centroid. The dominant subclass is the subclass having the significant high degree of transactions  Finally, the dominant subclasses will be assigned to be the representative name for the cluster. For example, the cluster with high centroid of QA was named as Mathematics group.

E. Association Rule Generation for Interest Patterns Discovery  Association Analysis  The example of association rule analysis was originally proposed in the common problem known as market basket transactions for discovering hidden purchase patterns in a large transaction data.

Let I= {i1, i2,?,id} be the set of all items in a market basket data and T={t1, t2,?,tN} be the set of all transactions. Each transaction ti contains a subset of items in I. An association rule is an implication expression of the form X?Y, where X and Y are disjoint itemsets, and X?I, and Y?I. The importance of an association rule is measured in terms of support and confidence. The support value of the rule X?Y is the fraction of transactions containing both X and Y, while its confidence value is the fraction of transactions containing Y to the transactions containing X [5]. The formal definitions of support and confidence can be represented by Eq.1.

)( )(Confidence  )(Support  X YX  N YX  ? ?  ?  ? ?  ? ?  (1)  The value of support is an important feature to define the popular patterns. Whereas the confidence measure the reliability of the inference made by a rule. For example, the high confidence of the rule X?Y means that it is the high     possibility that Y will be presented in the transactions containing X.

Apriori [5] is an algorithm for mining association rules.

This strategy control the exponential growth of candidate itemsets based on the support measure called support-based pruning. In order to eliminate the uninteresting itemsets, we need to setup the support threshold value. Initially, every item will be considered and the candidate item with lower support than the threshold will be discarded. Next, the algorithm will iteratively generate new candidates of k-itemsets by using only the frequent itemsets found in the previous step and calculate their support values. The itemsets with low support value will be eliminates. The algorithm terminates when there are no new frequent itemsets generated. Finally, the association rules are generated from the frequent itemsets.

The rules are generated by partitioning frequent item Y into two sets?X and Y-X and calculate the confidence of rule X?Y-X. The rules with low confidence may be discarded. Fig.

3 shows the example of association rules generation from the frequent itemset Y={a,b,c,d}. We can see that, there are 14 possible rules generated from this frequent itemset.

Frequent itemset  abcd  bcd -> a acd -> b abd -> c abc -> d  cd -> ab bd -> ac bc -> ad ad -> bc ac -> bd ab -> cd  d -> abc c -> abd b -> acd a -> bcd   Fig.3 Association rules generation from the frequent itemset Y={a,b,c,d}  Tertius is another algorithm for extracting the implicit, unusual, or interesting rules. The idea of this algorithm is to measure how strongly the rule is confirmed by determining the number of instances that satisfy the rule together with the number of counter-instances of the rule [7]. For example, to consider the confirmation of the rule mother(X,Y) ?female(X), we will focus on the number of counter- instances of this rule which is the number of instances satisfy the rule mother(X,Y) ?not(female(X)). Tertius algorithm can be run by setting the following values [8]:  ? Confirmation threshold: the minimal confirmation of the accepted rule A?B.

? Noise threshold and frequency threshold are the maximal and minimal frequencies of the counter- instances of the role A?B.

Association Rules of the Circulation Activity  After clustering patron based on their similarity of interest, to discover the relationships of interesting patterns of patrons in a cluster, we apply association rules for analyzing the transaction data. The steps of association rule generation start from quantizing the number of transactions in a circulation matrix into 3 levels of interest: low, medium, and high according to the distribution of our gathered data. In this work, we used the following criteria for assigning levels of interest.

? The level of interest is low, if the proportion of transaction that a member made in each subclass is less than or equal to 0.1.

? The level of interest is medium, if the proportion of transaction that a member made in each subclass is higher than 0.1 but less than or equal to 0.4.

? The level of interest is high, if the proportion of transaction that a member made in each subclass is higher than 0.4.

Hence, we got the circulation pattern composing of the nominal scale for representing the degree of interest in different book categories. The matrix of interesting degree of patrons in each cluster is the input data for generating cluster association rules. By matching the appropriate association rule to the past transactions of each patron in a cluster, we can predict their future requirements.

F. Discovery of Cluster Member?s Preferences In this study, we generated the book recommendation list  by analyzing the past transactions performed by all members in each group and find the characteristic of book that favored by the majority of members.

Our collaborative member preference task generates the similar interested information among members in a specific cluster. The similar interested information used in this study includes the favorite title and the favorite authors. These favorite lists are built from the collection of past transactions performed by members within a cluster.

Finally, the book recommendation list for each patron is created by selecting the book items having the characteristics that match the favorite lists for example the book from the favorite author. Our book recommendation list contains 10 book titles selected from the favorite title list, the newest books from the favorite authors, and also includes the new arrival books. The proportion of books for different categories depends on the related association rule of an individual patron.

For example, the patron with related association rule as QD=high ?QA=high will get the recommended book list containing 5 books from QD category and another 5 books from QA category, where the patron with related association rule as QD=high ?QC=low will get the recommended book list with all of 10 books from QD category.



III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  A. Patron Clustering by K-means Algorithm By applying K-means algorithm, we clustered the patrons  based on the similarity in their library circulation activities     into 10 clusters. The number of members and the dominant subclasses for each cluster are shown in Table IV.

TABLE IV  THE RESULTS OF MEMBER CLUSTERING BY K-MEANS  Cluster Member Dominant subclasses  Representative name            QD PE BF QA TK TA PN  TJ, TP   TS, TP   TJ  Chemistry English Language.

Psychology Mathematics Electrical Engineering.

Civil Engineering.

Literature Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Technology Manufacturer, Chemical Technology Mechanical Engineering.

The result shows that there are at most two dominant  subclasses for each cluster. This result suggests that the members within the same cluster share the common interests in specific domains and differ from the members in other clusters.

B. Example of Generated Association Rules We generated the association rules for each cluster by using  the transaction data of patrons in the cluster. The association rules are generated by Apriori algorithm of WEKA software.

Because we prefer the variety of rules to support the variety of patron requirements, we setup the low value of support threshold to 0.2 and confidence threshold equals to 0.8.

Moreover, we run the Tertius algorithm to extract the implicit association rules by setup the confirmation threshold equals to 0.1, frequency threshold equals to 0, noise threshold equals to 0.01. The intra-cluster association rules for different clusters can be shown in Table V.

TABLE V  THE ASSOCIATION RULES FOR DIFFERENT CLUSTERS  Cluster Rules Confidence/ Confirmation  1 1. QA=low ? QC=low 2. QA=med & QD=high ? QC=low 3. QD=high ?QC=low 4. QC=low? QA=low 5. QA=high ?QD=high 6. QC = high ? QD = med | QA = low 7. QC = high & QD = med ? QA = med  0.92 0.92 0.91 0.82 0.15 0.13 0.11  2. 1. PE=high ?PN=low 2. QA=low ? PN=low 3. PN = med & PE = high ? QA = low 4. PN = med ? QA = low | PE = med 5. QA = high? PN = med | PE = high  0.90 0.89 0.13 0.12 0.12  3. 1. BF=med ? BQ=low 2. QA=low? BQ=low 3. BQ=low ? QA=low 4. QA = high ? BF = high  0.94 0.92 0.89 0.12  4. 1. TA=low  ?TP=low 2. QA=high ? TP=low 3. QA=high & TA=low ? TP=low  0.98 0.98 0.98  5. 1. QA=low QC=low ?  TK=2 2. TK=high ?  QC=low  0.91 0.91  3. QA=low ?  TK=high  0.90  6. 1. TA=high   ?   TS=low 2. QA=low &TS=low  ?  TA=high 3. QA=low& TA=high  ?   TS=low  0.88 0.87 0.97  7. 1. PZ=low& QA=low ? PN=high 2. PZ=low ? PN=high 3. QA=low ?PN=high  0.97 0.97 0.96  8. 1. TJ = med & TP = high ? TA = low 2. TP = high ? TJ = high | TA = low 3. TP = high? TA = low 4. TJ = high & TP = med ? TA = low 5. TJ = high & TA = med ? TP = low 6. TA = high? TJ = high  0.14 0.14 0.14 0.11 0.11 0.10  9. 1. TS=0 ?T=0 2. TP=0 TS=0 ? T=0 3. TP=0?T=0 4. TP=low ?TS=high | T=high  0.87 0.85 0.85 0.15  10. 1. QA=low? TJ=high 2. TA=low ? TJ=high 3. QA=low& TA=low ?  TJ=high  1.00 1.00 1.00   Each intra-cluster association rules will be interpreted to  the proportion of books from different categories. The number of books from different categories will be the average number of books derived from all matched rules. Table VI represents the proportion of recommended books assigned to patron with different circulation patterns sampled from cluster 1 (QD: chemistry).

TABLE VI  PROPORTION OF RECOMMENDED BOOKS FOR PATRON IN CLUSTER 1  # Books Circulation Pattern  Matched Association Rules QA QC QD  {QA=low, QC=low, QD=high}  1. QA=low ? QC=low 3. QD=high ?QC=low 4. QC=low? QA=low   -   - -  Book Recommendation List 0 0 10 {QA=med, QC=high, QD=med}  6. QC = high ? QD = med | QA = low 7. QC = high & QD = med ? QA = med  2.5   6.7  3.3 2.5  Book Recommendation List 1 6 3  C. Evaluation of the Proposed Personalized Recommendation  To evaluate the accuracy of using the data of library circulation activities to predict the patron?s interested booklist, we sent the questionnaire consisting of the personalized book recommended list to a group of patrons of the library. In the questionnaire, we asked the patrons to specify the books from the list of 10 books that highly correlated with his/her interests.

There are fourteen out of fifty four patrons answered the question. The respondents are divided into 2 groups: instructor-researcher, and student (5 and 9 patrons, respectively) from 5 faculties. The total average number of selected books is 4.21 out of ten. The average number of selected books for instructor-researcher group and student group are 3.80 and 4.44, respectively. The average number of selected books separated by book properties into favorite title, favorite author, and new release can be shown in Fig. 4.

Fig.4 The average number of selected books separated by book properties into favorite title, favorite author, and new release

IV. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS  The total average number of books selected by the respondents is 4.21 out of ten recommended books (42.10%).

This value closes to 38.10% accuracy rate of assigning book recommendation list generated from the expertise information of each respondent in the online bookstore application of [9].

By considering the large number of books in the library, this number is sufficiently high to specify the scope of books that satisfy the individual.

The analysis of interesting pattern by association rules can be used to clarify the future requirement of the patron in each cluster.   In Table VI, two patrons in cluster 1 which share the common interest of chemistry have different circulation patterns. This leads to different in characteristic of book recommendation list assigned to these patrons.

The reply of respondents from the computer engineering departments suggests that the patron profile should be used in the book recommendation list generation phase to improve the quality of the book recommendation system. As we saw that the instructors and students in this group were more interested in the books with LC call number between QA76.75- QA76.765 which related to the computer software than the other subclasses (the average number of selected books with LC call number between QA76.75-QA76.765 is 86.16% of their total selected books).

The results of patron evaluation also suggest that students are more interested in the favorite title books than the author favorite, and new release books. These favorite book titles are the books used in their study. Hence, this result can indicate the student demands for the book acquisition process.

The present study is only the preliminary experiment that reveals the possibility of using circulation activity history to predict the future interest of an individual member and then provides the book recommended lists obtained from the transactions of other members which share the common interest. However, we need to perform the evaluation test with larger number of sample patrons.

This study has the contribution in the personalization systems such as the university web portal. Under this circumstance, we not only provide the ways to access the relevant information, but also satisfy the individual requirement.

