

Abstract? Data mining aims at extraction of previously  unidentified information from large databases. It can be  viewed as an automated application of algorithms to discover  hidden patterns and to extract knowledge from data. Online  Analytical Processing (OLAP) systems, on the other hand,  allow exploring and querying huge datasets in interactive way.

These OLAP systems are the predominant front-end tools  used in data warehousing environments and the OLAP  system?s market has developed rapidly during the last few  years. Several works in the past emphasized the integration of  OLAP and data mining. More recently, data mining  techniques along with OLAP have been applied in decision  support applications to analyze large data sets in an efficient  manner. However, in order to integrate data mining results  with OLAP the data has to be modeled in a particular type of  OLAP schema. An OLAP schema is a collection of database  objects, including tables, views, indexes and synonyms.

Schema generation process was considered a manual task but  in the recent years research communities reported their work  in automatic schema generation. In this paper, we reviewed  literature on the schema generation techniques and  highlighted the limitations of the existing works. The review  reveals that automatic schema generation has never been  integrated with data mining. Hence, we propose a model for  data mining and automatic schema generation of three types  namely star, snowflake, and galaxy. Hierarchical clustering  technique of data mining was used and schema from the  clustered data was generated. We have also developed a  prototype of the proposed model and validated it via  experiments of real-life data set. The proposed model is  significant as it supports both integration and automation  process.

Index Terms?Automatic schema, Data Mining,  Hierarchical Clustering, OLAP.



I. INTRODUCTION  LAP technology refers to a set of data analysis  techniques to view the data from all of the  transactional systems in an interactive way in order to  support the decision-making process. The growing  complexity and volumes of the data to be analyzed impose  new requirements on OLAP systems.

According to [1] and [2] OLAP systems have rapidly  gained momentum in both the academic and research  communities, mainly due to their quick and multi-  dimensional analysis capabilities. It plays a vital role in data  analysis to identify the key performance indicators of  business and other application domains. In addition to this,  it is an essential element of the decision support system and  permits decision makers to visualize huge operational data  for consistent and interactive analysis. Furthermore, it is  becoming more accepted due to the recognition of the  business value of exploring and querying huge amounts of  data sets in a multi-dimensional way.  During the last few  years OLAP systems are predominant front-end tools used  in data warehousing environments and OLAP system?s  market grew rapidly.

However, the growing complexity and volumes of the  data to be analyzed impose new requirements on OLAP  systems [3]. The major contribution of this paper is the  attempt of combining OLAP and data mining. According to  [4], data mining is a step in the overall concept of  knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) and data mining  techniques like Association, Classification, Clustering and  Trend analysis can make OLAP more useful and easier to  apply in decision support systems. More recently, data  mining techniques have been applied in decision support  applications in order to detect patterns and to extract  knowledge form data. Several previous works [5, 6, 7 and  8] proved the likelihood and interest of coupling OLAP and  data mining.

Hierarchical clustering is one of the dominant data  mining techniques. In this paper, we have applied the  hierarchical clustering technique of data mining as a pre-  processing step. Previously, hierarchical clustering has been  used by [9, 10, 11, 12, and 13] in conjunction with OLAP  systems for a number of reasons which include query  optimization, physical data organization, fast data access  and reduced storage cost. We intend to use the results of  this hierarchical clustering technique in the form of data  clusters to generate automatic schemas for enhanced OLAP  system.

As far as the automatic generation of OLAP schema is  concerned, [14, 15, 16, and 17] reported the work in this  area. To the best of our knowledge none of these works  used hierarchically clustered data to generate OLAP  schema. Furthermore, the authors used ER diagrams or  conceptual graphical models to produce only star schema.

Another major limitation in the automation work is that the  tools and techniques used for schema generation only draws  Data Mining and Automatic OLAP Schema  Generation  Muhammad Usman Auckland University of Technology,  Auckland, New Zealand  muhammad.usman@aut.ac.nz  Sohail Asghar Mohammad Ali Jinnah University,  Islamabad, Pakistan  sohail.asghar@jinnah.edu.pk  Simon Fong University of Macau,  Taipa, Macau SAR  ccfong@umac.mo  O      or identifies the structure of schema. It doesn?t populate the  actual data in the generated schema. In this paper, we are  not only generating OLAP schema of three types namely;  star, snowflake and galaxy; our automated schema builder  tool provides automation in uploading the data from  clustered files to relevant portions of the automatically  generated schema.

On the basis of these observations and limitations, we  proposed a model for automatic schema generation. The  proposed model, firstly, integrates OLAP with data mining  technique of hierarchical clustering and secondly, enables  automatic schema generation. A prototype of the proposed  model is developed by using our schema generation  algorithms.

Validation has been done by performing experiments on  a real-life data set. Experimental results prove that the  proposed automatic schema generation process by  integrating OLAP with data mining system can be achieved  which makes significant advancement in the modern  automation models.

The remaining portions of this paper are organized as  follows: Section II presents the literature review. Section III  elaborates the proposed model for automatic schema  generation. Section IV discusses the implementation and  experimentation details of the developed prototype. Finally,  section V provides conclusions and possible future research  directions.



II. LITRATURE REVIEW  The purpose of this literature review is to introduce and  identify the limitations of automatic schema generation  process by the other researchers. Our focus would be on the  use of hierarchical clustering to automate the process of  OLAP schema generation. The review is categorized over  three major themes: (1) combining OLAP with data mining,  (2) use of hierarchical clustering with OLAP, and (3)  automation in OLAP schema generation.

A. Combining OLAP with Data mining  Several previous studies [5, 6, 7 and 8] emphasized the  possibilities and interest of coupling OLAP and Data  Mining. The authors in [24] indicated the efficiency and  effectiveness of integrating data mining into OLAP and  OLAM systems. OLAM is a promising direction for mining  knowledge from multidimensional databases [8]. Similarly,  Hua [18] proposed and developed an interesting association  rule mining approach called Online Analytical Mining of  association rules. It integrated OLAP technology with  association rule mining methods. The results lead to  flexible multidimensional and multi-level association rule  mining. Similarly, Joseph et al. [19] presented a  methodology that derives the association rule of web pages  click sequences according to the support level and  confidence level of user requirements. This methodology  was responsible for identifying a set of frequently accessed  web pages on a website by a user. The result is a list of  potential customers for a certain product or service on a  target web page. Dzeroski et al. [20] combined OLAP and  Data Mining in a different way to discover patterns from a  database of patients. Two data mining techniques,  clustering and decision tree induction were used. Clustering  was used to group patients according to the overall  presence/absence of deletions at the tested markers.

Decision trees and OLAP were used to inspect the resulting  clustering and to look for correlations between deletion  patterns, populations and the clinical picture of infertility.

Dehne et al. [21] studied the applicability of coarse grained  parallel computing model (CGM) to OLAP for data mining.

Authors presented a general framework for the CGM which  allows for efficient parallelization of the existing data cube  construction algorithm for OLAP. Experimental data  showed that this approach yields optimal speed up even  when it runs on a simple processor cluster via a standard  switch. The study shows that OLAP and data mining, when  combined together, can produce greater benefits in a  number of diverse research areas. Our proposed work is  similar in terms of combining OLAP and data mining  techniques. Our main focus however is on a particular data  mining technique known as Hierarchical Clustering.

Furthermore, we are using data mining as a pre-processing  step to get a better understanding of data before passing it  to the automatic schema builder and then generates schema  for the OLAP engine. In the next section, our survey  confines down to the relations of data mining techniques to  hierarchal clustering, and their usages with OLAP.

B. Use of Hierarchical Clustering with OLAP  Hierarchical clustering of data is a well know mining  technique and it has been used by a number of research  communities in the past. Markl et al. [9] suggested that  OLAP performance can be improved by using the  Multidimensional Hierarchical Clustering (MHC)  technique. Clustering was introduced as a way to speed up  query aggregation without additional storage cost for view  materialization. The authors identified the problem with  queries which either select a very small set of data or  perform aggregations on a fairly large data set. The sole  contribution of their work is an encoding scheme for  hierarchical dimensions that enables clustering of data with  respect to multiple and hierarchical dimensions. The major  strength of the work lies in the comparison of their MHC  technique with the traditional bitmap indexing approach on  the real world data (7GB in size) and finding  an increase in  the performance up to the factor of 10.

Markl et al. [10], again utilized hierarchical clustering in  the context of OLAP queries. Authors investigated the  impacts on query processing in RDBMS when using UB-  Trees and multidimensional hierarchical clustering for  physical data organization. Furthermore, they illustrated the  benefits achieved by performance measurements of queries  using star schema for a real world application of a SAP  business information warehouse.

Karaynnidis et al. [11], proposed a novel multi-  dimensional file structure for organizing the most detailed  data of the cube, the CUBE file. The CUBE file archives  hierarchical clustering of data enabling fast access via  hierarchical restrictions. It imposes low storage cost and  adapts perfectly to extensive sparseness of data space.

Results show that the CUBE File outperforms the most  effective method proposed up to now for hierarchically  clustering the cube, resulting in 7-9 times less I/Os on  average for all workloads tested.

In the same context, Theodoratos et al. [12] claimed the  Heuristic Optimization of OLAP in MHC (Multi-  dimensionally Hierarchically Clustered) databases. They  identified the problem that commercial relational  database  management systems use multiple one-dimensional indexes  to process OLAP queries that restrict multiple dimensions.

They presented architecture for MHC databases based on  the star schema called ?CSB? star. The focus was to  facilitate the user to query the typical star schema and to  formulate the given query for ?CSB? star schema using  query processor. The limitation of their work was that they  only tested a particular class of typical OLAP queries over  the CSB star schema to check efficiency.

Tsois et al. [13], proposed cost based optimization of  aggregation star queries on hierarchically clustered data  warehouses. Hierarchically clustered data warehouses were  used to apply a cost based method for the optimal  application of the pre-grouping transformation. Authors  identified the most suitable algorithms for the operations  related to pre-grouping and derived detailed cost formulas  for them.

It is apparent from the review that various authors have  used hierarchical clustering technique in different ways  with OLAP to improve the functionality and to get better  analytical results. The major difference of the proposed  work with the reviewed work of this section is that the use  of hierarchical clustering is to generate hierarchal clusters  to get an insight of the data before passing it further for  OLAP operations. This mining technique has not been  applied on the cube for archiving cube data or for the  optimization of OLAP queries. Instead of query  optimization, OLAP performance has been improved in  terms of cube construction time through the use of  hierarchically clustered data.

In the following section, the work done on the automation  process of OLAP schema generation is discussed.

C. Automatic OLAP schema generation  Hann et al. [14], proposed the generation of tool specific  schemata for OLAP from conceptual graphical models.

Their work described the design and implementation of the  generation component in the context of their own Bablefish  data warehouse environment. The principle issues of  designing and implementing such an automatic schema  generation component and the possible solutions have been  discussed by the authors. Further topics are the use of graph  grammars for specifying and parsing graphical multi-  dimensional schema descriptions and the integration of the  generation process into a metadata cantered modeling tool  environment.

Peralta et al. [15], highlighted the existing work in the  area of automation and claimed that automation is focused  towards data models, data structures specifically designed  for Data warehouse (DW), and criteria for defining table  partitions and indexes. The major research contribution of  the authors is a step forward towards the automation of DW  relational design through a rule-based mechanism, which  automatically generates the DW schema by applying  existing DW design knowledge. The proposed rules embed  design strategies which are triggered by conditions on  requirements and source databases, and perform the schema  generation through the application of predefined DW  design oriented transformations.

For the sake of accomplishing the ease in the automation  work, Tryfona et al. [16], built a conceptual model (StarER)  for data warehouse design on the basis of user modeling  requirements. The StarER model combines the star  structure, which is dominant in data warehouses, with the  semantically rich constructs of the ER model. Comparison  of the proposed model with other existing models has been  performed, pointing out differences and similarities.

Examples from a mortgage data warehouse environment, in  which starER is tested, that revealed the ease of  understanding of the model, as well as the efficiency in  representing complex information at the semantic level.

For the purpose of achieving the automatic generation,  Song et al. [17] introduced an automatic tool for generating  star schema entity-relationship diagram (ERD). A prototype  named SAMSTAR was presented, which was used for the  automatic generation of star schema from an ERD. The  system takes an ERD drawn by ERwin Data Modeler as an  input and generates star schemas. SAMSTAR displays the  resulting star schemas on a computer screen graphically.

With this automatic generation of star schema, this system  helps designers reduce their efforts and time in building  data warehouse schemas.

It is evident from the literature on automatic generation  of schema that none of the previous works used  hierarchically clustering to generate OLAP schema.

Previous work on automation has a number of limitations as  well such as support for only one schema type, dependency  of ER diagram modeling and having to design rule based  mechanism before the automation process.

The work in this paper is different as compared to  existing automation works. Firstly, the results of  hierarchical clustering are used to generate any of the three  types of schemas. Furthermore, the work is not limited to  designing the schema but it also populates the data from the  clustered data source to the automatically generated schema  tables. In addition to this, the schema builder also  communicates with database server and deploys the  generated schema in the server as a complete database.

To the best of our knowledge none of these works used  hierarchically clustered data to generate OLAP schema.

Most of the work is using ER diagrams or conceptual  graphical models to produce only one type of schema which  is mostly star schema. Another major limitation in the work  is that the tools and techniques used for automatic  generation of schema only draws of identify the structure of  schema and doesn?t populate the corresponding data in the  generated schema. Furthermore, we are not only generating  OLAP schema of three types namely; star, snowflake and  galaxy but our automated schema builder tool provides  automation in uploading the data from clustered file to  relevant portions of the schema. This feature along with      other specifications distinguishes the work done in this  paper from the others. Table 1 highlights a summary of the  literature review.



III. PROPOSED MODEL  It is evident from the literature review that none of the  research works in the past targeted towards the integration  of OLAP with data mining along with the automation in the  schema generation process. A number of authors [5, 6, 7, 8,  18 and 22], in the recent years, have emphasized on the  concept of combination of OLAP and data mining.

Although this previously reported work justified the  advantages of such combination, the major limitation in  their works is the absence of automatic schema generation  process.

We suggest an independent automatic schema generation  layer that fulfils both the requirements of schema  generation and transformation of data. Based on the above  discussion, there is a strong requirement of a significant  model that takes the data mining results to automatically  generate schema, transforms mined data in the schema, and  overcomes the existing limitations in schema generation  models. Figure 1 depicts the proposed model for automatic  schema generation using data mining results.

TABLE I SUMMARY OF LITERATURE REVIEW     Fig 1. Proposed model for automatic schema generation  The elaboration of the layers of the proposed model is as  follows:  A. Data Mining: Pre-Processing Layer  This layer is responsible for the data mining process. The  three components in this layer are as follows:  Dataset: This component represents the data set. A large  number of data sets exist. This component is responsible for  the selection of a particular data set on which data mining is  to be performed.

Hierarchical Clustering: Once the data set is selected, the  data mining technique which is hierarchical clustering is  applied in this component on the data. This component also  handles clustering parameters which include linkage  method (Single, Complete or Average), clustering  directions (rows, columns, both) and similarity/distance  measure (Euclidean, Manhattan, Simple matching for  nominal or Pearson correlation coefficient). On the given  set of clustering parameters this component produces the  hierarchical clusters.

Clustered Data: The hierarchical clusters generated by the  previous component are stored and saved in the form of  clustered data. This component of the layer also saves the  hierarchy relationship among the data along with the actual  data in each cluster. The hierarchically clustered data  become the input of the next layer which is responsible for  the automation process of schema generation.

B. Data Mining: Pre-Processing Layer  The purpose of this layer is to automate the process of  schema generation. To achieve this purpose the data mining  layer feeds the mined data or clustered data to this layer for  the generation of schema from clustered data set. The layer  has distinct components and the working of each  component is explained as follows:  Schema Builder: It is the major component of schema  generation layer. The sole function of this component is to  build a particular type of schema for the clustered data set.

As this component has to perform numerous schema  generation activities, therefore it has a number of sub-  components to achieve the purpose of building the schema.

The sub-components of the schema builder are as follows:  Clustered Data Reader: This sub-component of the  schema builder reads the data generated by the hierarchal  clustering and save it temporarily for future operations.

Clustered Data Viewer: It allows viewing the clustered  data read by the reader in the grid view. All the cluster  hierarchy and the number of records present in each can be  viewed through it.

Schema Generator: After the clustered data has been read  and viewed the data goes to the component called schema  generator. The sub-components of the schema generator are  explained below.

Dimensions and Facts Identifier: This is the first sub-  component of the schema generator. In the generation  process of schema the first important step is the  identification of dimensions and facts from the clustered  data. For this important purpose the data in the schema  generator goes to the Dimension and facts identifier, which  identifies the dimensions and facts present in the clustered  data. It also identifies the cluster hierarchy and the numeric  type of data which are the facts or key performance  indicators of the data.

Dimensions and Facts Separator: The identifier component  just identifies the various dimension and facts present in the  clustered data. But in real life the dimension and the facts  are to be separated in order to build the schema. For this  purpose the Dimension and facts separator splits the  identified dimensions and facts to be used for different  types of schema generation.

Schema Type Selector: At the stage when dimensions and  facts are identified and separated the Schema type selector  component handles the designing of a specific type of  schema. This selector allows the selection of a particular  type of schema which can be a star, snowflake or galaxy.

Warehouse Builder: After determining the schema type to  be generated the dimensions and facts along with the  specific schema type goes in to another major and core unit  of schema builder which is called the warehouse builder.

The warehouse builder as its name implies, builds a  warehouse of a particular schema type and consists of the  following main sub-components. The functionality of each  of the component in the warehouse builder is described  below:  Dimensional hierarchy handler: It is the first component of  the warehouse builder and it serves the purpose of handling  the hierarchy in the dimensions. As the clustered data has  its own hierarchy and the dimensional data identified and  separated previously have to be in some hierarchical order  within each dimension. The dimensional hierarchy is  different for different type of schemas that is why this  handler component handles the hierarchy present within  each dimension.

Dimension and fact table creator: Because the warehouse  builder automatically creates a warehouse in the form of a  database so the creation of the dimension and fact table is a  must. For this reason the dimension and fact table creator  takes dimensional hierarchy from the previous component  and the facts separated by the separator component and  create the tables according to the specific schema type.

Within each table created for a dimension the hierarchy  structure is determined and created using the hierarchy  handler output, which is different for each type of schema.

Table relationship manager: For each type of schema the  referencing of dimension and fact table is different. For star  schema, the dimensions are connected directly. In  Snowflake schema there exists a normalized relationship  between the dimensions whereas for Galaxy both types of  relationships are being made. To handle this complexity of  relationship among dimension and fact tables created by the  warehouse builder for a specific schema type, the table  relationship manager plays its part and manages all kind of  relationships among the tables accordingly.

Data population unit: When all the tables are created along  with the hierarchy within each dimension and the  relationship is being created among the dimensions and fact  tables, the data population unit comes into play. The role of  this unit is to load the clustered data in the schema  intelligently. Therefore, this unit picks the clustered data  and inserts it in specific columns of the dimension and fact  tables so that this data can be used later for the OLAP  operations.

Schema Viewer: This component takes the generated  schema from the schema generator and gives the view of  the automatically generated schema in the form of schema  diagram.



IV. IMPLEMENTATION AND EXPERIMENTAL  DETAILS  In this section, based on our implementation, we discuss in  details the steps involved in the implementation of the  proposed model. Some tools and technologies have been  used for the implementation of each layer of the proposed  model. Each step of the implementation phase is discussed  individually in the following sub sections with the help of  an experiment.

For the experimental purpose, ForestCoverType [23] data  set has been chosen. This data set has 581,012 numbers of  instances and 54 attributes. The attribute breakdown shows  that it has 12 measures or facts with 54 columns of data  from which 10 are quantitative variables, 4 are binary  wilderness areas and 40 binary soil type variables. The  main purpose of the experiment is to demonstrate the ability  of using the proposed model with a real life data set.

A. Hierarchical clustering of data  The proposed model starts with the layer of data mining and  the technique used for data mining is the hierarchical  clustering. The first step of the implementation is the  hierarchical clustering of data. To serve the purpose of step  1, we used Hierarchal Clustering Explorer (HCE) tool [24]  for generating the hierarchical clusters of data. This tool  takes input data file and allows the hierarchical clustering  of given data based on different clustering parameters. At  this point, user can select the parameters of his/her choice  to perform specific type of hierarchical clustering on the  data. Upon the selection of clustering parameters, the data  as a result, is hierarchically clustered and the hierarchy  details are shown in the HCE tool.

We fed the ForestCoverType data set to the Hierarchical  Clustering Explorer (HCE) tool. Various parameters can be  set at this stage. A visualization map of the      ForestCoverType data is shown in Figure 6 (Appendix) as  an example.

The tool takes this data as input and produces the  hierarchical clusters of data by setting different clustering  parameters. With the help of this tool user can see the  generated hierarchy of the clusters along with the data  present in each cluster. For the experiment we selected the  row wise clustering option and the algorithm used for this  type of clustering was the Euclidean algorithm. The reason  for this choice is that Euclidean distance is the most  commonly used type of distance measure in cluster  analysis. It uses raw data instead of standardized data to  compute the distances.

Using the complete linkage method, the hierarchal  clusters are produced, it can be seen from the Figure 2 that  3 distinct clusters are produced where each one of them is  having its specific hierarchy.

B. Automatic Schema generation  In this step, the cluster results file which was exported  using the HCE tool becomes the input of the automatic  schema builder. We developed a prototype to automate the  process of schema generation. The prototype takes the  clustered data and generates the schema of any particular  type such as star, snowflake or galaxy/constellation. The  prototype has been developed using the C sharp (C#)  programming language in Microsoft Visual Studio.net  2005.

Once the hierarchical clustering has been done, the next  step is to extract this hierarchical information in the form of  cluster information tables which are fed into the developed  prototype called Automatic Schema Generator. Figure 3  depicts the main interface of the Automatic Schema  Generator having the clustered relationship data. Cluster  names are the abbreviations which are formed using the  first letters of each cover type, for example, cluster name  for C1 is PCD, which means cover types of Ponderosa pine,  Cottonwood, and Douglas-fir (PCD). All other names are  abbreviated by using the first alphabetical letters.

After reading the cluster relationship file, the button of  ?Create Schema? as shown in the following diagram  displays the schema selection window. Figure 4 shows the  schema selection window of automatic schema builder.

Using this selector window, cluster name and type of  schema can be selected to build database in the database  server. User can select from star, snowflake and galaxy or  constellation options of schema type using the radio button.

The ?Generate? button on the bottom of schema selector  window performs the following major functions:  1)Generates automatic database in the database server  2)Creates dimension and fact tables for the schema type  selected  3)Manage relationships among the tables  4)Upload data in the fact and dimension tables from the  clustered file  After performing the above mentioned functions, the  control is passed to the schema visualization window which  gives a glimpse of the schema created automatically as  shown in Figure 5.

Fig 2: Hierarchical clusters generated by HCE tool  Fig 3: User interface of automatic schema builder  Fig 4: Schema Selector window     Fig 5: Schema visualization window

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  In this paper, we reviewed the literature regarding the  integration of OLAP with data mining and automatic  generation of OLAP schema. Literature review revealed the  fact that none of the previous works targeted at the  automatic schema generation from the mined data set.

Furthermore the works in the past pose a number of  limitations. The major limitation of the previous work was  the absence of a model that can produce the three basic  types of OLAP schema (star, snowflake and galaxy). Based  on these observations we presented the model for the  integration of data mining and OLAP along with the  automatic generation of OLAP schema. We have developed  a prototype for the automatic schema generation. This  developed prototype takes mined data and produces the  schema of user?s choice. Finally we implemented the  proposed model and evaluated the results with the help of  experiment. It is evident from the result that the prototype  system overcomes the manual schema design and  implementation requirement in the data warehousing  environment. We are working on the enhancement of the  proposed model for automatic schema generation. One  possible way of enhancement is the use of other data  mining techniques along with OLAP for the schema  generation. Further more, we are exploring how OLAP can  be further extended and enhanced to meet the new  challenges and to make it more effective, efficient and  intelligent OLAP.

