A New Profile Identification Method Based on Multi? scale Energy Feature

Abstract-As one dimensional range profile is sensitive to direction, translation and intensity, it needs extra storage and big computation in target identification. To reduce storage and computation, a new multi-scale energy feature based on dyadic wavelet transform is proposed. As energy is not dependent on the translation of range profiles, the new feature has a translation invariable property. The energy of two neighbor scales is divided to eliminate the intensity sensitivity. The feature is also insensitive to direction variation. When the proposed feature was applied into real data for target identification, good result has been obtained, which is better than conventional methods.

Therefore, the new method is an effective feature selection method for range profile identification.

Keywords-range profile; target identificatition; dyadic wavelet transform; multi-scale energy  1. INTRODUCTION  In high resolution radar, a target which has a certain size in range becomes a multi-points target. The multi-points return is called range profile of the target[1, 2]. As range profile can supply information of targets' physics structure, it can be selected as a feature for target identification. But it is sensitive to direction, translation and intensity[1].

Wavelet transform is a good method for feature selection[3, 4]. Presently, the widely used wavelet features include multi? scale modulus maximum features, features based on adaptive wavelet neural network and based on orthogonal wavelet transform. But the first two methods are too complex, and the features based on the last method are not stable. To select features insensitive to direction, translation and intensity, a novel multi-scale energy feature based on dyadic wavelet transform is employed in the paper. It not only has a property of translation invariability and intensity invariability, but also can solve direction sensitivity problem effectively. When the proposed feature was applied into real data, high identification rate has been obtained.



II. DYADIC WAVELET TRANSFORM  The definition of wavelet transform is as follow: a function lj/(t) named mother wavelet is translated b and scale with a , then compute the inner product of the new function and signal x(t) . That is[3]  Supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities(HEUCFR I 0 16)    Jia-qun Zhao College of Science  Harbin Engineering University Harbin, China  j qzhao _ 03@163.com  1 f . t-b WI:: (a,b) = r x(t)lj/ (-)dt.

"a a  (1)  The above formula is called continuous wavelet transform of x(t) , where x(t) is a square integrable function, a is scale  factor, b reflects translation, and lj/a .b (t) = ? lj/(t -b) is the "a a translation and scale of mother wavelet. The equivalent frequency domain expression is  Faf * ? b  WT,(a,b) = 2Jr  X(w),? (aw)e1W dw. (2)  In frequency domain, wavelet transform in different scales equals to filtering the signal with a group of bandpass filters.

When a is small, the time observation scope is small, and in frequency it equals to high resolution analysis with high frequency, i.e. detailed observation with high frequency wavelet. When a is big, the observation scope in time axis is big, and in frequency it equals to general observation with low frequency. Therefore wavelet transform has a property of adaptive bandpass filtering. In every scale, the ratio of the center frequency to the bandwidth of the filter is constant, i.e. it has "constant Q" characteristic.

Famous Marr wavelet(Mexico hat wavelet) is used in the paper. It is second derivative of gauss function(but differs from it with negative sign). Marr wavelet is very close to spatial characteristics of human visual system. Fig.1 shows its time domain waveform. Marr wavelet's time domain and frequency domain expressions are shown as (3) and (4)  (3)  w-  '? (w) = J21iw2 e-2 (4)    0.8  0.6 " ] 0.4  0.

E 0.2  <:  Or--_____  ?0.2  Figure I . Time domain wavefonn of Marr wavelet.

Considering the feasibility of calculation and simplicity of analyze, it is necessary to get discrete wavelet transform. When scale a was valued in dyadic discrete way, the famous dyadic wavelet transform are obtained. It equals to the value of continuous wavelet transform Wj (a, b) when setting a with dyadic discrete value, i.e. ak = r  k .

Compared with discrete wavelet transform, dyadic wavelet transform has a merit of shift invariant So it is good at feature selection. In orthogonal wavelet transform domain, wavelet coefficients have no redundancy. So the features excessively rely on every coefficient However as dyadic wavelet transform is an over-complete representation, the features selected based on it are very stable. Therefore, dyadic wavelet transform is employed in the paper.



III. HIGH RESOLUTION RANGE PROFILE  Presently, high resolution radar is widely used. Compared with low resolution radar, it can recognize two points which are very near. In high resolution radar, targets can be represented by multi-points model. Thus a conventional point target becomes a distributed target in range, and the return of a target forms a dimensional range profile.

In target HRRP(high resolution range profile), the return of every range cell is adding coherently returns of all scatters in the range cell. If the direction of target to radar varies, the range of every scatter to radar also varies, which induces profile sensitive to direction. Setting HRRP data set in the direction scope can solve direction sensitivity problem, but it needs much storage.

As targets maneuver normally, the positions that profiles occur in range window are uncertain, i.e. range profile is sensitive to translation. The translation sensitivity problem can be overcome by range profiles alignment. However the computation is big.

Radar parameters of different radars are different, such as radar effective distance, radar antenna gain. In different radars, a same target has different scale standard, which is the intensity sensitivity of profiles. Using energy normalization to remove the intensity sensitivity needs extra computation.

Therefore, to reduce storage and computation, there is great need of selecting features insensitive to direction, translation and intensity.



IV. MULTI-SCALE ENERGY FEATURE  When one dimensional range profile is analyzed with wavelet transform, it is exposed clearly that local scattering behavior and all kinds of other scattering mechanics of targets.

Therefore, wavelet transform can select reliable features for target identification.

As different signals' energy distributions at scales are different, multi-scale signal energy can be selected as a feature.

Compared with energy feature based on Fourier transform, multi-scale energy based on wavelet transform can supply signal's composition information in different frequency band.

It can also select energy limited to the interested frequency band, which make it more effective and flexible.

According to [5], if Wr(a,b) is the wavelet transform of signal J(t) , scalogram is defined as the square of wavelet  coefficients' amplitude  E(a) = [ IWr(a,b)1 db. (5)  It gives signal's energy at scale a. The energy estimation process is that: to some scale a ,  move bandpass filter (center frequency is Wo / a and bandwidth is wo ) in time axis to filter the signal and select the component whose frequency are same to the center frequency. The energy of filter output signal is wavelet energy E(a) .

In dyadic wavelet transform, let Nand T, represent sample point numbers and sample step, and Wj(a,iTJ represent the dyadic wavelet coefficients at scale a . Then the center frequency and bandwidth of bandpass filter are Jo = 1/(axT,) and N = 1/(Nxaxl;) respectively. The signal energy at scale a is[6]  N  Ej = 'L W) (a,iT,).

;=1  (6)  As energy is not dependent of the position of range profile, energy feature has translation invariant property. Although range profile varies with direction variation, energy is stable.

Hence, the feature is insensitive to direction variation. To solve the problem of intensity sensitivity, after signal energy at different scales is computed, the energy of two neighboring scales is divided. The ratios are arranged to be a feature vector for identification. In a word, the multi-scale energy can solve the problem of translation, direction and intensity sensitivity for range profile identification. At the same time, the dimension of the feature is small. So the storage and computation are small.



V. EXPERIMENT AND RESULT  To verify the effectiveness of the proposed feature, it was applied into real data for target identification and the result was compared with the result of the method based on Self Organizing Feature Map(SOFM) combined Vector Quantization(VQ)[7, 8].( Our team has researched the method.)  In the experiments, one dimensional range profiles of three real aircrafts were used, which were An-26 propeller aircraft(see Fig.2), citation aircraft(see Fig.3) and Yark-42 aircraft(see FigA). Data were selected from trajectory with maximum variation. 2000 range profiles were selected for a target. So there were 6000 range profiles altogether. In experiment one, in both the proposed method and SOFM combined VQ method, 36 training samples were selected for An-26 propeller aircraft and citation aircraft respectively, and 30 training samples for Yark-42 aircraft. In experiment two, for two methods, 50 training samples were selected for An-26 propeller aircraft and citation aircraft respectively, and 40 training samples for Yark-42 aircraft. All range profiles except training samples were used as test samples.

Marr wavelet was employed in two experiments. At first, energy of range profile at scales a = i , a = 22 , a = 23 , a=24 , a=25 , a=26 , a=27 , a=28 was computed respectively. Then energy in two neighbor scales was divided.

Thus seven ratios were obtained, which were the selected feature. Classifier employed nearest neighbor rule. The identification results of two experiments are shown in Table 1 and Table 2. It can be easily seen that the identification rate based on multi-scale energy feature is much better than that based on SOFM combined VQ. SO compared with the conventional method, the new proposed method is not only much simpler, but also more promlsmg for profile identification.

TABLE 1. IDENTIFICATION RESULT OF EXPERIMENT ONE  Methods Types oftarget SOFM combined Multi-scale energy  VQ feature An-26 propeller aircraft 75.4% 89.4%  citation aircraft 82.4% 96.5%  Yark-42 aircraft 79.1% 91.4%  TABLE II. IDENTIFICATION RESULT OF EXPERIMENT TWO  Methods Types oftarget SOFM combined Multi-scale energy  VQ feature  An-26 propeller aircraft 83% 95.1%  citation aircraft 87.5% 96.3%  Yark-42 aircraft 84.4% 93.0%   18r-----,-----,-----,-----,,-----.----?  " "'"   .E 10 0.

E 8 <: 6  %?==????????????=-??--?  Figure 2. A range profile of An-26 propeller aircraft.

" 25 "'" Z 'i5.2O E <: 15   }; LJ 50 100 150 200 250 300  Range bin  Figure 3. A range profile of citation aircraft.

30r-----,-----,-----,-----,,-----.----?  " "'" z    'i5. 15 E <: 10  Figure 4. A range profile ofYark-42 aircraft.



VI. CONCLUSION  In one dimensional range profile target identification, a multi-scale energy feature based on dyadic wavelet transform has been proposed in the paper. It is not only a direction, translation and intensity invariable feature, but also very simple. When the proposed method was applied into real data for target identification, good result has been obtained.

Therefore, it is an effective and promising feature for range profile identification.

