Data analysis of Genome-Wide Association studies (GWAS)  concerning rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis

Abstract- In this study the methodology of analyzing the data produced from Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAs)  is presented, using appropriate techniques and software  packages. The analytical process is applied to Rheumatoid  Arthritis (RA) and Multiple Sclerosis (MS) data sets produced by experimental microarray assays. The purpose of the process  aims to the filtering of the datasets in order to derive and define statistically significant genetic variants associated with each one  of the diseases. Furthermore, the analysis is expanded using the  MuItifactor Dimensionality Reduction (MDR) data mining strategy. Using MDR we are reducing the dimensionality of the genotyped predictive factors from n-dimensions to one?  dimension by characterizing the genotypes of the different locus as high-risk and low-risk. In this way, we can provide risk  predictive models about the diseases' susceptibility and the methodology is further extended by adding clinical and  environmental factors to the RA and MS genomic loci data.

The methodology presented in this study aims to transform the  analytical genomic datasets produced by micro array experiments to a knowledge modeling framework constituted of  prognostic/diagnostic decision rules and risk predictive factors.

Finally, the evaluation methodology of the MDR data mining strategy is presented.



I. INTRODUCTION  A Genome-Wide Association study (GWAS) investigates the association that exists between common genetic variants and a disease in an unbiased manner, across the entire human genome. In order to perform this type of analysis we need a dense set of genetic markers, as well as a large number of individuals that carry the disease or trait and others without it, that are characterized as the control individuals in case-control studies [1,2]. The next step includes data management and analysis.

There are already several published GWAS [3] and specifically for autoimmune diseases surpnsmg and satisfactory discoveries have already been made [2].

Manuscript submitted July 10, 2010. This work is part-funded by the European Commission (project POCEMON: Point-Of-Care MONitoring and Diagnostics for Autoimmune Diseases FP7-ICT -2007-216088).

K. Nikolaou, F.G. Kalatzis, N. Giannakeas, T.P. Exarchos and D.1.

Fotiadis* are with the Unit of Medical Technology and Intelligent Information Systems, Dept. of Material Science & Engineering, University of Ioannina, GR45110, Ioannina, Greece (e-mail: konikol@cc.uoi.gr.

tkalatz@cc.uoi.gr, me013lO@cc.uoi.gr, exarchos@cc.uoi.gr, *Corresponding author; phone: 0030-26510-08803; fax: 0030-26510- 07092; e-mail: fotiadis@cs.uoi.gr).

S. Markoula is with the Medical School, University of Ioannina, GR- 45110, Ioannina, Greece (e-mail: smarkoula@grads.uoi.gr).



I. Georgiou is with the Genetics Unit, Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical School, GR45110, Ioannina, Greece. (e-mail: igeorgioU@cc.uoi.gr).

Technological progress in genotyping between other scientific conceptions has supported the last years the considerable increase of GWA studies. Due to linkage disequilibrium (LD) that exists between nearby single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), it is not necessary to type all genetic loci in order to capture the greater part of common variation of a region [4]. Facilitation of the genetic studies of human diseases has been made due to efforts for cataloguing and mapping the correlation patterns of SNPs (i.e. the haplotypes). Concerning this issue, the International HapMap project after cataloguing the haplotype patterns across the human genome, and analysis of over 3 million SNPs, has created a public database [5].

Interaction of a number of genetic variants and environmental factors, are believed to be the cause of complex diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. Various data mining approaches have been proposed for the association between multiple genomic loci and diseases cited in [6], such as dimensionality reduction [7], neural networks [8], random forests [9] and support vector machines [10].

A key component of the point-of-care diagnostic system concerns the modeling of the knowledge coming from clinico-genomic patient data along with the computation of the RA and MS disorders risk predictive factors. The datasets of the POCEMON system are composed of 800 RA cases, 800 MS cases and 1600 shared controls. The data were collected during the genome wide association studies from RA and MS cases and controls. The purpose of this step is two-fold: a) to extract new and potentially useful knowledge and b) provide prediction methods for the diagnosis as well as the detection of susceptibility for MS and RA diseases. In order to extract new and potentially useful knowledge, cluster analysis [11] and association rule mining techniques [12] are applied to the collected datasets.

In order to create predictive models for the diagnosis and the detection of susceptibility of the RA & MS diseases, classification techniques [13] are applied.



II. GWASDATA ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY  Concerning common disease I common variant hypothesis (CD/CV), we mean that much of the genetic variation of a common complex disease is due to relatively few common variants [4]. The standard logic of GWAS design, assumes that common variants with modest effects on a complex disease exist, explaining part of its variation. G WAS' data analysis represent statistical and computational challenges, due to the hundreds of thousands genotyped SNPs for    thousands of persons either carrying the disease (case) or not (control) [14]. In our study we use for GWAS the PLINK software program [14], to analyze the results of two GWAS related to rheumatoid arthritis and mUltiple sclerosis.

In this data analysis design we took into consideration a set of guiding principles for reporting results of genetic association studies mentioned by Little et at. [15], included into the STrengthening the REporting of Genetic Association studies (STREGA) Statement [15]. Software version and options used will be clearly stated. The key components of the methodology to be implemented for analyzing data from case-control GW A studies, which are  presented in the forthcoming sections, are: (a) Quality control and summary statistics, (b) Population stratification assessment, (c) SNP association analysis and selection of the statistically significant SNPs, using the PLINK software [14].

A. Quality control and summary statistics  Using the PLINK, SNP data are finally represented in standard text-based formats. The type of data representation includes one-row-per-individual format giving information about gender, phenotype and genotype for biallelic SNPs, or one-row-per-SNP format glvmg information about chromosomal position, RS# (reference SNP identifier), base pair position etc. At the next step genotype information can be reordered and filtered (using a simple interface).

Comparing values from summary statistics (e.g. genotyping rates, allele and genotype frequencies) to thresholds, could lead to determination and extraction of SNPs with accepted genotyping rates, as well as accepted allele and genotype frequencies [14], in order to further incorporate them in association tests with the respective diseases. For example individuals with > 10% missing genotypes and SNPs with > 10% missing data could be excluded [16].

In our study conformation to Hardy-Weinberg expectations are also checked concerning the observed genotypes, because deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) for a particular SNP may either suggest a problem with genotyping or population structure, or on the other hand concerning individuals with the disorder, an association between the SNP and the disease may exist [17, 14].

In GWA studies one method addressed in order to reduce potential false-positive results generated due to chance, is the application of Bonferroni correction, where the conventional p-value is divided by the number of tests performed (in our case the number of SNPs tested). Even though this approach has been characterized as conservative it is the most commonly used approach and is used by us [18, 19, 14].

B. Population stratification assessment  Population stratification describes the existence of different groups in a popUlation that potentially have different marker allele frequencies and disease prevalence [1]. Population heterogeneity induces spurious associations between genetic variants and the studied disorder [20]. Data derived from GWAS require careful statistical analysis to assess and correct for differences due to stratification (if they  exist), in order to exclude false-positive results [21]. The PLINK tool set is used to check for population stratification [14] (Purcell, 2007).

C. SNP association analysis  In order to test for association between SNPs that were not excluded for any reason and the respective diseases, RA and MS, the analysis approach as implemented in PLINK, is used [14].



III. RISK PREDICTIVE KNOWLEDGE MODELS  The architecture for the modelling of knowledge of the system is shown in Fig. 1. The selection of the most informative clinical features and SNPs is based on mathematical measurements like the correlation of the  ' -1 , - -  _ f  Fig. I. The architecture of the proposed knowledge modeling system.

features with the target outcome, as well as the consistency of the informative set of features with the target outcome.

Feature selection is used: (a) before clustering in order to keep only the important features for developing useful profiles, (b) before association rule mining in order to restrict the rules only to those that have as antecedent of consequent the informative features and (c) before the classification, in order to build more accurate and less complicated prediction models for MS and RA.

Cluster analysis is an unsupervised procedure, meaning that the outcome (e.g. MS or RA, or normal) is not used as input in the clustering procedure. During the clustering procedure, records of patients which are close in terms of a Euclidian distance are grouped together into the same cluster. Algorithms for this task include the k-means algorithm, the EM algorithm and the fuzzy c-means algorithm. The identified profiles are stored in the knowledge repository. Association rule mining aims at discovering hidden knowledge within the data in the form of    rules. The evaluation of rules is performed using the support confidence framework and only rules with high support and confidence are considered by the experts for storing them in the knowledge repository. The rules extraction is implemented using the well known a-priori and FP-growth algorithms [22].

Classification is one of the most important functionalities of the knowledge modeling framework, since the development of classification models, constitute the prediction models for MS and RA. These models are finally used to provide predictions for new patients performing an examination at the point-of-care. Extensive testing is  performed in order to identify algorithms with high prediction accuracy. Preliminary studies indicate that a combination of algorithms (Artificial Neural Networks, Decision Trees and Support Vector Machines) - which produces highly accurate results accompanied with interpretation of the decisions - performs efficiently for the needs of the diagnostic point-of-care platform.

STEt' 1 : ?Iecl I'olymorphisms ? STEP 2 : Calculate Case- ? STEP 3 : Identify Iligh- Control Ratios for Each Risk Mullilocus Genotypes  Polymoqlhism 1 PolymorJlhisllI 2 PolymoqlhislII 3 Polymorphism 4  e ] ? B  Polymorphism 10 E i  B  Mlillilocu Genol)'pe  Polymorllhism I AA Aa  " .

"  , , - .:.11 -- b IS It  ?? "  - . , - .

AA Aa  b ?? OJ  .1.-b bb  L ?""? .. ,."'.. .... _-='---'""""'-- ?'" ? l , . , ,  Tntin 9110  Tesli/iO  .,'" ? l , . , , Train 9/10  Test 1/10  Fig. 2. The steps of the MDR methodology [23].

<a , ..,.

, , Train 9110  Tail/tO  The Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction (MDR) [23] is a data mining strategy applied to results produced by Genome Wide Assocations Strudies (GW AS) aiming to provide risk predictive factors of the genomic disease study.

The method reduces the dimensionality of multilocus information, to improve the identification of polymorphism combinations associated with disease risk. Efficient data mining strategies like the MDR method are of significant importance on the way of analyzing the large amount of SNP data produced by GWAS.

The MDR method is nonparametric (no hypothesis about the value of a statistical parameter is made), is model-free (it assumes no particular inheritance model) [23], and is directly applicable to case-control studies like the RA and MS study of our work. The method allows the classification and prediction of discrete clinical endpoints using attributes constructed from multi locus genotype data. The approach is used once a multilocus attribute is constructed which is conceptual similar to that of a naiVe Bayes classifier.

The MDR methodology applied in the RA and MS cases of our work aims to reducing the genotype predictor factors  from n-dimensions to one-dimension by pooling the multilocus genotypes into high-risk and low-risk. The produced one-dimensional multilocus genotype is evaluated for its ability to predict the RA and MS disease status through cross validation and permutation tests. The process applied in our work is presented in Fig. 2.

As depicted in Fig. 2 for each combination of polymorph isms the case versus controls ratios are calculated.

The high-risk and low-risk factors are calculated using the ratio of cases versus controls; if the ratio is greater than 1.0 then the multilocus combination is indicated as high-risk, else is indicated as low-risk (step 3 in Fig. 2). In order to provide results with the smallest prediction error the cases and controls subjects must be balanced. The prediction errors are computed using a cross-validation procedure (step 4 in Fig. 2). The computation is implemeted by randomly division of the cases and control subjects to 10 equal parts.

The MDR data mining strategy is developed for each possible 9/10 of the subjects which is the training part of the method. The predictions of the RA & MS disease status are made to the rest 1110 of the subject. Actually a 10-fold cross? validation procedure is performed by changing divisions and the final prediction errors are averaged.

A computational challenge arising by the application of the MDR method concerns the astronomical number of all possible combinations produced by thousands of SNPs  involved in the GWA study [24]. To avoid such a challenge carefull selection of the genetic variables that are included in the analysis is required. The application of MDR in genome scans with hundreds to thousands of SNPs, requires the development of appropriate machine learning strategies to optimize the selection of polymorph isms to be modeled, since an exhaustive search of all possible combinations is impossible.

In the RA and MS study of our work the HumanCNV370- Duo BeadChip is used for the proccessing of the RA and MS cases. In order to exhibit the computational challenge of our study and the highly cpu-intensive calculations of the MDR method the following case is presented:  a. Current computer processing power can perform 50 MDR runs & SNP evaluations per second.

b. The evalutation time of the 318000 SNPs contained in the beadarray is estimated to 318000/50= 6360 secs= 1.76 Hours.

c. All possible 2-locus combinations are: (318000 2)= 5*1010. Exhaustive evaluations of all 2-locus combinations require: 5*1010/50=1 *109= 32 years which is not a suitable time for the proposed work.

Thus, machine learning strategies are applied in the selection of the polymorphisms aiming to reduce the sizing of the computations without loss of critical information.

The evaluation of the MDR strategy in our work is performed using the confusion matrix by computing the type I and type II error rates [25]. The confusion matrix is constructed for the MDR classifier as depicted in Table I.

TABLE I CONFUSION MATRIX CONSTRUCTED BY AN MDR CLASSIFIER (25)  Risk group by Djsease group MDR classifier  Case Control  High TP' fPC  Low FNb TNd  "True positive = the number of correctly classified individuals within case group.

bFalse negative = the number of incorrectly classified individuals within case group.

e False positive = the number of incorrectly classified individuals within control group.

dTrue negative =the number of correctly classified individuals within control group.

The classification accuracy (CA), balanced accuracy (BA) and weighted-balanced accuracy (wBA) measurements are computed according to the following formulas[25] respectively:  The purpose of the wBA measurements aim to improve the MDR performance at the RA and MS studies by extending the capabilities of the classical confusion matrix measurements.



IV. CONCLUSIONS  Up to date associations already exist concerning genetic variants and complex diseases, but at the same time not all of them can lead to assessment about the causal gene or variant.

One known characteristic of associated with disease genetic variants is that they have small to modest effect sizes [1,5].

As it happens for environmental influences, the probability for a person to develop a complex disease during his life is not depended on a single genetic risk factor, but each variant could only modulate that probability [5]. As far as the described methodology is concerned we are alerted, concerning the statistical analysis approach that best fits our research and willing to incorporate additional or alternative approaches.

Assessing and characterizing the risk or protection, association between a genetic variant and a disease is crucial for making progress in understanding the etiology, as well as for developing interventions based on genetic information, to improve patient's life [15].

