Recommendation Strategies Analysis in E-commerce

Abstract?With the development of personalized recommendation research, it has become increasingly important that how to select proper technology to set up recommendation system. In this paper, a few familiar personalized recommendation technologies are introduced briefly at first, while their characters are also analyzed.

Then, corresponding strategies are put forward according to characteristics of products and guests. Structures of personalized recommendation system are suggested and their work principles are analyzed.

Keywords-E-commerce, Recommendation strategy, Collaborative filtering,  Association rule

I.  INTRODUCTION The advantage of E-commerce recommendation system is  that it can automatically analyze user?s materials so as to find guest purchase trend and give suggests accordingly. Internet surfers can get information and purchase suggestions when they visit E-commerce Website. Their purchase decisions are made with the help of the recommendation system attached Website. So personalized recommendation system in an E- commerce website simulates a salesman in the business process. A well worked personalized recommendation system enables business website three advantages:  ? Turn a website visitor to a purchaser.

? Improve e-business website cross-selling ability.

? Improve user?s loyalty of an e-business website.

Recently, researchers have down a great deal studies in personalized recommendation field. There are lots of scientific research results. In a certain condition, this recommendation algorithm may get ideal recommendations. However, so fast the development of internet based e-business and so complicated of recommendation system as to the available recommendation algorithm has its inaccuracy, delay, etc.

Therefore, to analyze various recommendation algorithm has great significance to set up an e-commerce recommendation system.



II.  FAMILIAR E-COMMERCE RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS  Generally speaking, personalized recommendation has three stages. They are data gathering, data analyzing and forming recommendation result. Among which, the date analyzing is key stage to find knowledge [1].

A. User Bbehavior Based Product Recommendation Algorithm The custom?s purchase behavior can be evaluated by  whether their demands are met. When they are doing shopping, actually, they are going through a cognition process. While they evaluate all characters of available products they know these products and thereby make decision of purchase.

Customs may gather widely information of all kinds of products at beginning to know them generally. Gradually, the range they focus is shrunk, they will move their attention to the products in which they are interested. Therefore, we can learn custom?s demands according to their online behaviors.

We can get product recommendation algorithm under two assumptions as below[2]:  ? Custom only clicks those items in which they have interesting, so as to learn further information about those products.

? Custom stay at a page for a long time means he or she pay more attention on products in this page.

User behavior based product recommendation method obtains custom?s information through analyzing their online behaviors without additional custom inputs. With this method, the custom?s information can be update in time. On the other hand, because system need dynamically track every custom, record their behaviors and analyze them, it will consume a great deal of computer resource.

B. Recommendation Based on Association Rules Association rules is a statistical result which indicates how  many customs bought product X and therefore bought product Y. This algorithm recommends products to customer by the rule and what he or she has bought. Association rule data mining technique can find products? relativity. So it is used well in retail trade.

C. Collaborative filter recommendation algorithm Collaborative filter recommendation algorithm built a  model according to user?s information, such as registration data, product marks, and purchased items[7]. Using the model, the system gives recommendations to custom. There are two kinds of this algorithm:  ? User-based Collaborative filter recommendation algorithm         It gives recommended list by custom purchase records. It works under an assumption, that is, if two customs have same purchase recorders they will also select same product. It finds some aim custom?s neighbor first. Then, the aim customer will give scores to the unmarked product referring to his or her neighbor?s doing. The recommendation results are at the top of the mark list.

? Item-based Collaborative filter recommendation algorithm  It is based on similar items scores for the user to predict the scores of aim item. It is also based on an assumption: If the majority of users are quite similar to the scores of some items, then, user at present, will give the same scores to the item.

Items-based Collaborative filtering recommendation system uses statistical techniques to find certain items nearest neighbors. Because the present user and his nearest neighbors tend to give same scores to target item, therefore, the item scores predicted by current user can be get from his close neighbors. The algorithm choices a number of high scores as recommendation result to feedback to the user.

Collaborative filtering algorithm recommendation is currently get studied in depth, and it is also get widely used as well[6]. However, it also faces many challenges. They are:  ? Product scores data is extreme sparsity. With the development of e-commerce, the number of users and product items increase rapidly, therefore resulting in extremely sparse score data. In the circumstances of extreme sparse score data, the quality of the recommendation will be significantly decreased, sometimes may have not any results.

? Automation recommendation. At present, most of the collaborative filtering system asks users input requirements at first. Users must explicitly provide product scores. This may bring accuracy recommendation, but also causing inconvenience to users.



III. CHOOSE STRATEGY BASED ON CUSTOMER CHARACTERISTICS  The purpose of personalized products recommendation is to meet the individual needs. Then personalized recommendation system design and strategies should highlight the needs of the customers. Different customer Characteristics should use different strategy and recommendation system. Customers can be divided into familiar Customer and unfamiliar customers by the amount of his information.

A. Strategy to Unfamiliar Customers Such customer includes all non-registered customers, and  registered but inactive customers. Some of these clients might be potential customer. At beginning of his or her visiting, if system provides a consistent recommendation, these potential customers are likely permanent consumers. As system does not have these customer?s history information, it is necessary collect such customers? online information and make recommendations.

User behavior based product recommendation algorithm is applicable to such customer. System should catch those information include visiting path, sequential pattern and viewing time. Pay attention to exclude circuity time. The too short visits tend to reflect customer have no interest on the content, it could be excluded from the click-stream. Then, classify the pattern sequence to identify the types of customer want products. The key of this system is to optimize algorithm to enhance system real-time ability.

B. Strategy to Familiar Customers Familiar customers frequently visit website, they are loyal  customers of the e-commerce website and the main serve objects of recommendation system. As such customer?s information can easily get, so the collaborative filtering based recommendation algorithm is fit for using here.

On the One hand, based on product attributes model, system recommends products by customer?s purchase history recorders, on the other hand, based on relations between products, system recommend products which has close relations for customers. Association rule algorithm can reveal the intrinsic relationship between the products. Some of them are ignored by people or difficult to find. Therefore the recommended result is creative. As a matter of fact, not only is it a recommendation, but often can help clients choose complementary products, such as clothes match.

User-based collaborative filtering algorithms and item- based collaborative filtering algorithm cooperate with each other and complement each other. Thus, the recommendation can avoid duplication and singleness.



IV. CHOOSE STRATEGY BASED ON PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS  Different types of products should be recommended by different systems. According to being purchased frequency, products can be classified frequently purchased products and less frequently-purchased purchased products.

A.  Frequently Purchased Products Being quickly consumed products, such as food, daily  necessities and cosmetics frequently purchased products, such as books, CD, VCD, clothes, etc. are belong to this kind. To form recommendation of these products, the system analyzes the customer's personal information, their previous record of online shopping and browsing records to infer his personal parameters. The core of such kind of recommended system is to learn parameter which represents customer purchase trend and to make proper adjusts because of customer interest changes.

In the information-gathering phase, users may be given a form in which they can clearly indicate their interest. This is the most efficient method to obtain new customer?s parameters.

Modularization system construction is suitable used to process these products. Each module independently carries out their respective mandates first, then recommend products in cooperation[4]. Figure 1 is the system architecture.

In figure 1, Information Module and Monitoring Module are charged of collecting customer information. Information module submits a form enables users to show his interest.

Monitoring module records what product pages, contents customers have browsed and classifies them in the background.

Information Management module is the core of the whole system. It establishes and keeps maintaining personal profile for each customer. A personal profile consists of two parts: a personal forecasting model and a group of product items which attaches figures indicate the extent of custom prefer. System pre-defines some modules which can represent the most characteristic types of products, and keep analyzing these modules. When customer changes the parameters, client profile will be adjusted.

Learning module establishes prediction model on the basis of its client profile. Those products can reflect custom character included in personal profile will be treated as eigenvector. Through training eigenvector, classifier can be established. Classification result is different degrees of preference on product parameters. Learning module always work passively, when new client register or custom parameters changes cause to system quality decline, it can be activated by information management module at any time.

Performance module begins to work from customer entering the system. It decides whether or not to recommend a product to the corresponding customer through analyzing customer model. Performance module charge of tracking recommendations, and send feedback information to the Information Management module. Performance module will notice information management module to build a new forecasting model, when system quality decline to a certain extend.

B. Less Frequently-Purchased Purchased Products Products such as appliances, durable goods, etc., they are  not purchased frequently. So infer customers parameters will be very difficult because of lacking of history recording information. There little correlation between purchases.

Moreover, the requirements are different for each purchase. So deducing the former parameters is not necessary any more. In  such case, customers often have no corresponding knowledge to evaluate such a product, so expert?s recommendation become extremely important. Recommendation system must have a special knowledge in the field and can interact with customers at real time.

Such a recommendation system is not built on the model of analyzing past clients, but access and analyze customer?s demand at the time so as to help him find a most suitable product. Of course, customers need to simply identify the product he needs first, describe the specific product characteristics or functions he wants. Comparing the description and products available to find the similarities, recommendation system selects products closing to his wants.

Then, customer may revise his selects. Recommendation system will make out new recommendations based on the adjustment. This process may be repeated several times.

Finally, customers will be gradually found his really wants.

Helping with such system, customer can quickly approach to information he want. The system will enable customers chose products in their unfamiliar field or make their fuzzy demand became clear[8]. Figure 2 shows the system architecture of this recommendation[10].

Interactive module is responsible for collecting customer's chose. Since most customers do not have sufficient knowledge of related fields to answer professional question or give quantitative description, interactive modules are usually give qualitative questions to their customer. For example, instead of asking custom how many pixel value of monitor he want, interactive modules will ask customers how about the clarity extent he prefer, which can be divided into five grades. The next step, interactive module passes his collects, customer?s qualitative demands to analysis module.

Analysis module searches database to find proper products to meet the want according to the requirement. The key of this part lies in the similarity calculation. It is often get by calculate character value with a power. Here, the power is defined in advance by experts and customers.

The expert module has two main functions, the one is translating quantitative characteristics of the products into qualitative features in advance, the other is correcting product items generated by analysis module. Because customer may give mutual contradictions requirements, in this case, it may cause system unable to work or poor performance without taking manual intervention.

Personal Profile  Learning Module  Information Management Module  Performanc e Module  Monitoring Module  Interface  Information Module  Customer  Figure1. Frequently Purchased Product Recommendation System Architecture    Analysis Module Product  Database Expert Module  Interactive Module  Customer  Figure2. Sporadically Purchased Product Recommendation System Architecture

V. CONCLUSIONS Personalized Product Recommendation System plays an  important role in e-commerce. However, the current system still has many deficiencies. Many factors constrain its development, such as rapid increase amount of product, client and trade. All these elements may cause data sparse, scalability, real-time and accuracy problems. Other factors may also affect recommendation strategy. For instance, customers may have different product requirements when he shops for himself and select gifts for his friend.

