An Intelligent Recommendation Model with a Case Study on u-Tour Taiwan of

Abstract?Although there are many recommendation systems in use, they all face various challenges including the integration of diverse source data, improvement of prediction precision and meeting the user?s satisfaction. In order to increase success rate of satisfied recommendations as well as the applications in different domain fields, we propose an Intelligent Recommendation Model and conduct a case study on the historical monuments and cultural heritage of u-Tour Taiwan to show the feasibility of our model.  In this research we use a hybrid approach to combine effective techniques such as popularization-based, community filtering, demographic profiling, and expertise-based in accordance with the type of users and the amount of available data to adjust weight values.

We also use association rules of data mining technique to find potential patterns in the web access log, while clustering is used to assign users into different groups suitable for them. The incremental approach of our method can calculate the ranking value of content to be more precise. Finally, Adobe Flex is used to present the recommendation result of Taiwan?s 300 years of rich historical monuments and cultural heritage that provides more effective and efficient user interaction with less effort.

Making full use of the valuable digital information of historical sites with our model, we hope to revitalize contemporary cultural and historical meaning that can bring people a brighter future and colorful life.

Keywords-Recommendation mode ; association rule; cluster analysis; classification; interactive graphic interface

I.  INTRODUCTION  A. Background Nowadays various recommendation systems have been  widely used in many industry sectors such as e-commerce [12], music [3] and our daily life that benefit people greatly.

Incorporating with the emerging technologies such as ontology [1], geospatial [2,4,5] and software agents [10], web intelligence [9], data mining [1,4,7,8,9,12,13], and social network [8], people can do any enquiry via the Internet with a desktop personal computer or mobile device using wired or wireless networks.

Most recommendation systems can help people find what they are interested in, but do not know how to describe or explain them. With the rapid advancement of ITC  technologies, a domain expert or agent can take advantage of recommendation systems to help people find anything they want directly or show the content of recommendation results they may like to know.

There are many applications of recommendation system in our daily life. For example, when people watch video on YouTube, the system will recommend new videos related to the videos they have watched before or from the result of analyzing their behavior history.

More examples can be seen on the shopping websites such as eBay and Yahoo!Shopping, where people spend a lot of time to search products and compare their prices and shipping costs with each other. Each website may have hundreds or thousands of products. It is very hard to browse all relevant products in every website to compare their prices. By using a recommendation system, people can find the products meeting their expectation very easily.

In addition, interactive graphic user interfaces have become more attractive and personal when showing the final results to users. With an effective approach, there is little difference on result presentation between a client and a server.

B. Motivation A good recommendation system can deliver what a user  really wants without much effort in describing or explaining the details of target objects. For example, personal recommendation is a very important feature to find out interesting or useful items when users browse websites such as YouTube, eBay, and Amazon.

Although there are many applications of recommendation system in use, they do not have a unified definition of data source and can not integrate with each others easily. In view of the past experiences, we propose an intelligent recommendation model that any domain expert can use to make recommendations without knowing the details on how it works. In addition, we conduct a case study on the historical monuments and cultural heritage of u-Tour Taiwan to show the feasibility of our model. Users can not only use it with a desktop personal computer, but also smart mobile device via wired or wireless networks.

In our model, users are divided into two types: general guests and registered members. We provide different types   DOI 10.1109/TAAI.2010.23     of user with different hybrid techniques to make recommendations. Finally, advanced interactive graphic user interfaces are used to present the final results to users.



II. REALTED WOTK  A. Recommendation Systems Nowadays the applications of recommendation system  have been widely used in our life such as tourism, e- Learning system, television program, music, personalized route planning, shopping website, web page, image, daily menu, guideline, etc. Although the result of above applications can be shown easily, the core techniques of recommendation systems are very complex and challenging.

In [6], Katerina reviewed the personalized tourist recommendation during the last decade and analyzed the steps of how to develop a tourism recommendation system.

The author also summarized the advantages and disadvantages of client side with desktop computer and mobile device. In [2] Angel et al. proposed a recommendation system called SPETA to provide an e- tourism advisor and use ontology to describe the e-tourism they built. Finally they presented a use case to explain the detail of how the system works to help users.

Yuxia et al. [13] analyzed hierarchy-based personalized recommendations for tourist attractions. They used Bayesian network to classify users into several groups and applied ontology to integrate heterogeneous information about tourist attractions over the Internet. In addition, they built a map server and showed all the recommendation contents on the map.

Silvia et al. [10] used a software agent as expert travel agent in a system called Traveller. Although a hybrid approach of recommendation techniques is used, they did not consider the types of users and the weighting factor of each technique is fixed. Therefore, the recommendation results are not highly personalized.

B. Data Mining Data mining is successfully used in many applications  such as supermarket basket analysis and fraud detection. It also plays an important role in recommendation systems.

Many techniques of data mining, such as association rules and sequential patterns mining, are used to find useful rules from databases and web access logs. Others use Bayesian network to classify users into target groups.

Dirksen et al. [4] used sequential patterns mining to recommend touring routes and used a scenario or bar tour guide to explain how it works in Google Maps as well as why the bar tour will be recommended to users. Loc Nguyen et al. [7] recommended learning concept to students when they are studying objects. Authors applied many algorithms such as AprioriAll, GSP (Generalized Sequential Pattern), SPADE (Sequential PAttern Discovery using Equivalent classes) and FreeSpan (Frequent pattern-projected Sequential pattern) to evaluate their efficiency. Mei-Ling  Shyu et al. [8] used the method of collaborative filtering by mining association rules from user access sequences. They proposed a measure called MRD (Minimum Reaching Distance) to calculate the similarity between users.

We will use various techniques of data mining in different applications. First, association rule mining is used to predict user behavior; the main goal of clustering is to partition heterogeneous data into several groups with higher homogeneous features; Classification is aimed at training a classifier according to the known object of class and attributes.

C. Historical Momuments and Cultural Heritage Taiwan's ancestors in early migration had survived in  arduous environment, despite of dangers and difficulties of living in an island. As we have accumulated more than 300 years of rich history and heritage resources, many historical stories and knowledge have been preserved that can be used to improve the well-being and life of the residents as well as the human beings in general. Although promoting historical monuments and cultural heritage has many challenges, it is of great value in our society. Finding our root and paying back to the society is a motto of Taiwanese people.

As a small island, Taiwan has many diverse cultural features influenced by China, Japan, Spain, Holland, Portugal, etc. With a systematic effort to digitalize these historical monuments and cultural heritage, Taiwan's people can be recognized more than the land and people. Tourists can find experiences different from any other countries.

There is a considerable advantage to promote Taiwan's tourism industry.

Due to its multicultural history, religion in Taiwan is a way of life and being celebrated in every corner of city and town. For example, a very famous and popular temple in Taiwan called Dajia Mazu. Since it has hundreds of years in history and houses many statues of various Buddha, Dajia Mazu temple is regarded as a sacred building where different Mazu statues are worshiped as shown in Figure 1.

This is one of the sites with historical monuments and cultural heritage that are worth of promoting.

Figure 1. The Mazu statue.

D. Adobe Flex Google promotes services such as GMail, Google Map,  Google Earth, etc. with web interfaces of RIA (Rich Internet Application) that are more smooth and easy to operate than traditional websites. Therefore people start to learn more on RIA.

The RIA technique used by Google is called AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript And XML). AJAX improves the drawbacks of traditional web pages by combining JavaScript with XML. This web interface has the convenience of application program interface in desktop personal computer.

The architecture of web RIA for Adobe Flex is shown in Figure 2. It consists of three main components: 1) Flex platform, 2) Web application, 3) Database server. Flex platform is executed in the environment of Flash Player. In the Web Application Server we can use JAVA, .NET, PHP, etc. to develop web application interfaces.

Figure 2. Adobe Flex Architecture

III. OUR RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM In this paper we propose a Recommendation Model  based on various efficient techniques to recommend suitable contents to end users in many application domains. Our system as architecture is shown in Figure 3.

.

Figure 3. System Architecture   In our research, we use this architecture to develop a  prototype system that can recommend historical monuments and cultural heritage to users when they are planning a tour, taking a tour, or finishing a tour. It can be used as a ubiquitous tour guide that provides useful information to enquiry, memorable experience to share, and those services we all like to have in a u-Tour website.

A. Targeted End Users Anyone can use our system anytime, anywhere, in any  wired or wireless networks. One can use the system with a personal computer, laptop, or smart phone to get recommendation results from the Web easily and conveniently.

B. Interactive Graphic User Interface Although there are many different presentation  techniques, we adopt a new Interactive Graphic User Interface (IGUI) based on Adobe Flex architecture. Using this IGUI, users can have more multimedia information with better visual effect. Since the transition between web pages is very smooth, users cannot tell a client side from a server side that makes the system seems more efficient.

C. Recommendation Model 1) Model Components Our model consists of seven components as follows:  a) Web Access Log When a user browses the system through the Internet,  the web server (Apache, IIS) will record all the user behavior in the system. The format of web access log is shown in Table 1. It consists of several parts: source IP address, user id, timestamp, access URL, status code, and object return length.

Table 1. Web Access Log   b) User Ranking Matrix Only registered members can rank content in the  system no matter if they have any engagement with the recommendation result. They can update the original ranking value (orgValue) anytime. Four default options (n = 4) for calculating the ranking value with user engagement are visit the site, emotion, weather and site status. Initially, each of these four weights (optionWeight) is 0.25. They can be adjusted as needed. The formula of recalculating the user ranking value  is shown in (1).

( )  n ireRank C orgValue optionWeight= ??          (1)     c) Complaint Matrix Every member can have any complaint with the content  in the system no matter if they have any engagement or not.

Similar to user ranking matrix, there are some options to measure member?s complaint about the corresponding content that will affect the final complaint value.

d) Experise An expert has professional domain knowledge to  provide the best and precious source data in our system.

How to use the knowledge effectively is very important. We store all the knowledge of expert?s suggestions into the database for better recommendation.

With professional domain knowledge, the expert?s weight of ranking value is more important than user ranking value since expert?s rating is more reliable and usable.

e) User Profile The main goal of using this component is to calculate  more precise recommendation value of content for user?s preference. We use many attributes to record personal information in the database. We encode many ordinal variables to replace text in user profile for efficiency.

f) Content Attributes In order to calculate more precise recommendation  values that match user preference and save execution time, we cluster contents into groups that can be used to recommend to corresponding users more precisely.

Due to the various types of historical monuments and cultural heritage, we use international standards to design metadata. For bibliographic records of libraries and digital collections cataloging, we use Dublin Core to record the content attributes. Similar to user profile component, we encode ordinal variables to replace lengthy words.

g) Feedback When guests or members browse the content, our  system will make recommendations based on proper techniques. When the system presents the final results of personal recommendation, users can select some conditions to prune those do not interest them or unimportant information such as a place too far away from the user?s current location.

2) Recommendation Technique Recommendation model is the core of the system. We use  many recommendation methods such as (a) popularization- based, (b) community filtering, and (c) demographic profile, (d) expertise-based as well as association rules mining in our system.

a) Popularization-based In this approach we recommend contents to users with  higher ranking value of users and experts, meanwhile we also consider the complaint value of users in the formula.

The formula of calculation is shown in (2).

( ) ( ( ) ( ) (1 )) (1 ) ( )  i i i  i  Popu C userRank C expertRank C complaint C  ? ? ? ?  = ? ? + ? ? + ? ?    (2)  Here is the ratio between the number of rankings and the number of complaints while  . Currently, the weight is 50% for each of them and it can be adjusted as needed. The definition of ranking and complaint are described as follows:  Definition of ranking: only registered members or domain experts can rank content using values from 0 to 5 no matter if they have any engagement with the recommendation result. They can update the ranking value in the system anytime as depicted in formula (1).

Definition of complaint: members can provide complaints for the content in the system no matter if they have any engagement or not. Similar to the user ranking, there are some options to measure member?s complaints that may affect the final complaint value stored in the system  b) Community Filtering When a user registers with the system to become a  member, s/he will be assigned to a unique group based on the user profile. After that, the system will increase his/her weight value with ranking value from the ranking database and complaint value from the complaint database accordingly. The formula to calculate the weight value of Item Cj to member Mi is shown in (3)   1 1  ( , ) ( , )( , ) ( 1)  m n i j i j i j  i j  userRank M C Complaint M CCommu M C m n  ?  = =  += ? ? ? ?  (3) Given all items Cj with j = 1 to n and all m-1 members  of the group that Mi belongs to, the system uses (3) to calculate each Commu value and selects the item with the largest weight value to recommend to member Mi.

c) Demographic Profile Before using demographic profile technique to  recommend content to members, there are two things must be preprocessed: one is to use clustering to assign members into various groups, the other one is to use classification to distribute content to corresponding groups.

When a member logs in, the system will try to make recommendation based on his/her preference. First the system uses user profile to find out the user?s group, and then calculates the similarity between content groups. After that, we can start to compare all contents in the groups with the member?s preference. The formula to calculate the weight value of current member with content group cg is shown in (4).

( ) ( , )i gDemo C similarity memberPreference C= (4)  Where Cg contains C1 to Cn and Ci has the highest similarity value, 1 i n.

d) Expertise-based The knowledge of domain experts and their  recommendations to the users are no doubt the most convincing content and can be of high quality in terms of meeting user expectations. In order to fully utilize the advice of experts to make proper recommendations for the users in appropriate groups, we carefully assess the     similarity of user groups and the suitable content to match their needs and high expectations. The formula of calculation is shown in (5).

( )( ) n ij  j i  expertRank CExpt C n=  = ? , j=1 to m        (5)  Here n is the total number of experts, m is the total number of content items, and expertRank(Cij) is the ranking value of content item Cj from the expert i. For each content item, the system calculates the ranking value from expert matrix and divides it by the number of experts.

3) Our Proposed Hybrid Approaches Our system employs a hybrid approach to make  recommendations according to user types. With the help of recording user behavior for members, we take advantage of community filtering and demographic profile to combine with association rules mining from web access log for recommendation; otherwise we use both of popularization- based and expertise-based methods for guests. The two hybrid approaches are described in more details below.

a) Populace-based We use the technique of data mining to find out the  potential association rules from web access log. The source data are continuous and have a large amount of user behavior history. The mined results are reliable and useful for recommending content to quests. The amount of web access log increases tremendously every day. Since the traditional algorithms are not suitable, we devise an incremental approach to mining potential patterns or related rules.

Figure 4. The Architecture of Populace-based Approach  The architecture of populace-based approach for guests is shown in Figure 4. We use many efficient methods and techniques to find out precise recommendation contents that match user preferences and needs. This approach takes advantage of popularization-based and adopts association rules mining from web access log.

First, the system calculates all content values by adding ranking values of experts and members as well as complaint values stored in the database.  We also use an incremental mining algorithm to mining frequent patterns and generating association rules that can predict the content of user?s next browsing step. After that, the system will add the content value after normalization and the support count of content.

Finally, we sort the recommendation content list in descending order and present top-n recommendations to the guest. The formula of calculation is shown in (6).

[ ( ), ( ) ( )] ( ( ), ( ))  ( ) { ii ii i  i A vg su p C po pu lariza tio n C com pla in t C in itia lP h ase M a x A R s C in itia lP h ase C otherw ise  P opu lace C +  = ??  ??????????  (6) In the initial phase, the system will calculate the  average of adding support count of content to the total values of ranking and complaint values after normalization.

Later, if a user hits any recommended content, then the system will be able to consider the results of association rule mining as a factor to recognize which one has a higher recommendation value.

b) Neighbor Collaboration For registered members we use another hybrid approach  called neighbor collaboration as shown in Figure 5. This approach takes advantage of community filtering and demographic profile techniques. We use these two techniques to provide higher precision recommendation contents that can satisfy member?s preferences, needs and personal information by considering user profile and community groups? historical behaviors.

Figure 5. The Architecture of Neighbor Collaboration Approach  First, as shown in Figure 5, the system finds out which group the member belongs to, and then calculates related content values according to the information of ranking and complaint matrices. After that, we compare the similarity between the member?s group and all content groups.

Meanwhile, the incremental mining algorithm is used to mining frequent patterns of recommended content and then     generating association rules from web access log. Finally, we sort the recommendation content list after normalization from higher to lower and present the top-n recommendations to the member. The formula of calculation is shown in (7).

[ ( ), ( , ), ( , )] ( ( ), ( ))  ( ) { ii j j ii i  i Avg sup C Community M C Demographic M C initialPhase Max ARs C initialPhase C otherwise  Neighbor C = ??  ????????????? (7)  D. Database Several databases are used in our system. User profile  database records the user?s personal information such as age, hobby, and location when they register to the system.

Content database is used to store all the content information including the multimedia data of picture and audio as well as statistic description. Web access log database stores all the users behavior records when they browse and find out the potential patterns. Ranking database is used to record member and expert?s ranking to corresponding content items. Complaint database records members? complaints without considering their engagement with the content items.

Finally, the knowledge database is used to store the recommendation content from the expert.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS In this paper we conduct a case study on a project of  the historical monuments and cultural heritage to implement our model and show the feasibility of the proposed approach.

The process of system implementation is divided into three phases: 1) data input, 2) transformation, 3) result generation. In the first phase, we input two main components into the model: user profile and content. User profile is used to cluster users into groups, where the members of a group have some of the same interests or live in the same neighborhood. The content will be classified into several groups and each has some attributes in common or with high similarity. Meanwhile we have to do preprocessing for transforming web access log into the format that our model can accept as shown in Table 2.

Table 2. The Web Access Log after Preprocessing   In the second phase, the input data will be transformed  into the format suitable to our model. Before starting the process of mining the web access log or clustering the user profile, we need to do some preprocessing in the transformation phase. Then we can use the user profile and acquired content to mining the potential rules or clustering users into corresponding groups. When guests or members  login, the system will be able to make recommendations according to the user types. The third phase is used to present the result.

In the experiments, we use real data from the geospatial and multimedia database of the historical monuments and cultural heritage project supported by MOE Taiwan. This project starts from Oct. 2008 to Oct. 2010 and has many types of users, such as student, teacher, and traveler. Until now the system has 67 members and more than 1,200 POI (Point of interests) content. We use their web access log as source data to analyze the prediction precision of recommendation content.

A. Implementation In our experimental platform, we use Microsoft Windows  Server 2008 running on an Intel Quad Core Xeon E5420 2.5 GHz processor with 1333 FSB and 2x6MB L2 cache. MS SQL Server 2008 is used as the database management system. In the client side we use an interactive graphic user interface based on Adobe Flex to display all information on the screen as shown in Figures 6 and 7.

Figure 6 shows the initial interface after a user enters our recommendation system. The top left block is an opening film that introduces our system with informative contents and the top right table shows the most popular content items in our system in descending order by recommendation value.

The bottom part of the main panel displays all contents in the system. Clicking any image or title will display the detail data as shown in Figure 7. One can also use some conditional filters to prune non-interesting contents. In addition, the system also provides basic functions such as user login, register as a member, contact us, forget password, etc.

Figure 6. System screenshot of the initial interface.

Figure 7 displays the detail description of the selected content item in Figure 6. The information includes recommendation value, geospatial location through Google Maps as well as multimedia information such as image, video, audio, etc. We use many Adobe Flex components and libraries to present the multimedia data. For example, since     every content item may have many images and corresponding text data, we use the viewer of electronic book to present the detail as shown in the top right corner of Figure 7.

Figure 7. The screenshot of a detailed content item.

B. Performance of Prediction Results Although we can recommend content according to  different types of users, how to calculate the prediction value is an important issue. We devise a formula to define the accuracy rate of prediction value as shown in (8).

1( )  nh a  ai  Posi nrPrediction M  nh == ?  (8)  Whereas the symbols of (8) are described as follows: nh = the number of hit items (i.e., being selected for viewing) nr = the number of total recommendation items Posia = nr ? (position of ath item in the recommendation list) + 1, where a = 1 to nh.

For example, if the system recommends 10 content items a to j for member Weiding, and he hits item b in the position 2 and then hits item a in the position 1, then the prediction value of member Weiding is: Prediction (Weiding) = [(9 / 10) + (10 / 10)] / 2 = 95%  Finally we use the formula of prediction value to compare the four recommendation techniques used in our two hybrid approaches as shown in Figures 8 and 9.

In Figure 8 the result is shown in accordance with the age attribute for the comparison among the four main recommendation techniques and our two proposed hybrid approaches. As we can see the experimental results clearly show that our two hybrid approaches have better accuracy rates than others. One main reason is that we not only consider user profile but also user behavior history as well as potential association rules mined from web access log.  By taking these important factors into account and using complementary techniques, we can recommend more precise content to users that match their preferences better.

y~  y  y~  y  y~  y  y~  y  y~  y  Popularization- based Community filtering Demographic profile Expertise-based  Populace-based  Neighbor Collaboration  Figure 8. The accuracy rates of prediction based on the age attribute  Currently we have six member groups in our system. The number of member groups will increase when more members register in the system. In Figure 9 we compare recommendation techniques and our hybrid approaches with respect to different member groups. In these results our approaches have prediction accuracy rates of more than 90%, because we cluster users into suitable groups and we also use classification to assign content items into proper groups.

mg1 mg2 mg3 mg4 mg5 mg6  Popularizatio n-based Community filtering Demographic profile Expertise- based Populace- based Neighbor Collaboration  Figure 9. The accuracy rates of prediction for six member groups

V. DISCUSSION In this section we summarize the advantages and  disadvantages of our recommendation model and discuss the extension research topics.

A. Advantages 1) Our recommendation model is an intelligent and  feasible approach that can be deployed in promoting historical monuments and cultural heritage.

2) We provide an interactive graphic user interface based on Adobe Flex architecture  3) We use a hybrid approach to recommend more precise content to users.

4) Personalized recommendation is made according to the type of users.

5) According to the user feedback and history of user behavior, we can provide more precise personal recommendation.

B. Disadvantages 1) Difficult to judge the precision of prediction results.

2) When the system does not have enough data of user  profile and web access log, the precision of prediction result will decrease  3) Need domain experts to add more knowledge data and maintain the knowledge rules periodically to reflect the changes.

C. Extensions Because this recommendation model is a prototype,  there are still many improvements to be made in the future.

Some directions of extension research are described below:  1) Source data transformation: At this time our model can only transform the source data of historical monuments and cultural heritage. We need to adopt an integrated transformation approach that can be used in other domains easily.

2) Metadata definition: Any domain has their own metadata; it is hard to integrate with each other. The development of a unified metadata definition for any domain is a challenge.

3) Ontology: Using semantic expression can make users easily understand the meaning of contents in the proper context.

4) Agent mechanism: Agents can be used to search content, prune uninterested ones and make inference automatically.

5) Active recommendation: In our recommendation model, the system make recommendations passively. We need triggering mechanisms to provide recommendation in an automatic way.

6) Intelligent assistant: To reduce user load, an intelligent assistant can record all the user behavior using some automatic processes based on users? actions.

7) Location awareness service: The system can provide in time services to travelers or bikers based on where they are and their user behavior history.



VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper we propose an intelligent recommendation  model with a case study on the historical monuments and cultural heritage to show the feasibility of our approach.

Different from the past experience of using only one technique to make recommendations to users, we adopt a hybrid approach to recommend content according to the type of user. We also use association rules of data mining technique to find the potential patterns in web access logs, while classification is used to assign users into different groups suitable for them. The incremental algorithm of our method can calculate the ranking value of content to be more precise. Finally, a new technique is used to present the recommendation results with interactive graphic user interfaces.

In the future research we will continue to enhance the recommendation model and deploy this model in the cloud computing environment. Besides, we will also keep working in some extension direction, such as intelligent assistant, source data transformation, and location awareness service.

Finally, another future work is to make recommendations for a group of people instead of an individual.

