Utilization of Data Mining Techniques in  Knowledge Extraction for Diminution of Diabetes

Abstract?This research uses association rule generation and classification techniques to support decision making, by considering a data set of diabetes type 1 & type 2 patients.

There are advanced and reliable data mining techniques which leads to the discovery of unseen and useful information. The main focus of this research is to identify the yet undiscovered decision factors of diabetes which increases the possibility of the onset of diabetes, as well as to identify the undiscovered consequences of diabetes.

Through the data mining analysis, gender female is identified as a major decision factor of high FBS (Fasting Blood Sugar) level. Furthermore wheezes and edema were identified as unknown side effects of diabetes.

Keywords-Association rules; Data Mining; Diabetes

I.  INTRODUCTION People all around the world develop various types of  diseases due to many reasons, and from among them, diabetes is one of the most deathly disease. Globally, approximately 7 million people develop diabetes each year and approximately 3.8 million people die annually due to it, which is higher than that due to HIV aids [1].

Physicians always work towards saving the lives of their patients. Therefore, before prescribing medicines to a patient, they usually request the patient to do various tests to ensure proper diagnosis of the illness. When diagnosing a disease, a physician always takes into consideration the factors or attributes which have been identified as risk factors for that particular disease.

As an example, a physician asks a patient to do a glucose tolerance test (blood sugar test) after considering his age, family history, dietary practices, daily routine complications, wounds of the body etc. But there can be several other factors such as the sodium level or potassium level in the body, educational level, monthly income etc., which also increase the risk of developing diabetes. At present, physicians do not consider the contribution of gender towards the risk of developing diabetes. If all the factors which contribute towards the development of diabetes are known, then the efficiency of predicting the occurrence of diabetes will be greatly enhanced.

Advanced analysis need to be carried out to discover the unknown factors which contribute towards the development  of diabetes. In the medical field, physicians usually collect a data set and do statistical calculations to extract simple patterns from the data. However, by combining IT and using data mining techniques, which are advanced and reliable methods that have been used in many previous research studies [2, 3], undiscovered patterns may be extracted from such data sets. The results obtained by those methods can be used to treat the patients in more meaningful way.

The critical questions addressed through our research are, ?What are the main undiscovered decision factors of diabetes which increases the possibility of the onset of diabetes?? and ?what are the undiscovered effects of diabetes??  The main objectives of the research are: ? To identify the factors which are not considered as  decision factors of diabetes at present ? To recognize the undiscovered  patterns of the  combination of factors which lead to diabetes ? To identify the effects of diabetes ? To provide the extracted knowledge from the data  mining process to domain experts in order to verify the results through medical experiments  This paper is based on preliminary results. The second phase of this research is underway at the time of writing this paper. The analysis and recommendations presented here are preliminary, but provide insight into the landscape of the utilization of data mining techniques in knowledge extraction for the reduction of diabetes.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.

Section II describes the literature of the research, followed by research methodology in section III which includes the data design and data mining process. Section IV is on the results generated by the research. Section V is the discussion which contains the comments made by domain experts and the key contributions of the research.



II. LITERATURE REVIEW The literature review includes the previous finding about  diabetes, usage of data mining techniques, diabetes risk factors and their relationships and diseases that occurs because of diabetes.

A very large number of people, 246 million suffer from diabetes worldwide. 16% of the urban population and 8% in the rural areas suffer from diabetes. Mostly people with risk are individuals who have not done proper screening to   DOI 10.1109/VCON.2010.8    DOI 10.1109/VCON.2010.8     determine if they have it. The high risk factors include diabetic patients in the family, obese people who do not do physical exercises and people with unhealthy lifestyle partly due to eating more than they require. The age group is also a risk factor which has seen more 20-30 year olds being affected by diabetes than the 40-50 year olds [4].

Most of the people are unaware of the causes of diabetes.

This has resulted in them not taking sufficient precautions and thereby being struck down with the illness. Physicians not diagnosing the illness at the early stages also result in patients suffering the consequences of the disease.

Diabetes was selected for this study as it is a serious disease which affects all organs and is suffered by many people worldwide. The results obtained through this research will be invaluable in many ways for many different purposes. Physicians, patients and students will all benefit through this research.

Data mining is an essential step of knowledge discovery.

In recent years it has attracted a great deal of interest in the Information Industry. Data mining requires the use of advanced statistical algorithms and modeling. In other words, it is the combination of Statistics and Artificial Intelligence which allows us to explore for patterns in large data sets. [5]  When considering the literature, data mining techniques have been used for data analysis in several studies. The Health Insurance Commission (HIC), Australia has conducted a new research called Data Mining in Disease Management in diabetes [2] an application of data mining in the management of diseases. This is an attempt to apply data mining techniques to analyze the medical service transaction data for disease management. They say that their discoveries obtained through data mining can be used to educate medical practitioners to improve their practice to provide the best medical treatment with minimal cost.

A. Kusiak, K.H. Kernstine, J.A. Kern, K.A. McLaughlin, and T.L. Tseng in their research, have addressed the problem of predicting outcomes in medical and engineering applications [3]. They have solved it with a data mining approach which they selected over regression analysis and neural networks. They state that neural networks and regression models are population based, while the data mining approach follows the individual (data object) based paradigm, and that this is why they selected the data mining approach over the other two.

Thus, a survey of the literature indicates that many researchers have used data mining theory to conduct their data analysis.

Since the focus of this research is to find attributes and attribute relationships of diabetes, a study of the literature on these aspects was carried out. The following section is a discussion of the findings.

It is often assumed that there is little or no gender bias in either type I (insulin-dependent) or type II (non-insulin- dependent) diabetes [6]. Type I diabetes is the only major organ-specific autoimmune disorder that does not show a strong female bias [7].

The equalization in risk is due to the disproportionately greater increase in risk in women who develop diabetes  compared with men who develop diabetes [8]. Identifying the causes for this is critical. A previous work has discovered risk factors such as HDL and LDL levels in the blood. In that work it was established that both male and female diabetic patients have lower HDL levels [9].

A previously conducted research [10] describes the factors associated with diabetes for both men and women as, being aged 40 years and over, having a low gross annual household income, obesity, and a family history of diabetes.

In addition, being an ex-smoker and having low cholesterol levels were associated with diabetes among men [11].

Among women, having a high waist-hip ratio, high blood pressure and reporting a previous cardiovascular event or mental health problem were associated with diabetes [12].

But there could be several other factors which increase the risk of developing diabetes in both genders. These studies have not indicated whether there is a gender bias related to diabetes.

Spanish researchers Asensio Sanchez, Gomez Ramirez, Morales Gomezi and Rodriguez Vaca have researched [13] the influence of non-ophthalmic parameters as risk factors of clinically significant macular edema. Through the research they have identified that over half of our CSME (Clinically Significant Macular Edema) cases (56.3%) occurred in diabetes type 2 in treatment with insulin, against 15.6% of diabetes type 2 patients in treatment with oral anti-diabetics.

Torron Fernandez Blanco, Ruiz Moreno, Ferrer Novellae, Sanchez Cano and Honrubia Lopezfm have carried out a research [14] to determine the incidence of Cystoids Macular Edema (CME) by means of Ocular Coherence Tomography (OCT), and to compare the incidence of CME between diabetic and non-diabetic groups of patients. Their results indicate that OCT showed increased macular thickness in both groups of patients in a small percentage of cases, and significantly increased macular thickness in diabetic patients.

The literature indicates that there is some relationship between diabetes and edema. In the next sections these findings are used to prove our results.



III. METHODOLOGY  A. Data Design This section consists of ?Data design? which describes  gathering data, preparing the gathered data in a way suitable for analysis, and the knowledge gained about the project domain through the initial data analysis.

The General Hospital of Sri Lanka (Sri Lanka?s main national hospital) gave their ethical committee approval to access the non sensitive details of diabetes patients. 10,000 diabetes patients? records were gathered from the General Hospital diabetes clinic patient database. There were more than 30 different attributes in the database such as patient ID, age, diabetes type, cholesterol level, etc. Due to the sensitive nature of the database, it cannot be made public.

After performing necessary data cleaning processes and by running several MS SQL queries, certain attributes were selected and a flat table was generated. The attributes selected for the flat table were; age, gender, diabetes type,     education, occupation, monthly income, FBS (Fasting Blood Sugar), BMI (Body Mass Index), Potassium level, Cholesterol level, Sodium level, Diastolic blood pressure, Systolic blood pressure, Edema, and Wheezes.

The flat table prepared in this manner contained more than 10,000 records of diabetes patients. But the problem with the data table was that other than very few attributes (such as salute, gender, married, etc) all the other attributes contained missing values. About 7000 data records which contained missing values in significant number of attribute were removed to reduce the inaccuracy of the data set.

Remaining 3265 records were divided into small sub groups and for each sub group the mean value replacement missing data handling mechanism was carried out. Through that approach, a table with no missing values was created.

Next, a domain analysis was performed. Before the data was analyzed using data mining techniques, a domain analysis was used to gain an initial understanding of the overall project domain. A filtering process was used to do the domain analysis.  But a filtering process only looks at the data set outwardly and does not include algorithms that perform in-depth data analysis to discover the information behind the data set.

Because of this, it is impossible to make highly accurate discoveries and draw conclusions about the patterns hidden in a data set by performing only a simple analysis. The filtering process helps to make assumptions but advanced techniques are required for further analysis to identify the validity of the assumptions. An advanced data analysis not only analyzes the data but it can also extract the hidden information behind the data set. The filtering process is not sufficient to perform this and therefore further data mining process need to be used towards this end.

B. Data mining process The software which was used to perform the data mining  process is WEKA. WEKA is machine learning/data mining software written in Java (distributed under the GNU Public License) which is used in research, education, and applications. The following are the reasons for selecting WEKA for this research [15].

? Simple and user friendly interface.

? Includes a whole range of data preparation, feature  selection and data mining algorithms.

? Automatic features are provided in order to simplify  the mining process This section describes the entire data mining process  followed in order to generate the final results, the discretization of the data set and the visualization functionality in WEKA to handle the error values in the data set.

1) Discretization of data Discretization is an instance filter that discretizes a range  of numeric attributes in a data set into nominal attributes.

Data mining techniques require having only nominal attributes in the data set. Therefore, data discretization was required in order to convert all the numeric attributes into nominal attributes.

The attributes selected for the data table were mentioned under the section ?Data Design?. From those selected, no discretization was required for the ?gender? attribute (which has ?F? and ?M? groups) and the ?diabetes type? attributes (which was divided into type 1 and type 2 diseases). Edema and wheezes were the last two attributes of the data set which contained Boolean values, either ?true? or ?false?.

Since they are nominal values, no discretization was required for them either.

All the other attributes were discretized to change the numeric attribute values into nominal attribute values.

Discretization was performed by minimizing the number of categories for each attribute, to facilitate the data mining process and to reduce the complexity.

2) Handling of error values Even after discretization was completed, there were  still several records that had some mismatching attribute values. These errors may have occurred during the missing value handling process. These error values needed to be removed using WEKA before the data mining technique could be continued. WEKA has a feature known as ?visualize? which enables easy identification of errors or abnormal values. The error values of the data set were removed using this feature.

Following Figure 1 shows a sample of the number of instances of the final flat table which is used for the association rules generation.

Figure 1.  Sample of the final flat table used in the data mining process

IV. RESULTS  A. Association rules generation- for Diabetes type 2 ? Rule no 1 age=57_75 gender=F diabetesType=Type 2  cholesterol=<5.17 wheezes=Yes ==> edema=Yes conf:(0.95)  In this rule ?conf:? refers to the confidence of the rule.

This rule only considers the female, diabetes type 2 patients in age range between 57 and 75, whose cholesterol levels are greater than 5.17 mmol/L and having wheezes. Confidence of the rule defines that out of the above considered set of patients, 95% of them are having edema.

This rule has a higher confidence level as 0.95. The cholesterol level in the rule lay below the cholesterol range which a normal person has in his blood (normal cholesterol level is 5.17-6.21 mmol/L). The rule has also mentioned that there is a high probability for the Diabetes type 2 patients to occur wheezes, which is not currently proved in the medical field. The most important thing which is discovered from this rule is that, there is a clear relationship between Edema and Diabetes type 2.The following rule which indicates the direct relationship between Edema and the Diabetes type 2 also has a confidence level of 0.94.

diabetesType=Type 2 ==>  edema=Yes conf:(0.93) There is some sort of relationship identified in the  medical field between edema and Diabetes type 2 (mostly the cerebral Edema and macular Edema). That relationship is further proved with this generated rule.

With this attribute combination the overall conclusion that can be gained is, female Diabetes type 2 patients in between 57 and 75 years old who are having low cholesterol level in the blood and who are suffering from Wheezes, have a higher probability of getting edema disease as a side effect of the Diabetes type 2.

? Rule no 2: gender=F occupation=Housewife Sodium Level=135-  145 diastolic=60-80 cholesterol<5.17 edema=Yes diabetesType=Type 2 ==> wheezes=Yes     conf:(0.92)  This rule has a confidence level of 0.92. The sodium level and the diastolic blood pressure specified in the rule are the general ranges which a normal person has.

With this attribute combination the overall conclusion that can be gained is, people who are female housewives, having normal range of sodium level and diastolic blood pressure, low cholesterol level and who are suffering from Edema and Diabetes type 2 have a higher probability of getting Wheezes. The following rule which indicate the direct relationship between the wheezes and Diabetes type 2 has a confidence level 0.91. It clearly shows that there is a relationship between the Wheezes and diabetes type2.

diabetesType=Type 2 ==> wheezes=Yes  conf:(0.91) So, a clear conclusion can be made that there can be a  strong relationship between the wheezes and the Diabetes type 2 and there is a high probability for the diabetes patients to get wheezes.

? Rule no 3: age=39_56 gender=F cholesterol=<5.17 Sodium  Level=135-145 ==> diabetesType=Type 2     conf:(0.95) This is a rule which has a high confidence level of 0.95.

The cholesterol level in the rule lay below the normal cholesterol level. The sodium level specified in the rule is in the general range which a normal person has and the age range is 39?56 years. With this attribute combination the overall conclusion that can be made is, females in between 39 and 56 years old who are having normal range of sodium level and low cholesterol level in the blood are having a higher probability of getting Diabetes type 2.

Most important thing discovered from this rule is that, a relationship exists between gender female and the Diabetes type 2.The rule which indicates the direct relationship between gender female and the Diabetes type 2 also has a confidence level of 0.94. The rule is given below.

gender=F  ==> diabetesType=Type 2    conf:(0.94) Generally the doctors? belief is that, there is no special  relationship exists between gender and diabetes. But with the above mentioned rules it is possible to say that there is a high possibility of occurring Diabetes in females.

B. Association rules generation- for Diabetes type 1 The three rules described in section A are based on  Diabetes type 2. In the medical field and also from the doctors? point of view it is true that most of the Diabetes patients are suffered from type 2 diabetes.  According to National Diabetes statistics 2007, in adults, type 2 Diabetes accounts for about 90 to 95 percent of all diagnosed cases of Diabetes and type 1 Diabetes accounts for 5 to 10 percent of all diagnosed cases of Diabetes [13].

Even though a very few amount of type 1 are available in the database records, association rules to see the relationship of different attributes and type 1 Diabetes also have been generated. Following are the results generated from that study.

? Rule no 1: age=57_75 gender=F diabetesType=Type1  cholesterol=<5.17 wheezes=Yes ==> edema=Yes conf:(0.97)  This rule is mostly similar to the rule generated regarding type 2, but the confidence level is 0.97. This shows that wheezes, low cholesterol level and gender female have stronger relationship with Diabetes type 1 than type 2.

One important consideration is that the age group here is 57-75 years, which is not similar to the rule of Diabetes type 2. It is said that Diabetes type 1 usually strikes children and young adults, although Diabetes onset may occur at any age [8]. Asian pacific Diabetes type2 policy group also has stated that Diabetes type 1 mostly occurred for the people who are below the age limit of 30 [9]. But, according to the above association rule that statement can be considered as wrong.

The below given association rule also can be used to prove that most of the older people have got Diabetes type 1 than children and young people.

age=57_75 ==> diabetesType=Type 1    conf:(1) The most special finding of the above first rule is the  relationship between edema and the Diabetes type 1.The     following rule which indicates the direct relationship between edema and the Diabetes type 1 also has a confidence level of 1, which clearly shows that there is a strong relationship between type 1 diabetes and edema.

diabetesType=Type 1 ==> edema=Yes   conf:(0.95) ? Rule no 2: Gender=F occupation=Housewife Sodium Level=135-  145 diastolic=60-80 cholesterol <5.17 edema = Yes diabetesType=Type 1 ==> wheezes=Yes conf :( 0.95)  With the above attribute combination the overall conclusion which can be obtained is that, diabetes patients, who are housewives, having edema and low cholesterol level, having normal range of sodium diastolic blood pressure are the most common people who are having wheezes.

When considering Wheezes; according to the doctors? comments received and literature, there is no any relationship between Wheezes and Diabetes. The following rule which indicate the relationship between the Wheezes and Diabetes type 1 has a confidence level 0.92. It clearly shows that there is a strong relationship between Wheezes and Diabetes type1.

diabetesType=Type 1 ==> Wheezes=Yes  conf:(0.92) So, a clear conclusion can be made that there can be a  strong relationship between the wheezes and the Diabetes type 1 and there is a high probability for the Diabetes patients to get Wheezes also.

? Rule no 3: age=39_56 gender=F potassium=2.5-3.6  cholesterol=<5.17 Sodium Level=135-145 ==> diabetesType=Type 1   conf:(1)  This rule is more similar to the rule no3 of diabetes type 2. But in this rule a new attribute, ?potassium=2.5-3.6?, is added. This is the range of low potassium level which should be there in the human body. When considering the confidence levels in two rules, in the rule of Diabetes type 2 the confidence level is 0.96 and here the confidence level has increased up to 1. This shows that age, gender, low cholesterol level, low potassium level and normal range of sodium level have much stronger relationship with Diabetes type 1 than Diabetes type 2. Also there is more significant relationship between Diabetes type 1 and potassium level of 2.5-3.6. The doctors said that the medical field has already found some relationships between high potassium level, high sodium level and Diabetes. But when considering this rule a decision can be made that there may be no strong relationship between those attributes and Diabetes type 1.

Therefore it can be proved that the major relationship exists between gender, age and Diabetes type 1.

Another important thing we have identified is that although some of the risk factors for Diabetes Type 2 are identified; still most of the risk factors for Diabetes Type1 are unknown [14]. The researches which were carried out to identify the risk factors for Diabetes Type 1 also have identified a small number of risk factors such as family history and ethnicity [10]. Therefore, that will be an important discovery because; until now most of the risk factors for Diabetes type 1 is unknown.



V. DISCUSSION This section contains the comments of the diabetes  domain experts which were obtained through interviews as well as the key contributions of the research towards the diabetes field and research community.

A. Comments from domain experts Several domain experts such as physicians, nurses and  medical students were interviewed.  According to the comments received, physicians are unaware of a link between diabetes patients and those prone to wheezing.

Diabetes is not considered as a risk factor of wheezing and vice versa. But the data mining analysis indicates such a relationship and if this is verified through medical experiments, then this will be an enhanced contribution towards the medical field.

Physicians and medical students were also unaware of a link between gender and diabetes.  The belief is that the probability of developing diabetes is equal for both genders [6].  If the relationship between gender and diabetes is verified through medical experiments, this too will be a positive contribution.  The general public could be educated about these discoveries and it would help to reduce the number of diabetic cases.

B. Key contributions of the research The Business values of this type of a research can be  identified from the users by gathering information from them. Since Diabetes has become a common and very annoying decease, people are very interested with this research. The key contribution of this research is to identify hidden risk factors of Diabetes and to identify weather there are relationships between different combinations of risk factors.

The value of this key contribution can be further described focusing different end users such as physicians, medical students, and the people who have or who do not have Diabetes.



VI. CONCLUSION In this research, association rules were generated using a  data set of diabetes patients in order to identify the hidden risk factors of diabetes.  Type I and Type 2 diabetes were considered and some interesting results were obtained.

Currently in the medical field, although some research has been conducted regarding Type 2 diabetes, it is rare for Type 1 diabetes.  With the knowledge gained from this research and with guidance from experts in the medical field, the following conclusions were made.

A relationship between edema and diabetes has been identified in previous studies.  Through the generated association rule regarding edema, a direct relationship between these two diseases was identified.  A strong relationship was also identified between wheezing and diabetes.  This relationship between wheeze and diabetes is currently not considered in the medical field.

In the literature and according to the views of physicians, both men and women have an equal probability of     developing diabetes. But through this research it was discovered that women were at a higher risk of developing the disease.  A strong relationship was identified between gender, age and Type 1 diabetes.

Although all the above discovered relationships were evident for both Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes, they were stronger for Type 1 diabetes.

The above results were generated through the data mining process and evaluated through the related literature and the knowledge of domain experts.  But they have to be further validated through medical experiments and real life applications.  This is the next stage of this research.

As only an association rules based analysis of diabetes patients was carried out in this phase of the research, the next phase will concentrate on a classification based analysis.

The final goal of the entire research project is to identify hidden risk factors of diabetes and the dependencies between these risk factors by using association rules and classification techniques.

