Applying data mining and mathematical morphology to borehole data coming from

AbstractMining companies investigate very carefully the  area of proposed mine sites. This is done by first looking at the  geology of the area and then drilling the boreholes to predict the  quantity and if possible approximate the structure of the mine  and distribution of the metal grades. The data obtained from  boreholes is analysed using point interpolation techniques such  as inverse distance weighting (IDW) or Kriging. However, these  techniques have some shortcomings as they heavily rely on  strong spatial correlation and they assume linear dependency.

In this paper we show how data mining techniques can  contribute to planning and even to interpolation tasks when  used on borehole data. For this, we first transform the borehole  data into a form that is suitable for our methods, then perform  k-near-neighbours (k-NN) classification and association rules  mining analysis. We also compare k-NN classification method  with IDW and show how association rules discovered during  the process can improve the results of each method. Moreover,  we propose using mathematical morphology operations to  filter results for better understanding and, perhaps, for better  accuracy.

Overall this paper shows possible application of data mining  techniques in the mining industry and presents a general  framework for carrying out such tasks.

Keywords-k-near-neighbors; association rules; boreholes; in-  verse distance weighting; mathematical morphology

I. INTRODUCTION  Mineral exploration is a process undertaken by companies  with the goal of finding ore (i.e. commercially viable con-  centrations of minerals) to extract. In minerals exploration  one of the important phases is the resource evaluation, which  is undertaken to quantify the grade and quantity of a mineral  occurrence. This is achieved primarily by drilling to sample  the prospective area of the mine.

The ultimate aim is to generate a density of drilling  sufficient to satisfy the economic and statutory standards.

Depending on the financial situation and size of the deposit,  the level of detail required to generate this resource esti-  mation and stage at which extraction can commence varies.

For small partnerships and private non-corporate enterprises  a low level of detail is required whereas for corporations  which require debt equity (loans) to build capital intensive  extraction infrastructure, the rigour necessary in resource  estimation is far greater. For large cash rich companies  working on small ore bodies, they may work only to a level  necessary to satisfy their internal risk assessments before  extraction commences.

During the drilling a geologist takes samples and records  spatial coordinates of the samples, rock types, ore grades  and many other parameters. Eventually, this drill hole (or  borehole) data will be used for constructing an approximate  3D model of the ore body, which includes ore and rock type  distributions and grades. Obviously, the more borehole data  you have the more accurate your interpolation will be. But  drilling a borehole is very expensive activity, that is why  smart approximation techniques are needed to produce  quality results.

The geostatistical approach offers several possible models  for interpolation of spatial data such as kriging and in-  verse distance weighting (IDW) [2][6]. However, as new  techniques become available, adapting new techniques or  perhaps improving old ones for industry needs is a very  important exercise. Of course, one should keep in mind  the potential applications of the proposed techniques as  not every method is universal. Sometimes adaptations are  required to transfer theoretical methods into a form that can  be used in practical applications. Here we focus on methods  relevant to mining industry.

For most data mining algorithms, the data is encoded as  vectors in high dimensional space1. For these algorithms, a  measurement of similarity (or dissimilarity) is necessary and  often fundamental to their operation. Similarity queries on  multi-dimensional data are usually implemented by finding  the closest feature vector(s) to the feature vector of the  query data. More importantly, in large databases, the high  dimensional space can be subject to the curse of dimension-  ality [9], and in such settings, content-based retrieval under  the vector model must typically be implemented as k-NN    (KNN) queries, whose result consists of the k items whose  features most closely resemble those of the query vector  according to the similarity measure. This type of query is  known as a nearest neighbour (NN) query [7], it has been  1Attribute-vectors are the common input for learning algorithms like  decision trees, artificial neural network or for clustering algorithms like  k-Means or DBSCAN.

978-0-7695-4290-4/10 $26.00  2010 IEEE  DOI 10.1109/eScience.2010.10   extensively studied in the literature [8][10] and forms the  basis of k-NN classification algorithm included in the top  10 algorithms in data mining [11].

Similarity search is widely used as a common form of  query in modern database applications such as geographical  information systems (GIS) [12], time-series databases [13],  medical imaging [14], and bioinformatics [15]. The similar-  ity between two objects is defined with a distance function,  e.g., Euclidean distance, between the corresponding feature  vectors. For example, in image databases, the query can ask  for the most similar images to a given image [8]. 3D shape  histograms are used in molecular biology to find similar 3D  proteins [16].

In this paper we use k-NN classification algorithm for in-  terpolating spatial data coming from exploration and mining  companies. This is achieved by changing data representation  from grades to classes. We also provide experimental com-  parison with IDW method and show how association rules  can improve the results for both existing and new methods.

This paper first introduces the reader to the borehole data  (see Section II), how they are obtained, what kind of data  we are dealing with and the complex spatial distribution they  can have. Then, in Section III we explain point interpolation  for borehole data, and how points to be interpolated are  constructed. The inverse distance weighting method, used  by geostatisticians, as an interpolation technique is briefly  introduced in Section IV. For borehole data to be explored  by data mining algorithms, such as k-NN classification and  association rules mining, it needs some specific preparation  which is proposed in Section V.

The k-NN classification as an alternative method for IDW    is investigated with its usefulness is shown in Section VI.

The possibility of applying association rules mining to the  borehole data is presented in Section VII. Later on in  Section VIII, the promising results of the cross-validation  as a comparison method between IDW and k-NN classifi-  cation are shown. Moreover, we show in Section IX how  association rules can further improve interpolation results  of each method. The Section X and Section XI introduce  some basic operations of mathematical morphology, then  show how we can use them to filter the results coming from  k-NN interpolation.

Finally, we conclude (see Section XII) our paper with  some thoughts about main contributions brought by this  paper and demonstrate the possibility of future work on this  subject (see Section XIII).



II. BOREHOLE DATA  As we mentioned earlier, in the planning phase the  borehole data is used when deciding concerning whether  it is worth mining the area and how to mine by knowing  approximate structure of the ore body.

Typical borehole data consist of many parameters, but we  focus only on spatial coordinates, rock types and grades  of various metals such as Au (gold), Ni (nickel) and Cu  (copper) (see Table I).

BID X Y Z AU CU NI RID  EXID1 -97.5 -75.7 24.1 1.8 0.13 0.34 2  EXID1 -97.5 -75.7 23.8 3.1 0.11 0.33 2  EXID1 -97.5 -75.7 9.5 0.01 0.02 0.06 8    Table I  PART OF THE BOREHOLE DATA  Because of confidentially of the data borehole ID (BID)  and coordinates are changed, but the rest is unmodified. Note  that the drilled boreholes are not in homogeneous fashion,  but depending on the area and how difficult it is for drilling  the distribution of boreholes can be quite complex. The  Figure 1 is an example of the drilled area.

Figure 1. A plan view (top-down) of distribution of boreholes.

When interpolating one should make sure that interpolated  area contains at least some minimum amount of nearby  boreholes, otherwise interpolation does not make sense.



III. BUILDING A GRID    The next step is to build a grid across the area of  boreholes. Every record in the database corresponds to a  point in 3D. The grid in other words are new points that  need to be interpolated by using the points in the borehole  data. For instance, if in the interval (a,b) are two known  values, coming from borehole data, depending on how dense  we want our grid to be, we add another, say four, new  points and by some interpolation techniques calculate the  values (for instance, grades) in those new points. Because  we are dealing with three dimensions, first we have to find  minimum bounding box in 3D that contains all borehole  data. Once we found the box and agree on density2 we insert  coordinates of new points in regular fashion. Namely, we  divide the box into many small same size cells3.

2The density or number of points should be more than we already have  from boreholes. The points should be evenly distributed in the box.

3The size of the cell depends on the distribution of the boreholes and  agreed density.

While building a grid one should consider also computa-  tional aspects of the whole exercise. Usually the borehole  data is very large and for interpolation purposes, we need  to produce a database that is even larger. Moreover, all  interpolation algorithms compute distances between pairs of  points, compare, sort and perform many other operations, so  computational cost can be very high. In our experiments, for  instance, computing only AU grades took about 10 hours of  compute time on an Intel Core 2 Duo 2.66GHz machine. If  one wants to use kriging method for interpolation it can take  days. But in this paper we will not focus on computational  aspects of the whole process.



IV. INVERSE DISTANCE WEIGHTING  One of the widely used tools in the exploration and mining  community for point interpolation is the inverse distance  weighting (IDW) [2], [3] technique. The IDW is a method  for multivariate interpolation, a process of assigning values  to unknown points by using values from a scattered set of  known points. Here, the value at the unknown point is a  weighted sum of the values of N known points. The IDW [2]  is defined by the following way:  Given samples uk = u(xk) for k = 0, 1,    , N the goal  is to find u at the given new point x using IDW interpolation    function  u(x) =  N?

k=0  wk(x)?N  k=0 wk(x)  uk,  where  wk(x) =   d(x, xk)p  is a simple IDW weighting function, x denotes an interpo-  lated (new) point, xk is an interpolating (known) points, d  is a given distance from known point xk to the unknown  point x, N is the total number of known points used in  interpolation and p is a positive real number, called the  power parameter. In our settings us are the grades for  metals. Thus, after building a grid (see Section III) the  coordinates of the new points are known (because we chose  them). We are only missing the grades and rock types  for different metals. Thus, by IDW interpolation one can  approximate grades for the new points. Note that usually  coordinates in borehole data are in some special formats 4  and can be of different scales. Therefore, distance functions  should be applied with care.



V. PREPARING THE DATA FOR DATA MINING  Data mining methods such as k-NN classification and as-  sociation rules mining cannot be applied on the data as it is.

One way of dealing with this problem is to translate numeric  values of grades into classes. After all, the main goal is  not to know exact value, say of nickel, at the new position,  rather be able to predict which class it belongs to. During the  4To satisfy double-blind review process, exact format is not mentioned.

discussion on classification with mining planning (domain  experts) we have identified following classes or in this case  intervals of values for metals of interest. For instance, grades  of Ni were divided into five classes: NiClass1 (if the value  is less than 0.05), NiClass2 (if the value is between 0.05 to  0.1), NiClass3 (if the value is between 0.1 to 0.2), NiClass4  (if the value is between 0.2 to 0.3), NiClass5 (if the value is  greater than 0.3). The grades for Cu and Au were classified  in similar way. Thus, we end-up having seven classes for Au,    five for Cu and five for Ni. Now the new data will consist  of class information instead of exact values (see Table II).

BID    Au Cu Ni RID  EXID1    AUclass2 CUclass3 NiClass5 Type2  EXID1    AUclass3 CUclass3 NiClass5 Type2  EXID1    AUclass1 CUclass1 NiClass2 Type8    Table II  THE BOREHOLES DATA CHANGED TO CLASSES.



VI. INTERPOLATE BY k-NN CLASSIFICATION  In our framework, k-NN classification will classify Au,  Cu and Ni grades for new points by using already known  borehole data as training data. The k-NN classification  algorithm is defined by the following way:  Given a training set D and test object u = (x, c), where  x is the set of attribute values involved in the distance  computations and c is the class label to be classified. The  algorithm computes the distance dist(u, v) between test  object u and all training objects v(x, c) ? D by using  only x and x values to determine the nearest-neighbour list  Du. Once the nearest-neighbours list 5 is obtained, the test  object is classified based on the majority class of its nearest  neighbours [11].

c = argmax  m  ?

(xi,ci)?Du  I(m = ci),  where m is a class label, ci is the class for the i-th nearest  neighbours, and I() is an indicator function that returns  the value 1 if its argument is true and 0 otherwise. In our  settings, for instance, if we are using 5-nearest-neighbours  classification for Cu, and five nearest points (from borehole  data) have three CUclass2 and two CUclass3, then the value  for Cu at the new point will be classified as CUclass2.

We have applied k-NN classification and constructed a 3D  model of the distribution of various metals of the actual  mine. Again, because of confidentiality of the results, we  are not permitted to disclose the name and location of the  mine. But in Figure 2 we present actual results of k-NN  classification.

5The k-nearest-neighbours list contains k values.

Figure 2. Distribution of the AU in the interpolated box  Here each colour represents the class it is assigned to.

Red6, for instance, represents AUclass7 which corresponds  to Au content more than 8.0, which is actually of a great  interest to the mining companies. On the top-left corner of  the figure is the map from colour to class number7. By using  the thresholding technique we have separated AUclass7 and  AUclass6 (see Figure 3), that can show where is the highest  content of AU in the mine.

Figure 3. Distribution of AUclass6 and AUclass7 only.

These results show that k-NN classification can be ap-  6In grey-scale mode red is medium grey.

7Please, ignore the number 5.5, this is because the visualisation software  needs continues values.

plied to borehole data for interpolation. Moreover k-NN  classification has wider applicability than for instance IDW,  because we can incorporate not only numerical attributes like  coordinates into similarity metrics, but categorical values as  well. This is very important, since spatial correlation is not  always dominant and apparent in borehole data. Complex  geological processes can produce very complex structures  in the ground. But statistical methods like IDW rely only on  coordinate values. For instance, if one wants to interpolate  not only metal grades but also rock type distribution, then  IDW cannot be used, because it works with numerical values  only, but rock types have categorical values such as type2,  type11 and etc. However, k-NN classification still can be  applied for rock types as it can classify rock type of a  new point with the majority rock type from the k-near-  neighbours. In Figure 4 we show an example of k-NN  classification applied to the rock types.

Figure 4. Rock type distribution in the mine.

Here again each colour represents different rock type. The  image stretched into direction of the Y axis for more realistic  view. We have used class label 99 for representing the points  that are too far8 from known points. Interpolating such points  does not make sense, because not enough information is  available about their surrounding area. In Figure 4 we hide  all points that have class label 99. The spherical shapes at  the end of the boreholes which is due to using Euclidean  distance in k-NN classification.



VII. ASSOCIATION RULES  Association rules mining is one of the widely used tools  in data mining. The most common algorithm for fining  association rules is the Apriori algorithm [17] which finds  frequent itemsets from a transaction dataset and derives  association rules. The frequent itemset is an itemset such  that its frequency is larger than the user specified parameter  8If the distance between unknown and closest known points is greater  than some specified value we do not compute interpolation.

called support. The confidence parameter is also can be  set by the user, for generating association rules that have  confidence larger than the specified value.

One can find complete description of Apriori algorithm in  the data mining literature [11], [17], [18]. In the boreholes  data, association rules can be used for finding associations  of metals with or without considering rock types. We can  find rules such as if Ni=Niclass1 and RID=Type11 then  Cu=CUclass1 with 0.99 confidence9. When finding asso-  ciation rules one has to make sure that rules make sense.

Domain experts can interpret and refine the discovered rules.

Keep in mind that data mining is not always only finding  something we already know, but discovering previously  unknown relations and patterns.

After applying the Apriori algorithm to our borehole data  we identified the rules/relationships known to the domain  experts. But we have also found some new rules which were  unknown and were very interesting to our domain experts.

As this is not a geology paper we will not focus of particular  aspects of those rules. What we are interested in is how  we can use association rules to correct some errors from  k-NN classification or in general (say for IDW) improve  interpolation results. Some of the rules we found were:  1) If AU=AUclass5 and CU=CUclass2 then NI=Niclass2  with conf:(1)  2) If NI=Niclass1 and ROCKID=Type11 then  CU=CUclass1 with conf:(0.99)  3) If AU=AUclass4 then NI=Niclass2 with conf:(0.97)  4) If AU=AUclass3 then NI=Niclass2 with conf:(0.95)  We do not include all the rules because they will not  contribute more to understanding the work. Our goal here  is to show that association rules mining can be applied to    borehole data and we give framework how to do it, by  bringing the data into useful form and most importantly,  how these rules help us improve interpolation results. This  is discussed in Section IX.



VIII. CROSS-VALIDATION RESULTS  In this section we present a comparison of the IDW  method and k-NN classification while interpolating the  borehole data. For this we performed cross-validation of  the methods. Namely, from borehole data that are known  (extracted during drilling process) we randomly select 200  records10 and remove information about grades or class  labels of the metals. We then try to recover the information  that was deleted by using both IDW or k-NN classification  methods. We repeat this procedure ten times and compute  average accuracy for recovery by each method. Note that the  randomly selected records were removed from known data,  9Confidence has the value from 0 to 1, the bigger the value the more  confidence we have in the rule.

10We have tried to select various numbers of records and obtained similar  results.

so during the nearest-neighbours computations the same  records are not included in the list of nearest-neighbours.

Checking with different metrics sometimes helps to iden-  tify proper distance functions to use. We have tried Eu-  clidean distance and Chebyshev distance functions. The  Chebyshev distance or L? metric between two vectors  is the maximum of their differences along any coordinate  dimension. Thus for any vectors p = (p1, p2,    , pn) and  q = (q1, q2,    , qn), Chebyshev distance is  dist(p, q) = max  i  |pi ? qi|  The choice of the distance function depends on data as  well as the number of attributes (in this case n) that are  involved in the computation. If n is large (some researchers  say 6 is already too large), then the Chebyshev distance  is recommended. In our case, we are only using spatial  coordinates so it does not matter which distance function  we use. This was confirmed by our experiments. We present  results for k-NN classification using Chebyshev distance  (see Table III).

Test run 3-nn 5-nn 10-nn 20-nn IDW    1 17 24 39 36 22  2 15 25 30 45 27  3 14 23 28 39 25  4 18 19 29 32 21  5 9 28 37 40 26  6 11 19 33 37 21  7 17 18 32 45 26  8 13 30 28 41 20  9 13 17 33 29 22  10 11 26 41 34 20  Average 13.8 22.9 33 37.8 23  Accuracy 93.1 88.55 83.5 81.1 88.5  Table III  CROSS-VALIDATION BY USING 200 RANDOMLY CHOSEN RECORDS  One of the interesting results to note here is that the  more near-neighbours are involved in the classification task,  the bigger the error. This can be explained by the fact  that in order to add more neighbours you must go further  from your interpolation point. The further you go from  your interpolation point, the less influence they should have.

However, k-NN does not weight them according to their  distance.

As one can see in Table III, classification computed by 5-  NN gives us almost the same accuracy as IDW, but as we go  to 3-NN we obtain better accuracy than IDW. These results  are very promising. Taking into account not only accuracy,  but the fact the k-NN classification has the potential of  involving more attributes from data into the interpolation  task as it works not only with numerical values, but can  involve categorical values as well.



IX. CORRECTION BY USING RULES  In this section we discuss possibility of improving interpo-  lation results by using rules discovered during associations   rules mining. In Section VII we presented some of the rules  we obtained. As we have mentioned in Section VII, the  rules that we have presented there are not all. These rules  are chosen from the list as examples to be used here for  error correction of the interpolation applied to nickels (Ni)  grades. Therefore all our results are concentrated on nickel.

We will not list all possible corrections, but will give  examples for both k-NN classification and IDW methods.

Because in the cross-validation phase we randomly select  some records from known data, we have correct class labels  for each record that has been chosen. Thus, we can actually  check whether our interpolation produced wrong result or  not.

In one of the test runs in the k-NN classification method  we have an error in the classification of Ni. One of the  randomly chosen records was wrongly classified as NiClass1  instead of NiClass211. We checked other metals class labels  for this point and noticed that AU has a class label AUclass4.

But one can see from the association rules, particularly rule  3 (see Section VII) that if AU has a class label AUclass4,  then with 0.97 confidence we should have Niclass2. Thus,  wrongly classified record can be corrected by this rule to be  Niclass2 instead of Niclass1.

Now, the same idea can be applied to the IDW method  as well. Here again, interpolation for Ni produced a wrong  result. The correct class label for the point was Niclass2, but  was classified as Niclass1. Checking the AU class label for  this point we noticed that it has AUclass3 label, but from  association rules in Section VII, rule 4 says that if AU has a  class label AUclass3, then with 0.95 confidence we should  have Niclass2. So, we can correct this error as well.

Obviously, not all the errors can be corrected solely by  association rules, but the important message is that extra  analysis of the data can help us obtain better results of  interpolation by each method. It is important to mention  here, that this process can be automated up to a certain  degree for interpolation methods to become more intelligent  by taking into account more knowledge about the data. Also,  one should not underestimate the role of geology in the  specific area of mine. This knowledge is also very important  and can improve the results as well.



X. MATHEMATICAL MORPHOLOGY OPERATIONS  Although for mining companies accurate interpolation is  highly desirable, usually they are more concerned about  large areas of rock types rather than small structures here  and there. Thus methods which can accurately filter the  results are also very useful. Having results filtered not only  improves visual understanding of the mine structure, but also  can be used for faster ore grades computations with tech-  niques such as kriging, IDW or k-NN. For such a task we    11This can happen because of very complex structure of the rock types  and geology. The ways in which this occurs are beyound the scope of this  paper.

propose using mathematical morphology operations. In this  section we introduce some basic operations of mathematical  morphology (MM) that we apply to our results coming from  k-NN interpolation.

Mathematical morphology is a technique most frequently  used in image processing, but it can be applied for analysing  geometrical structures in general [19]. There are four basic  operations of mathematical morphology: erosion, dilation,  opening and closing. These operations are usually defined  on binary images. However in our case because we apply  them for one rock type at the time, we can safely assume that  we are dealing with binary images12. Let E be a Euclidean  space or an integer grid, and A a binary image in E.

Erosion: The erosion of the binary image A by the  structuring element B is defined by  A?B = {p ? E|Bp ? A},  where Bp is the translation of B by vector p or formally  Bp = {b+ p|b ? B}, ?p ? E.

Dilation: The dilation of A by the structuring element  B is defined by  A?B =  ?

b?B  Ab.

Opening: The opening of A by B is obtained by the  erosion of A by B, followed by dilation of the resulting  image by B  A ?B = (A?B)?B.

Closing: The closing of A by B is obtained by the  dilation of A by B, followed by erosion of the resulting  structure by B  A B = (A?B)?B.

Intuitively, erosion removes all objects that are smaller  than structuring element and makes larger objects smaller  by reducing the boundary by the size of structuring element.

Conversely, dilation increases the boundary of all objects,  either small or large, by the size of the structuring element.

Dilation also closes any holes in the objects that are smaller  than the structuring element. We are not presenting any more    details about these operations as they are extensively covered  in literature as well as on the web. We have to mention  though, that in our example we are dealing with 3D structure  not with the image. We use sphere centred on the origin  as a structuring element. Because we have regular grid (see  Section III), for each point p in our grid, Bp will only contain  its six neighbours (top, bottom, left, right, front and back).

12For instance, say we use MM for rock type 6, then we can assume that  in points where we have rock type 6, we have one and zero otherwise.

XI. MATHEMATICAL MORPHOLOGY IN ACTION  Let us now see how mathematical morphology operations  can filter the results of interpolation as discussed in Sec-  tion X. As an example we have chosen rock type 6, as we  think here we can more clearly demonstrate the method.

Note, that if after interpolation we get more or less solid  chunk of some rock type, then the effect of morphology  would be minimal and will not be considered as a good  demonstration example.

Figure 5. Distribution of the rock type 6 in the original boreholes data  In Figure 5 one can see the distribution of the rock type 6  in the raw borehole data (known points). After constructing a  grid and interpolating with k-NN classification method (see  Section VI), we obtain the results shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6. Distribution of the rock type 6 in the grid after interpolation  Figure 6 shows that there are many small objects that  need to be filtered. Usually, in image analysis this will be  considered as a noise. Morphological opening has a small  noise reduction effect. In order to understand this fully,  let us explain what this operation will do to our structure.

From Section X we know that opening is defined by erosion  followed by dilation. In our case, the erosion in 3D, with  spherical structuring element, will remove all points that  together with their six neighbours do not have the value 6.

At this stage all small (relative to the structuring element)  objects will be deleted. It will shrink the boundaries of the  objects which remain, but this effect will be reversed when  the dilation operation is applied. The results of morpholog-  ical opening can be seen in Figure 7.

Figure 7. Distribution of the rock type 6 in the grid after interpolation  We have now much clearer objects. It is worthwhile to  mention that this process can be fully automated and mining    experts can start their ore deposits estimations with much  clearer data which is easier to deal with.

XII. CONCLUSION  We have presented how data mining can be applied to  the borehole data coming from active mine area. We are  certain that data mining has a huge potential for other  types of borehole data. One of the important steps in data  mining is the preparation of data into useful form for various  algorithms. Together with domain experts we have identified  a way for transforming data to a form acceptable to k-NN  classification and association rules mining algorithms.

Although we have shown how the k-NN classification  and association rules mining techniques can be applied here,  this framework will open new possibilities to perform other  data mining tasks to this type of data. Our experimental  results are very promising in this regard as they show that  we are not only able to match the accuracy of the results  with IDW method used in the mining industry, but also  exceed it (93.1% accuracy was obtained by 3-NN method  while IDW gave 88.5% accuracy). Moreover, association  rules as a separate analysis tool can improve not only k-NN  classification results but also IDW interpolation results. This  is particularly important for convincing mining companies   of the benefits of data mining, as with a little effort they can  improve the method they are already using.

As we have shown in this paper, not only choosing right  classification techniques can help us to improve interpola-  tion, but more general analysis on data like association rules  can contribute a lot. Thus, the more knowledge we have on  the hidden relationships and patterns the more accurately  you can construct an interpolation. Moreover, discovering  hidden correlations not only important for this task, but also  can contribute to understanding about complex geological  processes that this specific area undergone. Therefore data  mining, which can discover useful knowledge purely from  data is of great importance and will be area of research for  next generation of exploration and mining specialists.

Finally, we have proposed to use mathematical morphol-  ogy for filtering the results of rock type interpolation. In the  example given here, we have seen that it performed well  in removing relatively small objects and filtering out large    areas of interest from rock types.

XIII. FUTURE WORK  This paper provides a framework for using data mining  techniques on the borehole data. Using this framework  we would like to investigate possibilities of using other  classification techniques on this type of data. We mentioned  that borehole data can contain more information about the  area besides spatial coordinates, rock types and metal grades,  so classification that utilizes this extra information will be  on our immediate research agenda.

Application of mathematical morphology provides possi-  bilities for further research on domaining (filtering out large  areas of interest) borehole data. Thus more attention should  be given also to this.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  I want to thank the Director of the WH Bryan Mining and  Geology Research Centre, at the University of Queensland,  Professor Alan Bye and his PhD student Mr Younes Fadakar  Alghalandis for contributing their expertise to this research.

This work is supported by the AuScope National Collab-  orative Research Infrastructure Strategy by the Australian  Commonwealth, the Queensland State Government and The  University of Queensland.

