Intelligent Recommender System using Shopper?s Path and Purchase Analysis

Abstract? Shoppers having a predefined shopping list usually follow the shortest path through a supermarket or store in order to make their purchases. This paper aims to study customer behaviour of such shoppers with respect to two aspects: (1) the path followed through the store to make those purchases. (2) the average path length to make those purchases.

The paper also proposes a methodology consisting of a number of stages such as data cleaning, path generation, clustering and classification, association rule generation, determination of attraction values that correspond to the appeal of each product or location and calculation of metrics such as average path length of paths taken by customers, average number of purchases per bill for trend analysis. This research can be used to recommend certain changes, in terms of the store layout, in order to increase the attraction and saleability of the various products in different locations in the store as an effect of modified store layout.

Keywords- Intelligent Recommender system, shopper path analysis, product attraction, location attraction, purchase analysis, up-selling, cross-selling

I.  INTRODUCTION This paper aims to study customer behaviour with respect  to the above aspects. Also, it aims to find the attractions of the various product categories and the associations between them. Based on this research, it proposes to recommend certain changes, in terms of the store layout, in order to increase the attraction and sale ability of the various products in different zones.

Shoppers carrying a predefined shopping list usually  follow a well thought of path through a supermarket in order to make their purchases [1]. They travel through the aisles, checking out different options/ costs of different products of various categories, make certain decisions about which products to buy till their shopping trip is complete. The purchases may be need based or want based. The parameters affecting the choices could be the cost, appeal of the product and the urgency of the requirement of the product. Hence, there may be several variations in the shopping patterns of different shoppers. Some may travel through the entire store while others may just visit a few zones. Also, different shoppers may follow different paths while visiting the same  zones.

A. Motivation: The paper aims at studying shopper path behaviour  which is an exciting area of research. Although there is lot of work done in the area of shopper?s purchase behavior there has been very little work to exploit the path knowledge for the benefit of shop keeper. The only published paper that the author?s came across was by Larson et al [1]. However, the path data that was gathered was used to categorize the customers rather than finding the product /location attractions for a better layout of the store.

In the present times, if a customer with the same shopping  list visits two different stores, one finds that the number of purchases made by the customer may differ for the two shops.

There could be several reasons for the difference in purchases made by the customer. One of the reasons for that could be the location of the zones or the layout of the store. With the number of shops and stores coming up at a rapid pace, it is important for these shop owners to utilize the data at hand for competitive intelligence. The analysis can be used to evaluate all the possible methods the shop owner can resort to for up- selling and cross selling. The simple statistical parameters of Product Attraction, Location Attraction and Average path length can be extremely useful. This is where the location (placement) of the zones or the layout of the store would matter. Modifying the store layout using the simple parameters mentioned above and then recalculating the average path length travelled by the customer for the new store layout (for the same set of transactions) will help one to analyse the current product visibility in terms of the paths undertaken by the customers. This information could be beneficially utilized by the retailers for up-selling of products, proper layout of stores with possibility of cross selling and profit maximization.

B. Approach: The paper aims to make use of a data set consisting of  purchase invoices of several customers to generate a set of paths based on purchases. The set of paths along with the corresponding purchases made by the customers can be used for analyzing customer behaviour with regard to the paths followed by them. The purchase data is also used to study the associations between various product categories.

DOI 10.1109/CICN.2010.118    DOI 10.1109/CICN.2010.118     The paper aims to introduce the concept of ?attraction? which is a simple measure of the inherent appeal of a product category. Statistical measures such as the average path length of the customers and the average number of products purchased per visit are calculated. The association rules, attractions and statistical measures are used to make recommendations and suggest alternative store layouts.

C. Issues:  Customer paths may not always be representative of the shopping patterns of the customers because:   1. There is a considerable proportion of shoppers who  visit the store but do not purchase anything. This paper considers only those customers who make at least one purchase while visiting the store.

2. Not all the customers entering the store may know the layout of the store. An assumption is made here that all customers know the store layout well and hence follow the shortest path that connects all their purchases.

3. Although the initial objective was to recommend a product to the customer using the location of the customer in the store, since the data set did not include the time dimension, the time spent by each customer in the various zones was not captured. This led to only recommendation to the store owner regarding the layout of the store.



II. CURRENT TRENDS  A. Placement of Products A visit to the shopping store will reveal that the store managers look to place the products in their store based on the following.

1) Product categories.

The products belonging to the same category are placed in a single location. e.g. Electronics items are generally placed together.

2) Brands:  Different Brands of a similar product are clubbed together to provide the customer with multiple options available for the same product. E.g. Biscuits of Britannia, Parle, Sun Feast, and other Brands.

3) Promotions.

Promotional offers sometimes drive the location of the products in the store so that products falling under the promotional scheme get more visibility.

4) Intuition or Experience.

Most store managers rely on their intuition and experience to determine the placements of products in their store.

B. Research in the Relevant Field: Presently, the typical customer is assumed to travel  through the store, stopping at various locations, deliberating about his/her consideration set, choosing the best (utility maximizing) option, and then continuing in a similar  manner until the trip is complete. Despite the common presumption of this scenario, little research has been undertaken to understand the actual travel patterns and purchases within the supermarket.

The efforts made so far by store managers to study customer shopping patterns and reasons for failure are given below:  Feedback forms. Though the interests in the products may have been captured, they do not provide an accurate picture as more often they tend to capture the customers shopping interest and are seldom representative of the customer shopping behaviour. Moreover, customers give little attention to the feedback forms they fill.

Membership programs. The membership programs do not provide an accurate picture of the shopping patterns as very small percentage of the customers enroll for such programs.

Discount Coupons. These help in capturing behaviour of customer with regard to promotions and offers but not the general shopping patterns.

Video Cameras. Though they are rich sources of information , analysis of the same is often difficult.

Such failed attempts triggered the need to look out for other ways to understand the customer shopping behaviour.



III. PROCEDURE DESIGN After the data set consisting of purchase invoices was  obtained many processing stages were carried out. They were: Initial data cleaning, Product Categorization into zone, re-cleaning after categorization, Path Generation using Dijakstra?s Algorithm, Clustering, Association Analysis and calculation of PRODUCT Attraction, LOCATION Attraction and Average path length before the recommendations could be made. These steps are explained in detail in the following sections.

A. Initial Data Cleaning: The raw data set (that was stripped of confidentiality  information if any) obtained had a large amount of details that were not relevant in the analysis. To make data more fit for processing and reducing the processing time, only the relevant content was extracted and stored in an output file.

Extraction was carried out using pattern matching. [5], [6], [7]. The relevant content extracted from the raw set contained the date, time, and the list of transactions in each bill.

B. Categorizing: The store layout was studied and the store was divided  into various zones. A single entry and exit point was assumed to the store. Each of the product sold in the store was assigned to a particular zone. The entire analysis, for the first cut, was carried out at a zone level and not at a     product level, since the granularity at product level was too fine, both for efficient processing and efficient data analysis.

Hence the products were mapped into their categories. For the specific store in consideration, mapping resulted in 19 categories. More categories can be introduced as per the need. After the mapping, each transaction in each bill was compared with the categories to find a match. Thereafter, the product was replaced by appropriate category number.

Algorithm:  1. Scan the cleaned data for each bill.

2. In each bill, write the date and time as it is  in the output file.

3. For each product encountered, match the  keywords with those in the category file.

4. If a match is found, replace it with  appropriate category, else place the product in the miscellaneous category.

5. Continue the process till end of file is reached.

C. Data Cleaning after Categorizing: Replacing the products by their respective categories  resulted in bills having repetition of categories that was undesirable, so all the repeat occurrences were replaced by a single occurrence. Also, certain null bills (bills with no entries) were found. Such bills were eliminated from the analysis at this stage.

D. Path Generation:  This phase aimed at generating paths along the zones which customers would have taken based on the knowledge of the products they had purchased in a single billing transaction. It was assumed that the customers follow shortest paths and showed forward looking behaviour. The algorithm is described in short here:  The store layout is the first input. This is stored in the form of a non-weighted graph and assumes 0 as the start zone and n+1 as the exit zone (where n are the no of zones). It assigns the zones from where products are purchased as intermediate zones. Let's starting node be an initial node.

Let a distance of a node X be the distance from the initial node to it. Dijkstra's algorithm will assign some initial distance values and will try to improve them step-by-step.

1. Assign to every node a distance value. Set it to zero for our initial node and to infinity for all other nodes.

2. Mark all nodes as unvisited. Set initial node as current.

3. For current node, consider all its unvisited neighbors and calculate their distance (from the initial node). For example, if current node (A) has distance of 6, and an edge connecting it with  another node (B) is 2, the distance to B through A will be 6+2=8. If this distance is less than the previously recorded distance (infinity in the beginning, zero for the initial node), overwrite the distance.

4. When we are done considering all neighbors of the current node, mark it as visited. A visited node will not be checked ever again; its distance recorded now is final and minimal.

5. Set the unvisited node with the smallest distance (from the initial node) as the next "current node" and continue from step 3  The output is stored in the appropriate file and contains the date, time, path followed by the customer and minimum cost of the path. Alternatives that were considered to Djikstra?s shortest path algorithm were k-minimum spanning tree algorithm, Travelling Salesman Problem and Bellman Ford algorithm.

In the theory of computational complexity, the decision version of TSP belongs to the class of NP-complete problems. Thus, it is assumed that there is no efficient algorithm for solving TSP problems. In other words, it is likely that the worst case running time for any algorithm for TSP increases exponentially with the number of zones, so even some instances with only hundreds of zones will take many CPU years to solve exactly. Since Dijkstra?s Algorithm provides a relatively faster solution, it was chosen over TSP.

The Bellman?Ford algorithm, a label correcting algorithm, computes single-source shortest paths in a weighted digraph (where some of the edge weights may be negative). If a graph contains a cycle of total negative weight then arbitrarily low weights are achievable and so there's no solution; Bellman-Ford detects this case.

If the graph does contain a cycle of negative weights, Bellman-Ford can only detect this; Bellman-Ford cannot find the shortest path that does not repeat any vertex in such a graph.

The main disadvantages of the Bellman?Ford algorithm in this setting are  Does not scale well, Changes in network topology are not reflected quickly since updates are spread node-by-node, Counting to infinity(if link or node failures render a node unreachable from some set of other nodes, those nodes may spend forever gradually increasing their estimates of the distance to it, and in the meantime there may be routing loops)     For these disadvantages and since Djikstra?s algorithm solves the same problem with a lower running time, but requires edge weights to be non-negative. Thus, Bellman? Ford is usually used only when there are negative edge weights.

A related graph is the k-minimum spanning tree (k-MST) which is the tree that spans some subset of k vertices in the graph with minimum weight.

A set of k-smallest spanning trees is a subset of k spanning trees (out of all possible spanning trees) such that no spanning tree outside the subset has smaller weight.

However, this was not adopted because it was more complex as compared to Djikstr?s algorithm.

E. Clustering: Based on the purchase details in a single transaction, an  attempt was made to capture the relation between the number of products bought per transaction and the number of zones the customer would have visited for the same. [2], [3]. This step was performed to analyze the number of zones that would be visited for a given number of products bought.

Algorithm:  1. Extract the number of categories of the products purchased from the clean data and   save it in  file.

2. Extract the number of zones visited for the corresponding transaction and save it.

3. Repeat the above two steps till end of files.

4. From the new file thus generated we find out the frequency of each set of (No. of zones, Path length) and store it in a new file.

F. Association:  Association rule mining [3], [4] was used to find out the associations that satisfy the predefined minimum support and confidence of the various zones of the store from the database. The problem was decomposed into two sub problems. One was to find large item sets. The second problem was to generate association rules from those large item sets with the constraints of minimal confidence. The Apriori algorithm was used to find the frequent sets L in database D.

Find frequent set Lk ? 1.

o Join Step: Ck is generated by joining Lk ? 1with itself  o Prune Step: Any (k ? 1) -item set that is not frequent, and hence does not have the minimum support, cannot be a subset of a  frequent k -item set, hence should be removed where  (Ck: Candidate item set of size k)  (Lk: frequent item set of size k)  G. Attraction Calculation: The attraction of each zone in the store was determined.

A simple statistical measure was used to analyze which zone appealed to the shoppers more, based on the following two criteria:   (i) Product Attraction (ii) Location Attraction   1) PRODUCT ATTRACTION: This metric was used in order to determine the appeal of the various products placed in a particular zone. It is a ratio of the number of purchases made from a zone to the number of visits made to that zone, within a specified period of time. The formula is as follows: PA = ?Pi ?Vi  where PA  ? Product Attraction ?Pi ? Number of purchases made from zone i.

?Vi ? Number of bills in which zone i is present.

Product Attraction is an indication of the Current Attraction of a particular category.

2) LOCATION ATTRACTION:  This metric was used in order to determine the appeal of the location of a particular zone. It was calculated as a ratio of the number of visits made to a zone to the number of total visits made to the store, within a specified period of time.

The formula is as follows:  LA = ?Vi ?V where LA  ? Location Attraction  ?Vi ? Total number of visits made to zone i ?V?Sum of number of visits made to each zone  Location Attraction is an indication of the Potential Attraction of a particular zone.

H. Average Path Length and Analysis:  The step was aimed at determining the average path length of all the paths undertaken by the customers. This information can be used to strategically place the products having the potential to be sold if kept within the right reach.

That is products in the zone with low attractions can be placed in the zones with high location advantage for up selling.

An average number of products purchased by a customer were also calculated for future trend analysis. This can be used to statistically determine the inventory required.



IV. OBSERVATIONS AND RESULTS The star schema for the system is shown in Fig.1. The initial     store layout and the respective zones is shown in Fig.2.

Figure 1: Star schema     Figure 2: Initial store Layout  The products are then categorized into specific zones where one had to identify and ensure that the products were correctly classified since there could be overlapping keywords in product names likes coil and oil that needed to be classified in different zones.

After the initial data cleaning, the sample input and output were as follows: Sample input: 05/10/2005,05:54 pm, A P MANI VEGETABLES-nos  ,  A  P  MANI  VEGETABLES-nos ,  A  P  MANI VEGETABLES-nos , A P MANI VEGETABLES- nos   , A P MANI VEGETABLES-nos , A P MANI   VEGETABLES-nos , HALDI, KHATTA MITHA-350 g , MOUNTAIN DEW-2 l , PEPSI-2 l , Sample Output: 05/10/2005,05:54 pm,8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 9, 13, 13, Data Categorizing after cleaning: Sample Input: 05/10/2005,05:32 pm,8, 9, 13, 05/10/2005,05:33 pm,1, Sample output: 05/10/2005,05:32 pm, 8, 13, Number of zones-2 05/10/2005,05:33 pm, 1, Number of zones-1   The min cost for each path was found out as the zones that were visited For example, the path cost for the bill generated as follows:  05/10/2005,04:23 pm,0, 5, 7, 8, 7, 5, 20, Min cost:6  Based on the number of customers and the path length customer clusters were formed as shown in Fig. 3            FIGURE 3: GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OF  CLUSTER ARRAY  Product Attractions for current layout is seen in Figure 4 and the Location Attraction is shown in Figure 5.

Figure 4: Zone wise Product Attraction     Figure 5: Zonewise Location Attraction  Based on the calculations of product / location attraction as shown in Table 1, a new layout for the store was suggested as shown in Fig. 6.

TABLE 1: Zone wise Product and Location Attraction Description Zones Product Location  Attractio Attraction n  Ideally 1,3,8,9,11,13, High High placed 14,17,18 zone  Zones the 2,6,10,12,15, High Medium/Low need to be 16 placed in  more attractive locations  Zones that 5,7 Medium/ High need to be  Low placed in  less attractive locations Zone that 4, 19 Low Low need to be  further analysis      Figure 6: Proposed Store Layout  A. Average Path Length and Purchase Analysis: 1) Average path length for the given data set: 8.48241 2) An average number of products bought was  calculated for trend analysis in future of the number of products bought by the customers.

3) Average number of products purchased per bill for the given data set:3.50918

V. CONCLUSION The paper thus presents an simple yet effective and innovative approach to analyze shopper's paths and purchases and draw suitable results which would help shop owners to enhance their sales.



VI. FURTHER IMPROVEMENTS Our analysis can be further improved by considering  the following features.

A. Multi - Dimensional Store Layout  In this analysis the authors have only considered a 2- Dimensional store layout, wherein the placement of products at the shelf level has not been taken into account.

The analysis can be extended to include a third dimension along the height of the store by considering the various  shelves. E.g.: Shelf height  B. Time Variant data: The data set provided contained purchase invoices of a single month. Hence, the analysis carried to was limited to the data of only one month. If more data is available, a time variant analysis with the appropriate weightings can also be undertaken.

C. Time Spent by customer in various Zones: Since the data provided did not contain the time dimension, the analysis done in this paper misses out on the time spent by customers on different products in various zones which can have an influence on the attractions of the products and their locations and hence, can produce more accurate results for more appropriate recommendations.

D. Mulitple Entry Points to a store: The store layout has been constrained with a single entry and exit point. Variations in the same can have considerable effects on the results.

E. Deviating from path Customers: The shortest paths assigned to the customers, by the approach used in this paper, are not applicable for the entire set of customers. This is because there may be some customers who deviate from the shortest path while traversing the store. Thus, appropriate variations in some of the shortest paths generated could help improve the outcome.



VII.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors wish to thank the Managing Director, Mr.

Ashok Maheshwari, Homecare retail for providing us pilot data and his team for analyzing the results for verification.



VIII. REFERENCES   [1] Larson, Bradlow and Fader, ?An Exploratory Look of Supermarket Shopping Paths,? International Journal of Research in Marketing, April 2005. Available: http://www.searchlores.org/realicra/PT_1006.pdf  [2] Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber, ?Data Mining Concepts and Techniques?, Morgan Kaufmann, 2006.

[3] Margaret H. Dunham, ?Data Mining: Introductory and Advanced Topics?, Prentice Hall; 1 edition (September 1, 2002).

[4] Agrawal and Shrikant, ?Fast Algorithms for Mining Association Rules,? ACM SIGMIOD VLDB Conference 1994. Available: http://www.sigmod.org/vldb/conf/1994/P487.pdf  [5] Ponniah, ?Data Warehousing Fundamentals?, John Wiley, 2007.

