Association of Signal-Controlled Method at Roundabout and Stop Rate

Abstract?Since the fact that the non-signal roundabout allows less flow rate, and with the increasing of roundabout flow rate, series of problems have occurred in respect of traffic jam, rising of accident rate, growth of traffic delay and increasing of saturation degree, etc. Arrangement of signal control help to enhance the efficiency at roundabout and security, but there exist big difference for applicable conditions and traffic efficiencies under different signal control methods. The main concern of this text, on the foundation of Left-turn with Two - stop Control Method at Roundabout, with consideration of the number of different entrance paths and on the basis of signal control theory and optimal method, is on the three control methods related with ?Control of In-turn Discharge Clockwise at Signal-entrance Path?, ?Control of In-turn Discharge Clockwise at Signal-entrance Path + Interlace of Minor Flow? and ?Association Roundabout Control at Multi--entrance Path?. It is on such a basis that the methods analyzing the effect rule on stop rate coming from the signal cycle and space strategy parameters and radius of island under different signal control methods by applying approaches of numerical calculation and experimental traffic engineering. The research achievement will perfect the theory system for signal control roundabout and provide technical support for the reconstruction of uncontrolled roundabout as well as selection of signal control method of roundabout, meaning significant application value.

Keywords- Signal-Controlled Roundabout (SCR), Signal- Controlled Method, Stop Rate, Adaptability

I.  INTRODUCTION Uncontrolled roundabout features in less conflict points,  non-necessity of stopping and simpler way of management.

The increasing demand for roundabout traffic have brought forth series problems at Uncontrolled roundabout in respect of traffic jam, rising of accident rate, growth of vehicle delay and increasing of saturation. Signalizing at roundabout has greatly improved the traffic capability of roundabouts while differences exist between condition of adaptability and traffic efficiency under different signal controlling methods.

In addition to difference between traffic capacity and real- time vehicle delay, there is bigger difference for stop rate, especially for stop rate of left-turn traffic flow. Stop rate affects the vehicle's fuel consumption and automotive  emission. Less stop rates as possible will effectively reduce environment pollution. Hence, it is necessary to make a study on the adaptability for various methods when searching for the optimization method to effectively lower the stop rate.



II. RESEARCH REVIEW It is divided into two directions of unsigned-controlled  roundabout and controlled roundabout in the related domestic research. For the research of unsignal-controlled roundabout, it mainly involves the study of traffic characteristics and its applicable conditions, capacity, delay, safety and geometrical design, etc. in which, for most cases, the capacity and delay of roundabout entrance under different conditions of entrance and loop is calculated by using gap-acceptance model[1][2][3][4]. For foreign researchers, they tend to connect safety with geometrical design of roundabout which is made under guidance of safety requirements for vehicle and pedestrians[5][6][7]. In the countries of the States, Australia and Britain, numbers of national regulations have been issued concerning roundabout design, which have laid a foundation for the study of space related optimal design of signal-controlled roundabout and evaluation of traffic efficiency.

The study on signal-controlled roundabout started at a later time and according to designing guidance for roundabout in the States and Australia, it qualitatively regulates that signal control could be implemented for certain entrances if necessary, stressing that it should be used with great care and should not be used for purpose of a long-term solution to traffic jam. Baranowski[8] made a study on the signal control method for roundabout pedestrians, exploring condition and safety of arranging signal for roundabout pedestrians. Ak?elik made a study on the limit control of capacity at entrance of roundabout[9]. We study the relevant research in our country in 1998, which was initially raised by researchers from engineering department of Tongji University[10][11]. They established basic principle and approach for left-turn with two-stop control at roundabout and gave it a good study in the way of traffic law, signal timing method, applicable condition, optimization control method and efficiency evaluation. Mr.

2010 Second WRI Global Congress on Intelligent Systems  DOI 10.1109/GCIS.2010.96   2010 Second WRI Global Congress on Intelligent Systems  DOI 10.1109/GCIS.2010.96   2010 Second WRI Global Congress on Intelligent Systems  DOI 10.1109/GCIS.2010.96   2010 Second WRI Global Congress on Intelligent Systems  DOI 10.1109/GCIS.2010.96   2010 Second WRI Global Congress on Intelligent Systems  DOI 10.1109/GCIS.2010.96     Ao Guchang[12] put forward signal control method for roundabout under condition without of straight flow.

Researches from home and abroad focus on the field of non-signal controlled roundabout, with less time in the study of signal-controlled roundabout. It needs further research in terms of capacity of signal-controlled roundabout, condition of geometric topology, demand for mixed traffic flow and adaptability of signal control at roundabout.



III. INTRODUCTION TO SIGNAL CONTROL METHOD AT ROUNDABOUT  A. Control of in-turn discharge clockwise at signal- entrance path In this control method, each entrance lane discharge In-  turn of clockwise, see Fig. 1.

This control method could be converted into a one-way  closed intersection group (Fig. 2). To take the five-fork intersection as a example, it could be regarded as an intersection group made of five intersections of A, B, C, D and E. To select datum point of coordination control, to set the Max delay as optimization target and to choose signal period, phase difference and queuing length as constraint condition, the optimization of other parameters will be carried out.

B. Control of in-turn discharge clockwise at signal- entrance path + interlace of minor flow With consideration of order and efficiency of multi-fork  roundabout, on the basis of Control of In-turn Discharge Clockwise at Signal-entrance Path, the interlace of secondary traffic flow is introduced (Fig. 3), i.e. to treat a main flow and several secondary flows which have least conflicts between each other as the same phase.

C. Association roundabout control at multi--entrance path Three phases are usually designed for three-fork  roundabout and twice is released within one period at each entrance (Fig. 4). Two phases are usually designed for four- fork roundabout (Fig. 5). Twice is released within one period at each entrance of five-fork roundabout, and release is made clockwise at entrance lane (Fig. 6). Three phases are arranged at for six-fork roundabout and release is made clockwise at entrance lane (Fig. 7).

Associated Roundabout Control at Multi-entrance Path includes, in two ways, the coordination of entrance signal and loop signal, and then the coordination with loop signal.

The optimization model of timing parameters is established under concept of equisaturation, but the space constraint of loop parking should be realized. When flow ratio between different entrance lanes in the same phase is unbalanced, or queuing vehicles inside the loop go beyond conflict point (or stop line), which influences the normal traffics, it is suggested to take coordination measures of delayed start-up, early disconnection or start-up and late disconnection for green signals of conflict flows.



IV. CALCULATION METHOD FOR STOP RATE OF SCR When discharging method is adopted in sequent  clockwise order at one-way entrance in terms of roundabout, stop rate will be influenced by the control of the first stop line at entrance lane while it will be mutually influenced by the control of both the first stop line at entrance lane and the second stop line on circular road when the cooperative discharging method is adopted at multi way entrance.

A. Stop rate for the first stop line of entrance lane Similar with ordinary intersections, the motion state for  vehicles at the first stop line of entrance lane of signal- controlled circular road usually applies the calculation method for intersection stop rate[14] . The stop rate af of the first stop line at SCR entrance lane is decided by the sum of stop rate between ?random and over-saturation stop rate? 0f and ?normal block? uf , i.e.

)( 0 ut a fff +=?  ??  ? ?  ?  ?  > ?  ????==      ] )(12  )1()1([  xx  xx TQ  xx xx  sg ST  sg Q  f t     ??  ? ? ?  ?  < ? ?  = 10.1   x  x yfu ?  In which, ?t is the correction factor set after complete consideration of a full stop, Q0 is the average number of stranded queuing vehicles at entrance lane by the end of signal circulation under saturation (pcu), Qt is the traffic capacity at direction of such entrance (pcu /s), s is the saturated discharge value of vehicles (pcu), x is the saturation of entrance lane, T is the time interval of research for average delayed queuing vehicles(s), x0 is the saturation threshold at entrance lane, g is the effective green time(s), ? is the green ratio. y is the flow ratio.

B. Stop rate for the second stop line of roundabou 1) State analysis for left-turn vehicles at the second stop  line: In accordance with the relationship of driving time th that the left-turn front vehicle goes from the first stop line to the second stop line and the effective green time geLa for left-turn at the first stop line, the motion state of left-turn vehicles could be divided into the following three (See Fig.

8):  ? The light turns green for the second stop line when the left-turn front vehicles arrive at the second stop  line, i.e. 2Igt a eLh +> . The left-turn flow does not  stop at the second stop line, encountering no jams and the stop rate is 0.

? The light simultaneously turns green for the second stop line when the left-turn front vehicles arrive at  the second stop line, i.e. 2Igt a eLh += . The left-turn  flow does not stop at the second stop line, encountering no jams and the stop rate is 0.

? The light turns red for the second stop line when the left-turn front vehicles arrive at the second stop line,  i.e. 2Igt a eLh +< . The left-turn front flows stop at  the second stop line, restarting until the light turns green at the second stop line, which will drive into the entrance lane, leaving the roundabout and the left-turn vehicles encounter jams.

When the design speed is set certain, th is merely related with the geometric conditions inside the roundabout while geLa relates with the signal cycle of roundabout as well as with the relevant control parameters, including the left-turn green ratio at the first stop line. To change the relationship between th and geLa into the relationship between geometric conditions of roundabout and control scheme for roundabout[10] , we obtain:  L v  vIdwR CIgt a  L  ha eLh +?  ??++? <?+>  ? ?    )5.0(  L v  vIdwR CIgt  a L  ha eLh +?  ??++? =?+=  ? ?    )5.0(  L v  vIdwR CIgt a  L  ha eLh +?  ??++? >?+<  ? ?    )5.0(  In which: dh1 is the driving distance for the front vehicles away from the conflict points(m), ? is the central angle (radian) formed by the three points of crossing point, central point of the second stop line (on the first roundabout) and center of traffic island, R is the radius of roundabout(m), w is the lane width of roundabout(m), v0 is the design speed of roundabout(m/s), C is the signal cycle of roundabout (s), ?La is the left-turn green ratio of the first stop line, L is the totally lost hours within a single signal cycle(s).

2) Stop rate for left-turn vehicles at the second stop line: According to relationship between control cycle and geometric conditions of island, under condition of  L v  vIdwR C a  L  h + ?  ??++? >  ? ?   021)5.0( , there exists stop behavior for left-turn flow. Suppose that the number for vehicles which are necessary to stop at the stop line of roundabout reach the single lane of stop line at roundabout with saturation is n, the number for vehicles which randomly reach the single lane of stop line at roundabout is m, we obtain the stop rate fb of stop line at roundabout as following:  ? ? ?  ?? ?  ?  + ?  ??++? ?  + ?  ??++? >  ? ?+?  = L  v vIdwRC  L v  vIdwRC Cq  nmn  f a iL  iihi  a iL  iihi  iL  ihii  b  ? ?  ? ?      )5.0(0  )5.0()(3600  ? ? ?  ?? ?  ?  ? ?  <? ?? ?  + ? ?  ?? =   1] )1(21  1[  a L  ih  L a eL  a L  ih a L  ka L  L  x n  Sg  x n C  xC ef  y fq  n  ?   ihLL  LL  nqS qSdm ??  ?? =  )(   121 h  a eL tIgd ?+=  In which: ni is the number of vehicles reaching stop line of roundabout with saturation within one cycle at No. i  entrance lane (pcu), mi is the number of vehicles stopping at the stop line of roundabout randomly reach the stop line of roundabout within each cycle at No. i entrance lane (pcu), nih is the number of roundabout used for left-turn vehicles at No.

i entrance lane, Ii2 is the time interval between left-turn green lights at stop line and green lights of roundabout at No. i entrance lane, qL is the flow rate of left-turn vehicles(pcu/s), f is the correction factor for vehicles without complete stopping, 0.9 is usually taken, y is the flow ratio for left-turn vehicles at stop line of entrance lane, xLa is the saturation for left-turn vehicles at stop line of entrance lane, SL is the saturation flow of left-turn vehicles(pcu/s), d1 is the delay of the first left-turn vehicle (s), th1 is the driving time for the first left-turn vehicle moving from the stop line of entrance lane to the stop line of roundabout (s).



V. RELEVANCE BETWEEN FACTORS OF TIME-SPACE AND STOP RATE  Besides the main factors of regular road and traffic conditions influencing the stop rate of other factors[11] of signal-controlled crossings, the number of lanes, central  island radius of roundabout, signal cycle and green intervals are also included. This text mainly analyzes the relevance between central island radius, signal cycle and stop rate.

To indicate the influence under such control mode coming from the central island radius and signal cycle, certain parameters are supposed to be at definite values.

From the point of physical meaning of parameters, we presume that the roundabout belongs to the type of orthogonal crossing and the number of entrance lanes, the number of roundabout lanes and the number of exist lanes match. The saturation flow for straight forward lanes of entrances is 1650 pcu/h and saturation flow for left-turn lanes is 1550 pcu/h, which are symmetrically matching.

A. Analysis on stop rate for control method of synergistic discharge at multi entrance lane  1) Relevance between stop rate and signal cycle: On the basis of above calculation method via using VISSIM simulation results for model modification, we obtain variety laws of stop rate for straight forward and average left-turn vehicles with the changes of signal cycle under the control method for synergistic discharging at multi entrance lane of roundabout. Refer to Fig.9 and 10.

It could be found that: ? The stop rate of average straight forward vehicles  varies little with the changes of central island radius under the synergistic control of discharging at multi entrance lane of roundabout, generally around 0.6~0.7 time/pcu.

? The stop rate for average left-turn vehicles increases at the beginning with the radius growth of central island while it tends to be stable when the radius of central island reaches certain value. The value is generally around 1.3~1.5 time/pcu.

2) Relevance between stop rate and radius of central island of roundabout: On the basis of above calculation     method via using VISSIM simulation results for model modification, we obtain variety laws of stop rate for average vehicles with the changes of central island radius under the control method for synergistic discharging at multi entrance lane of roundabout. From Fig.11, it could be found that:  ? The stop rate of average straight forward vehicles varies little with the changes of central island radius under the synergistic control of discharging at multi entrance lane of roundabout, generally around 0.6~0.7 time/pcu.

? The stop rate for average left-turn vehicles slightly increases at the beginning with the radius growth of central island while it decreases when the radius of central island grows at certain value. The smaller the cycle is, the more obvious the downtrend will be.

B. Analysis on stop rate for control method of orderly discharge clockwise at single entrance lane For roundabout in the control mode of orderly discharge  clockwise at single entrance lane, stop rate is mainly reflected at the fist stop line while the stop rate of the first sop line is not influenced by the radius of central island of roundabout, which is only influenced by the traffic control parameters, e.g. signal cycle, etc. By adopting the calculation mode for the stop rate at the first stop line of entrance lane and by using VISSIM simulation results for model modification, we obtain variety laws for the stop rate of average vehicle with changes of signal cycle when it is controlled by the discharging control of single entrance lane at roundabout, refer to Fig. 12.

It could be found that the total stop rate of average vehicle at intersections (ratio for left-turn and straight forward is 1:2) will slightly increase with the growth of signal cycle, usually around 0.7~0.8.



VI. CONCLUSIONS Arrangement of signal control at roundabout can greatly  help to increase the traffic capacity and safety and there lies difference for applicable conditions and traffic efficiency under different methods. This research puts forward three control methods concerning auto vehicles at signal- controlled crossings, establishes stop rate models for the first stop line at entrance lane of signal-controlled crossings and the second stop line of roundabout and analyzes the influence laws on the stop rate of signal-controlled crossings caused by the signal cycle of time & space parameters and radius of central island under the two different modes of method of synergistic roundabout control discharged at multi entrance lanes and control method of orderly discharge clockwise at single entrance lane.

Researches show that the signal cycle under two control methods is less influential on stop rate. With precondition of the same signal cycle, the stop rate for control method of orderly discharge clockwise at single entrance lane is 0.7~0.8, the stop rate for straight forward vehicles synergistically  discharging at multi entrance lane is 0.6~0.7, stop rate for left-turn vehicles is 1.3~1.5. Hence, when the straight forward vehicle ratio at roundabout is more than 85%, the stop rate will be smaller for control method of synergistically discharging vehicles at multi entrance lane. Meanwhile, under certain signal cycle conditions, the bigger the radius of central island, the smaller the totally average stop rate at intersections will be. The research result has provided us with quantitative basis in theory when choosing signal control method of roundabout.

