Extracting Sentiment of Fund Investors  from Small Talk on the Web

Abstract?Reviews on Web can help small investors make decision in selecting funds. The size of fund reviews is smaller than other products, which proposes a challenge to extract sentiment by using statistic methods. We develop a methodology to deal with this problem by using association rule to select seed words and introducing new outside resources to improve the traditional PMI performance. The result shows that this methodology is effective.

Keywords- sentiment extraction, lexicon, PMI,  outside resource, data mining

I.  INTRODUCTION With development of information technology, web  finance information has significant impact on investor?s decision making. Since 1997, funds have experienced rapidly expanding and became an important part in Chinese stock market. The open-end fund in value exceeds 300 billion dollars and has almost 200 million investors. As a kind of competitive investment tool, fund can provides customer its specialist finance service. To individuals, which fund should be invested is an important selection and reviews on web can help them.

Talks issued by small investors have unique language characteristic, which means that individuals incline to use informal language to issue their ideas about funds, such as fashion words, slang and some symbols. It is difficulty to identify their sentiment only depending on the standard dictionary. At the same time, reviews to fund are smaller in scale comparing with other products, so extracting sentiment from them becomes more difficult since the statistic methods require enough samples. In this research, we propose a hybrid method for the extraction of sentiment word from small corpus based on PMI algorithm and additional outside language resources, such as the word frequency list and a sentiment lexicon of HOWNET. The task is decomposed into the following main subtasks:  ? Identify sentiment words from a talk corpus to build a seed list.

? Expand sentiment lexicon from new talk corpus.

? Improve system performance by using outside language resources.

This paper focuses on the all 3 subtasks and our contributions are as follows:  ? We introduced association rule miner to find sentiment words for our seed lexicon?s building, which was used to find product features [1].

? We proposed a new idea to improve PMI performance in very small corpus by introducing outside language resources.

?  The relationship also has been studied between seed words, SM results [10], lexicon words and outside frequency list.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the related work, Section III presents our method and the system?s framework, Section IV shows the results of experiment and compares different method?s performance and Section V draws our conclusion.



II. RELATED WORK This paper concentrates on reviews? evaluation. Popesuc  has decomposed it into several subtasks [2]: (1) Mining product features. (2) Mining customers? viewpoint to the feature. (3) Sentiment analysis for viewpoints. (4) Ranking viewpoints according to their importance. Sentiment analysis is used to judge the polarity of the review and provides a useful reference to customer. Most previous research on sentiment-based classification has been at least partially knowledge-based. Some work focuses on classifying the semantic orientation of individual words, using linguistic heuristics or a pre-selected set of seed words which is similar with us in subtask one [3] [4].

To provide more flexibility to different language environment of the lexicon, Turney used algorithm called PMI-IR to expand lexicon by measuring the similarity of words [9]. Gamon continued Turney?s work by propose SO and SM method [10]. Yuen pointed out that the performance of PMI algorithm depend on the great size of corpus [8].

In finance product reviews, Sanjiv develop a methodology for extracting small investor sentiment from stock message boards. He comprises different classifier algorithms couple together by voting scheme. The lexicon he used is a hand-picked collection of finance words, such as   DOI 10.1109/ICCIS.2010.298    DOI 10.1109/ICCIS.2010.298    DOI 10.1109/ICCIS.2010.150    DOI 10.1109/ICCIS.2010.150    DOI 10.1109/ICCIS.2010.150     bull, bear, buy, pressure, etc [5]. Tetlock quantitatively measure the interactions between the media and the stock market using daily content from a popular Wall Street Journal column. He analyzes the polarity of newspaper data by counting the sentiment words from the Harvard psychosocial dictionary [6]. As we described earlier, formal words coming from dictionary do not suit to informal language environment completely in Internet. Hand-picked lexicon can deal this situation well but it has a drawback that old lexicon can not be expanded when retrieve new corpus.

The inability to learn more sentiment words from new documents limits its application.

Automatically extracting the emotive content of text is a complex problem. There are two basic techniques proposed for discovering terms in corpora: Symbolic approaches and statistical approaches, which exploit the fact that the words composing a term tend to be found close to each other and reoccurring [2] [7]. Minqing Hu use association rule mining to find all frequent item sets in statistical meaning [1].

Inspired by the work of Minqing Hu, we mined sentiment words by using association rule to release the pressure of hand pick job. Seed words with high minimum support also have more possibility to find co-occurrence words by PMI algorithm in small corpus at the next step, which is important to the lexicon expanding. Outside resources are introduced afterward to further improve system?s performance.



III. PROPOSED TECHNIQUES Fig. 1 gives an architectural overview for our sentiment  extraction system. The system performs its function in five steps.

Figure 1.  Sentiment extraction system of fund reviews  A. Reviews crawling and words segmentation Three corpus (F0, F1 and F2) are downloaded from  website and segmented with the software ICTCLAS (Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Lexical Analysis System), which was programmed by Chinese Academy of Sciences.

B. Mining for seed words by using association rule miner The miner is based on Apriori algorithm [9] which  generally works in two steps. At the first, it searches all frequent itemsets from documents that satisfy a user specified minimum support. Secondly, it generates rules from the discovered frequent itemsets. For our task, we only need the step one to find candidate sentiment words. While Minqing Hu set his minimum support as 1%, we make this value equal to 0.2%. The reason is that sentiment words have lower repetition rate in our corpus.

Sentiment words are picked by hand from frequent itemsets produced by Apriori miner and result in seed sentiment lexicons I1.

C. Mining for sentiment words with SM We use SM algorithm to extract new sentiment words  from review corpus F1. The PMI between features and seed words are calculated, then candidate words are automatically picked up according to our threshold setting [10], which results in expand lexicon I2.

D. Minging for sentiment words with HOWNET HOWNET is a kind of Chinese semantic resource, which  is similar with WordNet. We use its sentiment lexicon to derive sentiment words from corpus F1 by simply comparing each other. It is the fact that a smaller corpus easily leads to the low recall of PMI algorithm because many low frequency words in the test set barely associate with the seed words. So we use this outside resource to strengthen opinion words extraction.

E. Frequency lists filtering The scale of fund reviews limits the accuracy of PMI  methods which is based on statistic theory. The distribution of candidate words in our experiment may not be the same as that in general situation. We use a frequency lists based on very large corpus to rectify this problem. Candidate words will be filtered by their frequency in the lists according to the assumption that sentiment words incline to have smaller words frequency.



IV. EXPERIMENTS  A. Data We conducted experiments on fund reviews from website  http://ifund.jrj.com.cn, which is an important financial forum in China. Three fund reviews have been collected to build corpus F0 since June, 2007 to June 2010 which comprises 17,842 units. We use another two fund reviews from 2009 to     2010 to form corpus F1 and corpus F2, each with 1,309 and 1,387 units. Comparing with colossal corpora like Turney?s hundred-billion word corpus, our one is very small and only has words not exceed 200 thousand(TABLE II). We can not get more materials because of the short history of Chinese stock market. So how to extract sentiment from this small corpus propose a new challenge.

Total 545 words are extracted from F0 by employing association rule miner. There are 32 negative and 8 positive words tagged by human. To prepare for performance evaluation, 500 negative (36%) and 85 positive (6%) reviews also are pre-labeled from corpus F2 by hand, which means 58% of reviews in corpus F2 is neutral in sentiment. We found it is general that almost all fund reviews in total inclines to negative and the difference is only the degree. For describing clearly, the experiment below concentrates on negative words extraction and the technique can be easily extended to positive words processing.

B. Methods of performance evaluation To evaluate system performance, two indexes of  precision (P) and recall (R) are used as (1) and (2). Table I shows parameters? meaning.

BA AP +  =                                      (1)  CA AR +  =                                      (2)  C. Results Table III gives all the precision and recall results. We  evaluated results at each step of our algorithm. In the table, column 2 lists each technique. Column 3 represents the number of word in lexicon at each step. In experiment, we make parameter selection as column 4. Columns 5 and 6 give the precision and recall of sentiment extraction from corpus F2.

At the first step, based on seed lexicon?s 32 words and the small corpus with 200 thousand words, the system gets the result of 83% precision and 49% in recall. Comparing with Yuen 75% precision and 31% recall in one year data (3.4 million words), we think using Apriori method to mine words is effective. In step two, we can see the lexicon is expanded to 227 words which lead to 7% improvement in recall at the cost of 11% precision decline. In step three, features of corpus F1 are compared with the sentiment lexicon to draw another sentiment words.  At the last step, we use a frequency lists (tokenization and POS tagging by NEUCSP) based on Internet large corpus to filter new words expanded at step2 and 3. It obviously improves system precision at relatively lower cost of recall and can satisfy basic requirements in practical use.

TABLE I.  PARAMETER MEANING  Real negative review  Not real negative review  Negative reviews extracted by system  A B  Omitting reviews by system C D  TABLE II.  THE DIFFERENCE OF CORPUS SIZE  Experimenter Corpus size Turney Hundred billion words  Yuen R W M 34 million words Our 200 thousand words  TABLE III.  RECALL AND PRECISION AT EACH STEP OF THE SYSTEM  Technique No. of words  in lexicon  Parameters value  Precision Recall  1 Seed lexicon 32 Minim support >0.2%  83% 49%  2 Expanding lexicon with  PMI  227 PMI<0 72% 56%  3 Expanding lexicon with HOWNET  374  60% 67%  4 Frequency lists filtering  291 For I2, threshold =66% of words  For I3, threshold  of frequency <100  73% 61%

V. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we proposed a technique for sentiment  extraction from a small corpus of stock fund reviews. To compensate the weakness of small corpus, outside resources are introduced for improving PMI performance. Our objective is to provide investors an automatic tool to analyze general inclination to different funds. Our experimental results indicate that the proposed technique is effective. In our future work, we plan to further improve this technique to get better performance.

