A Study of Safety Third-Party Logistics Information

Abstract?By illustrating the classification rules and association rules of data mining and taking into consideration of the content and requirement of third-party logistics information management and analyzing the security problems exist in third-party logistics information management, the paper suggests a safety third-party logistics information management model based on data mining. This model could provide better solution to the security problems in logistics information management, and help ensure the security of third-party logistics information management.

Keywords????data mining; association rules; third-party logistics; information management; model

I. INTRODUCTION With the globalization of supply chain and  the development of competitive system and information technology, the logistics becomes more and more complex, and the cost of logistics increases and capital becomes more intensive. As a new model of logistics, the third-party logistics plays an important role in reducing the company?s logistics cost and in enhancing the competitive edge. Under the logistics information system, the third-party logistics corporations could build up the relationship between the various sectors of a company; the company and supplier; the company and the consumers ; the company and government on the net, and coordinate and corporate between each other.

When the third-party logistics information system serves as business running and decision- making platform, the safety of the system is much worried by the decision makers, because any change and leaking of information resource or the destroy of information resource could bring to the company inestimable economy loss and even could endanger the company?s survival and development. Besides, logistics information management system, which based on traditional data-bank, neglects the analysis of information and it causes inconvenience to decision makers. The third-party logistics, as a  complex system, yields a large amount of data every moment. The various data store in logistics information management system distributed in various data bank with different storage means and data format. Therefore, it turns out to be an important problem needed to be solved as how to make use of advanced data mining technology and to search useful information among multi-sources and heterogeneous data and ensure the safety of information management data, thus to better serve the third-party logistics in the aspect of decision making.? ????.THE ANALYSIS OF THE CONTENT  AND SAFETY OF PRESENT THIRD-PARTY LOGISTICS  INFORMATION MANAGEMENT The connection in logistics system is  achieved through information. The dispatch of basic resource is achieved by sharing the information resource too. So the arrangement of logistics activities should base on information.

In order to make logistics activities go smoothly and regularly, it is important for us to ensure the safety and accessibility of these activities. The network of logistics information is just the way which aims to make the logistics information be shared by business sectors, various businesses and even businesses worldwide with the help of modern information technology. The logistics information management is the process to analyze, search, study, report, exchange logistics information and offer these services by planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating and manipulating, so that it could effectively make use of manpower, materials and capital to reach an overall target of logistics management. It is a dynamic development concept, its denotative and connotative meanings will change along with the enhancement of logistics management practice and development of logistics management, along with the development of information technology, the logistics information system comes into being based on information technology. By adopting computer technology and communication technology, the logistics information management system is a   DOI 10.1109/ICDMA.2010.67     human-machine system which collects, catalogues, processes, stores logistics information and offers service etc. It can exchange long-distance information and process huge data of information, and it can play an important role in e-commerce circulation, accounting treatment and business management.

According to the features of information system and logistics, the functions of the third-party logistics information management model are shown as follows: data collecting and inputting, information storage, information process, information transmission, information searching and inquiring and outputting. It is quite obvious that information management requires processing and transmitting huge accurate data, such as market supply quantity, supply price and demand quantity, demand price and storage quantity, assortment, quality and size.

Any missing or mistake in information can directly affect the decision making and carrying out the decisions, and eventually will influence the effect of logistics management and economy efficiency of company. The safety of the third-party logistics information management model includes the safety of external information exchange and the safety of internal information processing. The safety of information management is threatened when a company exchanges information with other companies such as accepting the ordering, sending back the information on the net. Some measures must be taken due to insecurity on the net, such as network attack from hackers, virus spreading and unsafe network system. As for the safe internal information processing, firstly it must be done under the safe operating system, this is the basic requirement of company logistics information. Secondly, it requires a qualified work team who are self-disciplined and law-abiding, which is key link to ensure the safety of information system operating.

From the perspective of information system, the core of the safety of logistics information system is to ensure the normal operating of information system and the safety of data. Information system safety involves the problems of the safety of net, servers, storage device and operating system, reliability of back-up solution and clustering technique, electrical supply, the computing environment, computer virus and unauthorized access, computer system management. Data safety refers to ensure the safety of data, which means the data would not miss and be changed and destroyed and stolen; the insecurity of data processing will cause great loss to business.

Although the information has the characteristics  of sharing and not equaling to zero, the various businesses may get imbalanced information of the demand of market, so it will still erode the competitiveness of businesses if key information is leaked and will put the business at a serious disadvantage. So logistics information system safety is a safety project. ? ????. Safety Third -Party Logistics Information Management Model Based on Data Mining  A. The safety model of third-party information management   As what is discussed above, in order to make logistics activities go smoothly and regularly, it is important for us to ensure the safety and accessibility of these activities.

Third-party logistics information management model bears networking feature, and the information is transmitted through network, so the safety of network is quite important for the logistics information management. Because of the openness of network, insecurity of communications protocol, and because of data storage and data processing on the net and because users access data from many different sources distributed throughout network environment, it is more likely that data transmitted on the net is leaked or destroyed, and the network is likely to be attacked severely.

We could adopt information Protection System (or Dynamic Information Security Theory) in order to ensure the safety and accessibility of logistics information. We construct Information Protection System, that is, P2DAR model shown on Fig 1. This model provides an available method of securing logistics information management. P2DAR model consists of Policy, Protection, Detection, Analyze and Response. Protection, Detection, Analyze and Response combined to form a complete and dynamic safety cycle, which ensures the safety of information system under the safety guideline.

Policy is the core of The P2DAR model in Fig 1. The security policy should be made in the company in order to carry out third-party     logistics information management dynamic network system. The security policy provides guideline and supporting means in the information management, while protection is achieved by adopting some traditional static security means such as firewalls, encryption and user authentication. Detection is the foundation of the whole safety model and basis of dynamic analysis and response. It is also the powerful means to impose the security policy by continuously detecting and monitoring network and system and finding out the weakness and threat and at the same time it responds effectively and promptly through cycle feedback.

It often detects the weakness of the system and external threat. Analyze is the most important link in the model, it further abstracts and analyzes findings of detection and distinguishes the most dangerous actions affecting system from the complex reports of findings and builds up the most ?advanced warning model, provides the users the friendly analysis of findings, so we could quickly locate the existing problems occurred in the network and respond readily to the problems according to defense system previously worked out. Response plays an important role in the safety system and it is the most effective method to solve potential security problems. It must make correct response in case insecurity hole or incident occurs.

B. Third-party logistics information safety detection model based on data mining  As suggested in the P2DAR model in Fig 1, detection is the foundation of the whole safety model and basis of dynamic analysis and response. It is also the powerful means to impose the security policy by continuously detecting and monitoring network and system and finding out the weakness and threat and at the same time it responds effectively and promptly through cycle feedback. The application of data mining technique to detecting network and system of third-party logistics information model would automatically result in brief and accurate detecting model based on huge data being checked. The Information Detecting Model based on the association rules and Apriori algorithm is suggested in Fig 2.

In Fig 2, Packet Sniffer aims to collect data and it is only a simple interface to get information; while data preprocessing is responsible for transferring the network data and data connecting into the data format required by data mining, the steps includes further filtering, noise clearing up, the known attack detected by the third-party detection tools.

Newdone Analyzer tries to find the new attack through association analysis and sequential  analysis and sends abnormal behaviors to Rules Builder which extracts intrusive abnormal behavior patterns. Rule Bank is used to store the original intrusive behavior patterns and other intrusive behavior patterns which arise when Rules Builder is data mining. Rule Bank can also be used to data preprocessing.

Announciator makes announcement to third-party logistics information management system administrator in human-computer interface when deviant analysis reports abnormal behaviors. ?  ???????? Data Mining and Its Applications Data mining means extracting hidden,  unknown and potential useful information and knowledge from huge, incomplete, noisy, vague and random data. The major task of data mining is to adopt and develop some relevant theories, methods and tools to extract some useful and interesting knowledge and model by making full use of huge databases.

A. Some concepts of Association Rule  Let I={i1?i2?	?im}be a set of items. Let D, the task-relevant data, be a set of database transactions where each transaction T is a set of items such that T ? I. Each transaction is associated with an identifier, called TID. Let A be a set of items. A transaction T is said to contain A if and only if A ? T. An association rule is an implication of the form A?B, where A ? I,B ? I, and ??? ?The rule A? B holds in the transaction set D with support s, where s is the percentage of transactions in D that contain A ? B(i.e., both A and B). This is taken to be the probability, P(A ? B). The rule A?B has confidence c in the transaction set D if c is the percentage of transaction in D containing A that also contain B. This is taken to be the conditional probability, P(B|A). that is,  Support(A?B)=P(A ? B) Confidence(A?B)=P(B|A).

When support account and confidence  account is equal or greater than their threshold limit value respectively, we can see A is equal or greater than B. These two values are named as min sup and min conf. If support?A?B?? min_sup and confidence?A?B??min_conf? association rule A?B is the strong rule. If not, association rule A?B is the weak rule.

B. The process of association rule mining  Association rule mining is to generate association rule which demands all support and confidence count exceeds min sup and min conf in itemsets D, that is, to satisfy support?A?B? ? min_sup and confidence ? A ? B ? ?     min_conf. Association rule mining is a two-step process?  ?Find all frequent itemsets: By definition, each of these itemsets will occur at least as frequently as a pre-determined minimum support count.?  ?Generate strong association rules from the frequent itemsets: By definition, these rules must satisfy minimum support and minimum confidence.

C. The Apriori Algorithm  Apriori is an influential algorithm for mining frequent itemsets for Boolean association rules. Apriori employs an iterative approach known as a level-wise search, where k-itemsets are used to explore(k+1)-itemsets.

First, the set of frequent 1-itemsets is found.

This set is denoted L1.L1 is used to find L2,the set of frequent 2-itemsets,which is used to find L3,and so on, until no more frequent k-itemsets can be found. The finding of each Lk requires one full scan of the database.

k-itemsets are the itemsets of {c1,c2,	,ck}.

Lk refers to k-itemsets when support count is greater than minimum support count required by the users and it is also called frequent k- itemsets. Ck  refers to k-itemsets candidate composing candidate item sets, L .

Apriori Algorithm could help to input accounting itemsets D and user specified minimum support count and minimum confidence account and output all association rule itemsets if support account and confidence account is greater than minimum support and minimum confidence respectively. Apriori Algorithm is shown as follows:  L1=find_frequent_1-itemsets(D); for (k=2; Lk-??? ; k++) { Ck=apriori_gen(Lk-1,min_sup); for each transaction ???????????????  ? !?? "???? ????#??"$?%?&#'(?)*? ? ? ? ? ??+%?? ?,%?  ?"$?%??? ?????,????!%????-.-??%?? ????? !?%??,????-.-??%???#?? ????????? "??//*? ???0? 1'???#'2??? "??34.?5?"60? } return L= ? kLk; Apriori Algorithm should first find out  itemsets, L1 of frequent 1-itemsets and then L2 of frequent 2-itemsets until some r-value appeared which make Lr empty. Then Apriori Algorithm will come to an end. In the cycle Lk-1is to generate candidate Ck?thus to find out Lk. The Apriori_genprocedure generates the candidates and then uses the Apriori property to eliminate those having a subset that is not  frequent. Itemsets in Ck  is to generate candidate itemsets which result in frequent itemsets. The final frequent itemsets Lk must be a subset of Ck.

For each transaction, a subset function is used to find all subsets of the transaction that are candidates, and the count for each of these candidates is accumulated. Finally, all those candidates satisfying minimum support form the set of frequent itemsets, L. A procedure can then be called to generate association rules from the frequent itemsets?  For each frequent itemset l , generate all nonempty subsets of l .

For every nonempty subsets of l , output the rule ?s ? ( l 7 s)?  if  conf scountport  lcountport min_  )(_sup  )(_sup ? , where  support_count( l ) is the number of transactions containing the itemset l .

As Apriori Algorithm doesn?t consider the specific aspects in data accounting and detection, it will result in a great number of useless rules or it is likely to miss some rule which infrequently appeared but with meaningful description of behavior patterns. So it is necessary to expand Apriori Algorithm by introducing some limiting characteristic attributes in the formation of rules. In association rule mining, characteristic attributes can restrict the formation process of candidate itemsets Ck so that it makes each itemset of Ck contain some characteristic attribute value.

D. samples  To process data packet into association record format and save it as text file, and separate the variants by space, suggested as follows:  19281688188    tcp 25 exterpassive sf normal  192816881865   tcp 25 exterpassive sf normal  1928168818106  tcp 25 exter active sf normal  We adopt association rule data mining to generate rules according to 250 items of association r information record satisfying both minimum support 8% and minimum confidence 100%, it turns out a lot of less meaningful rules, which can not suggest any meaningful association between association values. If we detect the system according to these rules, it will mislead the decision making. So it is necessary to discard these meaningless rules, we can take     the following procedures: ? filter rules not including class type on  the right side rules (2) and filter rule not including rules of TIP  and Port on the left side rules.

Some satisfying rules are achieved by taking above steps, shown as follows:  left side rules  right side rules  support count?9? confidence count?9?  192 8 168 8 1 8 12 80 sf normal          9.8           100  192 8 168 8 1 8 168 25 passive exter normal         16.5           100  192 8 168 8 88 8 217 80 active normal         25.2           100  192 8 168 8 114 8 48 tcp 25 sf normal         37.1          100  192 8 168 8 118 8 63 80 active normal         19.7           100?  ::::. Conclusion The safety of third-party logistics information involves many factors, and there are also multi - methods to ensure the safety. The paper discusses the content and safety of third-party logistics information management and constructs a third-party logistics information safety detection model based on data mining which applies data mining technique to information detection and analyze in order to judge whether the information management model is attacked or not. The paper suggests a useful method to further solve third-party information technique safety problem.

