Sequential Sequence Mining Technique in Large Database of Gene Sequence   Kiran Amin1, J. S. Shah2

Abstract The Sequential Sequence Mining produces large gene sequence. It is important find out meaningful information from the huge data. It mostly depends on the cell as such the most of these processes are controlled by the gene expression. Sequential Sequence Mining technique is useful to find sequential relationships between genes.

Many algorithms have been developed to associate the huge amount of gene sequence. This paper focuses on Sequential Sequence Mining algorithms to analyze large gene sequence.

Keywords- Gene Sequence, Association Rule Mining, Sequential Sequence mining Sequence-A, Sequence-B.

1. Introduction   The GENE sequence is a fragment of DNA is having  composition of one type of protein. Gene acts as the blue print for the proteins and some other products. These days, the various expression levels of large genes, mostly all genes in an organism, can be measured simultaneously in a single experiment using micro arrays. Sequential sequence technique is used to develop and analyze the gene sequence.

The Sequential Sequence Mining technology enables to identify the long sequence which is responsible for the genetic causes of anomalies occurring in the functioning of the human body. It identifies the long sequence occurring repeatedly in human body.

2. Association Rule Mining   Association rule mining gives the interesting relationship among a large items[3]. If the rules satisfy the minimum support and minimum confidence threshold[2]. The association rule mining divides the  problems into two parts[2]. First it finds the frequent item sets : Means  each item set is frequent if it satisfies minimum support[3]. Second it finds the strong association rules from the frequent item sets: Means these rules should satisfy minimum support and minimum confidence[4]. Many scans are required to find frequent sequence by using association rule mining. We may apply Apriori[1], FP-growth[5], Hashing have been found.

They apply on gene sequence. This association rule mining algorithm finds the useful patterns from the biological sequence. Using this approach, one gene sequence is used to the induction of a serial of target gene sequences.

Association rules mining algorithms are used to find gene expression in data. The several gene expression are scanned. These several association rule mining algorithms used to find related sequence. One of them is Apriori, is a segment of DNA, which contains the formula for the chemical composition of one particular protein. Genes serve as the blueprints for proteins and some additional products, and mRNA is the first intermediate during the production of any genetically encoded molecule. The concentration of a specific mRNA molecule is usually called the expression level of the respective gene and it serves as an indicator of the amount of end product that is currently being produced. Nowadays, the expression levels of thousands of genes, possibly all genes in an organism, can be measured simultaneously in a single experiment using microarrays. This new technology gives rise to a challenge: to interpret the meaning of this immense amount of biological information formatted in numerical matrices. To meet the challenge, various methods have been developed using both traditional and innovative techniques to extract, analyze and visualize gene expression data generated from DNA microarrays.

A key step in the analysis of gene expression data is to find association and correlation relationship between gene expression patterns.

DOI 10.1109/CICN.2010.142    DOI 10.1109/CICN.2010.142      2.1. Apriory Algorithm   Apriori Algorithm[7] The algorithm uses prior knowledge of frequent itemset properties such as such k- itemsets are used to find k+1 sequence. It uses join step and prune step method to find the frequent sequence. First it finds L1 itemsets which is single itemsets. The L2 itemsets are found by using L1 itemsets. Again L3 item sets are found by using L2 itemsets. Finally the frequent sequence is found by using Apriori Principle.

3. Frequent Pattern growth Tree   Frequent Pattern growth Tree mines the frequent item sets uses divide-and-conquer method. It performs on the tree and finds the frequent sets. The nodes are kept as in such a way that more frequently occurring nodes shares the frequently occurring item sets compare to less frequently occurring. It finds first frequent-1 item sets then frequent-2 itemsets like wise we may generate frequent?n item sets. It finds conditional frequent tree based on the subset of the database. This algorithm is divided in two phases.  First phase uses FP-tree. The FP- tree growth method converts the problem of finding long frequent patterns searches for shorter ones recursively and then merging suffix.

This method uses the least frequent items as a suffix.

It reduces the search costs.  When the database is large, it is sometimes unrealistic to construct a main memory-base FP-tree.

The performance study on FP-tree shows that it is efficient and scalable for mining both long and short frequent patterns.

4. Partition   Partition algorithm is based on the frequent sets are  normally in very less number in the set of itemsets.  As a result the database is divided into various partitions such that each partition can be adjusted in main memory. This algorithm reduces the number of scanning of database.  It brings the partition in memory while scanning andcounts the number of items in that partition. The algorithm is implemented in two phases First phase logivally divides the database into number of non-overlapping partitions.

The partitions are considered one at a time and all frequent itemsets for that partition are generated. Hence therefore if there are n partitions, n iteration are taken by Phase I of the algorithm. At the end of this phase, these frequent itemsets are merged together with a plan to generate the set of all potential frequent itemsets. In this step, the local frequent itemsets of  same lengths from all n partitions are combined to generate the candidate  itemsets. The actual support of these itemsets is generated in Phase II and the frequent itemsets are found.

During the first database scan, it finds all frequent itemsets in each partition and during the second scan, only those itemsets that are frequent in at least in one partition are used as candidates and counted to determine if they are large in the entire database. These algorithms may be performing better in main memory.

5. Gene Sequence   Gene Sequence allows the measurement of expression  levels of large number of genes. It is important to extract biologically meaningful information from this huge amount of expression data to know the current state of the cell because most cellular processes are regulated by changes in gene expression. Association rule mining technique is useful to find association relationship between genes of various sequences. Many association rule mining algorithms have been developed to analyze and associate this huge amount of gene expression. Gene is a one component of DNA which contains the formula for the chemical composition of one particular protein.

Genes works as the outline for proteins and some additional products, and mRNA[7] is the first intermediate during the production of any genetically encoded molecule. The specific mRNA molecule is usually called the expression level of the respective gene.

It works as an indicator of the amount of end product that is currently being produced. At present, the expression levels of thousands of genes, possibly all genes in an organism, can be measured at same time in a single experiment using micro arrays. This new method gives increase toa a challenge to interpret the meaning of this immense amount of biological information formatted in numerical matrices. To gather the challenge, various methods have been developed. Gene expression data collected from DNA microarrays[7]. A key step in the analysis of gene expression data is to find association and correlation relationship between gene expression patterns using Microarray technology. The Microarray technology has authorized the scientific community to to explore the genetic causes occurred during functioning of the human body.

5.1. Production of DNA Microarray   Thousands of DNA mircoarrays are produced by  dividing a glass or silica plate of 1 cm across into pixels.

Each pixel is considered as one gene. The mRNA molecules are extracted from the cell taken from various tissues like cancer tissue. They are reverse copied from RNA to DNA and their focus is enhanced. Then the resulting DNA is copied back into fluorescently marked single strand RNA. The solution of marked and copy of     the mRNA molecules that were originally extracted from the tissue is placed on the chip and labeled RNA diffuse over the dense forest of single strand DNA probes[7].

After finding molecules that found their perfect match remain fixed to the chip. This chip is illuminated with a laser, and those fixed targets fluoresce. By measuring the light radiating from each pixel, one obtains a measure of targets that stuck. It is proportional to the concentration of those mRNA in the investigated tissue.

5.2. Advantages of Gene Expression Data   The Gene Expression data helps the molecular  biologists in many ways like, gathering information about different cell states, functioning of genes, identifying genes that reflect biological process of interest etc. The meanings of gene expression data analysis are given below[7].

Finding biological expression of our interest like  finding development of cancer cells Various classification of groups of tumors with  differentiated on the basis of their expression profiles.

Finding the function of genes or proteins.

6. Using Sequential Sequence Mining   The Large Gene sequence may be found using  Sequential Sequence Mining techniques. This technique uses vertical fragment representation of the database with efficient support counting. It finds long sequences using generating sequence-A and Sequence-B sequences. The various sequences are generated by item adding the item at the end of the sequences.

When the item is added at the end of the sequence, it becomes a Sequence-A, while the item is added at the end of last item set, such that item whose index is greater than the last itemset.

In this method the customers? transactions are shown by various fragments. The corresponding bit is set to 1 if the transaction it contains the last itemset in the sequence and previous transactions contain all previous itemsets in the sequence (i.e. the customer contains the sequence of itemsets) from a parent to as Sequence-A and Sequence-B.

A Sequence-A requires that we set the first 1 in the current sequence?s fragment slice to 0 and all fragments afterward to 1 to indicate that the new item can only come in a transaction after the last transaction in the current sequence.

6.1. The Absolute Support   The absolute support of a sequence Kp in the sequence  representation of a database D is defined as the number of  sequences k   D that contain Kp , and the relative support is defined as the percentage of sequences k   D  6.2. Generation of Sequences   First the Customers? data are sorted by Customer ID and then Transaction ID. First various Sequence-A and Sequence-B sequences are generated.  Various nodes are tested using Sequence-A and Sequence-B sequences. At each node n, the support of each Sequence-A and each Sequence-B is tested. If the support of a generated sequence s is greater than or equal to minSup then this sequence will be useful and stored as a frequent sequence.

If the support of s is less than minSup, then we do not need to repeat the process on s by the Apriori principle since any child sequence generated from s will not be frequent.

If we create the sequence by considering a tree then each sequence in tree generates Sequence-A sequences and Sequence-B sequences. Thus we can associate with each sequence n in the tree two sets:  The set of items that are considered for a Sequence-A extensions of sequence n (k-extensions) = Kn . and The set of  items that are considered for a Sequence-B extensions   = I n .

Suppose the item elements are considered as  nodes of the tree then each element in the tree is generated only by either Sequence-A. The  sequence ( { p , q }, { q } ) is generated from sequence ( { p , q })  with Sequence    { q }. It can not generate from the sequence ( { p } , { q } ) or ( { q } , { q } ).

6.3. Pruning   We can prune candidate k-extensions and i-extensions  [10] of a node n in the tree. We use the pruning techniques based on Apriori principle and aimed at minimizing the size of  Kn and In at each node n.

6.4. Fragment Representation   We have used various fragments to represent the data.

In the fragment map, each item in the transaction is set to 1 if it appears otherwise the corresponding value is set to 0. Suppose the item i is appearing in transaction x then the value of that bit is to be set to 1 for the transaction otherwise it is set to 0. Suppose the item i and item j are appearing in one transaction, for finding { i , j } we need to do bitwise AND operation among the transformed fragment of {i} and itemset {j}.

6..5. Algorithm  Input : D, a database of transactions Output : Frequent Sequences of database     Method :  1.Collect the information for customer's transaction from an input data file and stores into array.

2.Initialize Number of Customers, Transactions, and Items.

3.Store the Customer, Transactions and Items into array 4. Increment customer count for new customer.

Increment customer?s transaction count for same customer for different transaction. Increment item count for the same customer and different item.

5.Read the information about CID, TID, IID from the array and put 1 to appropriate transaction in bit.

6.Read the data and fill in transaction bits.

7.Read the input file and finds the frequent-1 itemsets.

8.Find the max number of transactions and number of customers & set minimum support.

9.Finds the frequent  itemset.

10.Do sequence-A and Sequence-B process on the current node.

11.Find sequence-A sequence for the next node 12.Create Sequence-B for the next node whose index is higher than current node. Check for the frequent item. If it is frequent then store it.

13.Output index wise Sequence-A whose support is greater than min support threshold.

7.0. Performance   The Figure 1 and Figure 2 show the analysis of Sequential Sequence Mining. Figure 1 shows the Analysis Mining time for various customers. Figure 2 shows the mining time taken with different support value.

Here we made comparisons with Association Rule Mining and our results are found better for Gene Sequences.

8.0. Conclusion   Our algorithm which finds frequent sequences in Gene Sequences used as a transactions by using sequence-A and sequence-B sequences. The algorithm use fragment map and outperforms better compare to Apriori algorithm. Our algorithm generates the sequences with various lengths with efficient support count.

