Research on Association Rules Based Fixed Point Theory

AbstractBased on the fixed point theory of the complete  lattice, we propose a theoretical framework on how to find out  the association rule in a transactional datebase. The results  show that finding a closed itemset is a process of establishing a  Galois contact and mining all the closed itemsets is the way  to  find out all the fixed points of its closed Galois operator.

Keywords- Data mining; Association rule; Complete lattice;  Fixed point

I.  INTRODUCTION  In recent years, with the rapid development of  information science and technology, people accumulate more  and more data, but often fall into the situation of "wealth of  data and poor in knowledge. It becomes increasingly  important to use the sharp increasing data with a lot of  important unvoiced information. Data mining technology  emerged [1-2], whose aim is to identify potential rules and to  extract useful knowledge from the data. At present, data  mining has become a very active frontier area in computer  science and has a successful application in market analysis,  financial investment, health, environmental protection,  product manufacturing and scientific research and made a  very significant social and economic benefit.

The problem of mining association rules in data is an  important research direction. Association rules, as an  important branch of data mining, describe the data in the  database items (attributes, variables) of the potential  relationship. The association rule mining has become a key    technology and been studied by many researchers. Currently,  there are many algorithms for mining association rules.

Agrawal et al. [3] first studied the customer transaction  database and the relationship between sets of items from  large databases. They proposed to mine association rules in  databases. Association rules in databases have since been a  research focus. Researchers in this field have made important  contributions to the mining of association rules in databases  and they proposed many meaningful data mining algorithms,  such as Apriori algorithm, AprioriTid algorithm, Apriori  Hybrid algorithms, which are mainly carried out by  repeatedly scanning the database, iterating until the entire set  of data items to generate frequent itemsets, and thus this is  the current focus of the research on association rule mining  algorithms [4]. Although in theory the concept of lattice and  the use of Boolean algebra are studied [5], in general, the  theoretical basis of this line of research is relatively weak.

Based on lattice theory in the framework of fixed point  theory, we analyzed some problems of the association rule in  data mining and obtained some interesting results.



II. THE CONCEPT OF LATTICE THEORY  Definition 1   Suppose all subsets of a set can be seen as  composed by a set called the power set, denoted by 2A .

Definition 2   Suppose  a  set  A, ? A ,?? is a partially  ordered set, if any two elements of which are supremum and  infimum, then ? A ,?? (referred to as  A) is a lattice. In the  lattice, the elements yx ?  and x ? y as x and y,  respectively, are intersection and union.

Definition 3   Suppose ? A ,?? is a lattice, if any non-  empty set S, there are both supremum and infimum, we say  that? A ,??is a complete lattice.

In the ordinary set theory, the so-called a relation from A  to B, defined as a subset R, BAR ? , denoted by  BA R??? . For convenience, we have the following  definitions.

Definition 4   Suppose A ,B are sets, ),,( RBA  a triple,  and, BAR ? , Ax?  and By? ,accordingly, are  called objects and attributes, usually denoted by xRy , that  means "the object x has attribute y".

Definition 5   An itemset X is a closed itemset, if there is not  an itemset Y satisfying: Y is a true superset of X and  anything which contains X contains Y.

The support for an itemset can be determined by that only  corresponding to a closed itemset, so that the closed itemset  retains all information of the support in the database. In this  sense, the set of all closed itemsets can be regarded as a  clustering of the set of all itemsets.

Definition 6   An itemset is frequent if its support is not less  than a given minimum support threshold.

Definition 7   Suppose A is a set. c the function defined  between the power set of A, c : AA 22 ? , is called a  closed operator, if the following properties hold:  1) ( )X c X? ;  2) if X Y? , then ( ) ( )c X c Y? ;   978-0-7695-4270-6/10 $26.00  2010 IEEE  DOI 10.1109/ICCIS.2010.327   3) ( ( )) ( )c c X c x= .

Definition 8  Suppose R is a binary relation between A and  B, if AX ? , BY ? , so:  { }XxandByyX ???=? ,, xRy ,  { }YyandAxxY ???=+ ,, xRy ,  Claimed that ?X  is the pole of X , +Y  is the pole of Y .

Definition 9   Suppose A and B are two partial-ordering set,  *X  is the pole of X , Y +  is the pole of Y ,  Mapping *( )x x? = and *( )y y? = , are Galois contact, if  they satisfy:  1)  if 1 2x x? , so  * *  1 2x x? ?? 1 2x x A? ? ?

2)  if 1 2y y? , so 1 2y y  + +? ?? 1 2,y y B? ? ?

3) *( )x x +? , *( )y y+? ?? ,x A y B? ? ? ?

Obviously, ? ?? and ? ??  are closed operators, also  known as Galois closed operator. The following theorem is  equivalent to the condition in Definition 9.

Theorem 1 [6] Suppose A and B are two partial-ordering  set, then the mapping ? : A B? , *( )x x? =  and  ? : A B? , *( )y y? = , is a Galois contact, if and only if,  when ? x A?  and ? y B? , then *y x x y+? ? ? .



III. FIXED POINTS AND ASSOCIATION RULES  Mathematicians have proposed a number of fixed point  theorems, there are three types being widely used: ?    thinking along the Brouwer-Kakutani fixed point theorem  proved; ? along the Hahn-Banach contraction mapping  principle to prove the fixed point theorem, the idea of the  advantage is that it not only proves the existence of fixed  points, but also constructs the specific algorithm for the fixed  point; ? the idea that along the Knaster-Tarski fixed point  theorem for the series, the series of fixed point theorem can  have access to the specific algorithm for fixed point, but also,  with the help of the universal properties of  Lattice, to be  more widely used, especially in the field of logic. Because  "knowledge" can be expressed as "lattice", the basic calculus  of logic can be expressed as "lattice".

If the ID set U in the transactional database and itemset  I are taken as A and B in a relationship ( , , )A B R , and then  the binary relation between ID set and itemset as a relation  R. So ( , , )A B R  is a relation, and is called an Association  Relation. If to establish its Galois contact according to  Definition 9, the mapping ? (I) is the set containing all  things of its itemset , is an ID set, and ??? : 2 2I I?  and  ? ?? : 2 2U U? are closed operator, that is, Galois closed  operator. In fact, searching a closed itemset is a process of  establishing Galois contact process.

Theorem 2   Suppose there is an itemset I, and ???  is  the Galois closed operator, then the  set{ }2 ( )IX I I? ??? =  is a set of all closed itemsets  in transaction database.

Proof: Suppose there is an itemset X satisfying  ??? ( X ) = X , not a closed itemset. Based on the  definition of the closed itemset, there is an itemset Y which  is a truth superset meeting with each affair containing X  contains Y, this is ( ) ( )t X t Y= . According to the  definition of the closed operator, ??? (Y ) ? Y , so X =  ??? ( X ) = ??? (Y) ? Y is contradictory to that Y is  the truth superset of  X . Now that X is a closed itemset.

On the contrary, the assumption that a closed itemset X is  in transaction database. Because ???  is a closed operator,  so ??? ( X ) ? X ; if ??? ( X ) ? X , then according  to the definition of the ? and ? , that each affair containing  X contains ??? ( X ), and this is contradictory to that X is  a closed itemset, so ??? ( X )= X .

Definition 10   P and Q are two partial-ordering sets, ? :  P?Q  is a mapping,  if a ?b , ? (a ) ?? (b ) , so ? is    the mapping with order preserving.

Definition 11   Suppose P is a partial-ordering set, ? :  P ?Q  is a mapping, a ? P ,if ? ( a ) = a ,  so a is a  fixed point of ? .

By the Definition 11, we know that each itemset  in { }( )URI U U? ?? =   is a fixed point of  mapping ? ?? . Therefore, to mine all the closed itemsets is  equivalent to finding all the fixed points of the  mapping ? ?? .

According to the relation of inclusion in set theory, the  set of all itemsets ( )P I  in the transaction database  is a  complete partially ordered set, and mapping  s t? : ( )P I ? ( )P I  is a closed operator, it satisfies for  X? ? )(IP , so X = ? ?? ( X ), and  mapping ? ??  is  a mapping with order preserving, its fixed point exists.

How to find a fixed point mapping is often very difficult.

However, all itemitems 2I  in the transactional database is a  complete lattice, the closed operator ???  is a mapping  with order preserving, and the following fixed point theorem  could give a concrete fixed point of the mapping??? .

Theorem 3[7] (Knaster and Tarski) P is a complete  lattice, ? : P?P  is mapping with order preserving, then  { }( )a P a a? ? ? ?  is a fixed point of  ? .

Definition 12 P and Q are two lattices, when the  mapping ? :P?Q  meets  ( ) ( ) ( ) , ,x y x y x y P? ? = ? ? ? ? ?

Claimed that mapping ?  is a union of homomorphism;  similarly, when a mapping ?  satisfies  ( ) ( ) ( ) , ,x y x y x y P? ? = ? ? ? ? ?

Claimed that mapping ?  is an intersection of  homomorphism. If the mapping ?  is both a union of   homomorphism and an intersection of homomorphism, it is  said to be lattice homomorphism. If P =Q , we claim that  the mapping ?  is automomorphic.

Theorem 4 [6]   P is a complete lattice, ? : P?P ,if  and only if  ? is automomorphic with order preserving ,  there is at least one fixed point.

In fact, as for a special mapping ? ?? on an itemset, all  of the fixed points can be found with the existing algorithm  [7] for mining closed itemsets.



IV. ONE EXAMPLE    There is a transactional database in Table 1. Each ID  corresponds to each item, so the itemset  { }, ,A ABD BC  is a closed itemset. The support for  an itemset can be determined by that only corresponds to a  closed itemset, so that the closed itemset retains all  information of the support in the transactional database. In  this sense, the set of all closed itemsets can be regarded as a  clustering of the set of all itemsets. All of the frequent closed  itemsets in Table 1 can be given in all of the frames of dotted  line in Figure 1.

TABLE I.  THE TRANSACTIONAL DATABASE (MIN-SUPPORT IS 60%)  TID Item  1 A  2 ABD  3 ABCD  4 BC  5 ABCD      ABC ABD ACD BCD  ABCD  AB AC AD BC BD CD  A B C D    Figure 1.  Lattics of Itemset  The lattice of fixed point constructed by all fixed point  set about mapping ???  are showed in Figure 2.

ABC  ABD BC  A B    Figure 2.  Lattice of Fixed Point

V. CONCLUSION  The association rule is a relation which is constituted by  the ID set in the transaction database and itemset and their  binary relation, then with the relation the Galois contact can  be established, and associated Galois closed operator be  given. The closed itemset is a fixed point of the Galois  closed operator in the association rule. All fixed point set  construct a complete lattice according to the relation of  inclusion in set theory, --the fixed point lattice. Existing  closed itemset mining algorithm is to find fixed point    method. As the closed itemsets retained the support  information of all itemsets, the fixed point lattice retained the  support information of all itemsets in the transaction  database. To mine all frequent closed itemsets is equivalent  to finding the node set with support constraint on the fixed  point lattice. Some classic fixed point theorems on lattice  theory confirm the existence of fixed points, and then can get  a theoretical method searching for closed itemsets in  transaction database; it is a theoretical method searching for  the association rule.

