

Abstract -Web based learning systems provides huge volume of educational content to learners. However, a single learner might not be interested in learning all the contents delivered. To encourage learners of varying skill sets and to develop learning interests web recommendation system is needed for web based learning. This paper focuses on providing recommendations to learners as well as web masters to improve overall effectiveness of web based teaching and learning. This work deals with analysis of web log data and development of recommendation framework using web usage mining techniques like upper approximation based rough set clustering using k nearest neighbors, dynamic support pruned all k-th order Markov model and all k-th order association rule mining by dynamic  frequent (k+1) item set generation using Apriori. The goal of this integrated approach is to make accurate recommendations for learning management systems with reduced state space complexity.

Keywords- Learning management systems, Markov Model, Web recommendation, Rough Sets

I. INTRODUCTION  The contribution of World Wide Web in education domain is enormous. It is a dynamic data source whose contents are updated world-wide for every second. E- learning is the process of learning such materials from web.

However, e-learning has several benefits in terms of resource sharing, infrastructure, man power, huge availability of materials etc., To overcome all these drawbacks and to encourage web based learning, recommendation systems are essential. This paper proposes web recommendation model through web usage mining.

Discovering and extracting useful knowledge from web data is called web mining. Web mining is essential to improve the usability of web. Web mining is divided into web content mining, web structure mining and web usage mining based on type of data used for mining process. Web usage mining analyses web usage information recorded in log files as server log, client log, proxy server log, error log, access log etc., The web server of e-learning portal records details about every action performed by learners on learning website in its access log It includes all the activities of e- learners like click-stream sequence, data of access, size of files downloaded, time spent by each user on page, referrer  URL, IP address, User ID etc., Web usage mining plays a vital role in development of web recommendation systems.

Other applications of web recommendation system includes  ? Cross- marketing of products in e-commerce to improve sales  ? In Internet advertisements, a blooming field, to attract users having special interests on specific products  ? To design adaptive web servers, that dynamically changes its structure and organization of hyperlinks according to current access patterns.

? In search engines, to deliver materials based on other similar searches, irrespective of contents of web pages  ? In personalization on specific user group to improve effectiveness of web site  ? To improve user friendliness by providing shortcuts

II. RELATED WORK  Several works have been performed in this area using various web mining techniques, each having its own benefits and limitations. The motivation of proposed work is to achieve good recommendation accuracy with less computational and space complexity. Yang [13] proposed a sequential pattern mining approach for personalization in online learning.  In that work, relevant patterns are identified only by association, even least constrained pages are also considered for recommendation phase, it affects recommendation accuracy. In the proposed work, it is suggested to use strict consecutive sequences for recommendations. Devanshu Dhyani  has developed a general prediction approach using Markov process resulting in high computational complexity but good accuracy was achieved [2]. Hence in the proposed work it is suggested to reduce the data set by clustering before finding recommendations. In 2009, various pre-processing techniques essential for any web usage mining application are suggested in the work [10] . Bamshad Mobasher [1] has developed personalization systems using graphs and  A Web Usage Mining based Recommendation Model for Learning Management Systems  A.Anitha1, N.Krishnan2 1Centre for Information Technology and Engineering, Manonmaniam Sundaranar University, Tirunelveli ? 627 012,  Tamil Nadu,INDIA 2 Centre for Information Technology and Engineering, Manonmaniam Sundaranar University, Tirunelveli ? 627 012  (1e-mail:ulagu_m@yahoo.com)     multiple support association rule mining. Though good accuracy is achieved, there exists complexity in maintaining link structure of graph and difficulty in setting multiple thresholds. Khalil, in his work on prediction of next web page access has integrated association rules and Markov models and achieved good prediction accuracy with high state space complexity. It is due to summing up of all low order states while applying all k-th order Markov model.

Hence, in the proposed work the main objective is to eliminate all these drawbacks and to provide better recommendations for e-learning systems.



III. METHODOLOGY  A. Data Preprocessing and Transaction Identification The access log for e-learning portal contains all the information about its usage. However, for the proposed work all those data are not necessary. Hence pre-processing is needed to bring only relevant usage information and to represent them in format suitable for the mining task. Only the fields such as IP address, URL and time are retrieved from access log by data cleaning. During pre-processing transaction is identified as a sequence of page views made in a user session. Using these details, interest of  learners is efficiently identified.

B.  Learning Pattern Recognition The similar patterns regarding learning interest are identified by a data mining approach called clustering and a mathematical concept rought sets. Clustering is a technique used to discover interesting patterns based on the principle that, inter cluster similarity is low and inter cluster similarity is high. In this work it is proposed to apply rough set theory with clustering in order to reduce computational complexity. Rough set  is a mathematical concept that  deals with uncertainty and vagueness. It is defined by two sets namely lower approximation and upper approximation. The lower approximation of a set contains all elements that are subsets of a set and upper approximation of a set contains elements that have non-empty intersection with it. The equivalence relation R in this work is defined as, aRb>0.4, where 0.4 is the similarity threshold. The equivalence relation is used to define equivalence classes.

At the initial stage, equivalence class in constructed. Then smaller neighborhood is identified by a threshold. The elements on smaller neighborhood are upper approximated iteratively until results of two consecutive upper approximations are same. The resultant equivalence classes represent the clusters of learning sequences. The sequence in the clusters are mutually disjoint.

Fig 1. Proposed Web Recommendation Framework    The highlights of this approach are ? No iterative relocation of data objects. Only  successive merging is done. This approach reduces computational complexity  ? Similarity measure involves only simple Boolean operations.

? Reduction in cluster validity by possibility factor is overcome by considering nearest k neighbors  ? No need to retain or update the data structures after framing initial clusters. Memory efficiency is improved.

? Good clustering validity is achieved with reduced computational complexity.

? The resultant clusters are similar learning sequences. These patterns are useful for recommendation systems.

C.  Sequential Pattern mining  Markov models are one of the sequential pattern mining techniques used for next page access prediction.

These models in general can achieve good prediction accuracy as they consider consecutive and sequential page accesses. The number of history pages considered for prediction process determines the order of Markov model.

The method proposed in this work is a dynamic support pruned all k-th order Markov model. The dynamic approach generates low order states only when needed.  Hence there is low state space complexity. To achieve desired recommendation accuracy, the longest possible learning sequence is considered for finding matching pattern. If there is poor coverage, in order to retain recommendation accuracy, next lower order states are considered for prediction process. The k-th order Markov model considers latest k pages for predicting (k+1)- th page. Such a model is defined by conditional probability of visiting page Pi next from state k. It is the ratio of  number of occurrences of latest k pages to the number of occurrences of latest k pages and next page Pi together.  By the proposed all k-th order approach if the longest possible learning sequence has poor coverage, then next lower order is considered for prediction.

This process is repeated to predict the highest probable page to be accessed next. The predicted page is recommended to learners during learning process.

When Markov model fails to predict pages, then a least constrained approach that deals with non-consecutive and sequential patterns called association rule mining is applied to make recommendations. The frequent item sets are generated only when needed. The clustering of learning sequences before applying sequential pattern mining reduces ambiguous predictions by association rule mining.

If still any ambiguity arises, it is resolved by calculating statistical parameters specified in Section 4.



IV. RECOMMENDATION EVALUATION AND METRICS  The predicted page is the one having highest chance to be accessed next based on the learning behavior of active learner and learning characteristics of other learners with similar interest. The same strategy is applied to a repeating user by using his previous learning sequences.

The pages pruned from discovered patterns by sequential mining are recommended as least referenced pages. Such pages need more attention of web masters for content modification. Hence such pages are recommended to improve teaching effectiveness.

Fig 2.  Statistical Analysis Results & Recommendation Accuracy  Various metrics used for evaluating recommendation effectiveness are as follows.

Tavg = Total time spent on all pages by all learners per day Total no. of learners X Total no of pages visited   [1]  Havg=  Sum of hits made by all learners on all pages Total no. of learners X Total no of pages visited       [2]  Savg = Total number of sessions for the period considered Number of days under analysis                 [3] Racc= Number of correct recommendations Total number of recommendations                         [4] Where, Tavg is the average time spent per user per page Havg is the average number of hits per page Savg is the average number of learning sessions  per day    Racc is the percentage of correct recommendations made  All these parameters are evaluated for the sessions considered for a period of 1 month in an e-learning portal.

The results of this analysis before and after recommendations are depicted in the Fig 2. Moreover, the academic achievement of learners who followed recommended pages are also compared in Fig 3.

Fig 3. Effective Learning through Recommendation

V. CONCLUSION  In this paper, a good recommendation system is proposed by integrating efficiency of three web mining techniques namely clustering, markov model and association rule mining. In addition some statistical parameters are also evaluated for better understanding about usage of e-learning portal. Application of various web usage mining techniques at different stages of this model, can improve both learning and teaching effectiveness. The experimental results represent the impact of recommendations in improving web based teaching and learning effectiveness.

