Research on Tennis Technique and Tactics Decision Support Based on Theory of  Association Data Mining

Abstract?The result of tennis match were great influenced by the level of technique and tactics decision-making, and how to find the characteristics of athletes' technique and tactics from mass data is a urgent problem which is needed to be shoveled, in order to make up the insufficiency of traditional statistical method and provide scientific basis for tennis technique and tactics decision-making. Based on association data mining theory and the Weka data mining platform, association data mining model was established, which was about the association between the stroke placement, stroke technique, stroke line and score of tennis technique and tactics. Specific case research were carried out from the following three perspectives, i.e. the association analysis between the last two stroke placement, line and win or lose of each point, the association analysis between the first three stroke placement and win or lose point in serve game, the association analysis between the first two stroke placement and win or lose point in service game. The research results indicate that the data mining model were capable of providing objective and scientific decision support for technique and tactics decision-making in tennis game and daily tennis technique and tactics training.

Keywords-Tennis; technique and tactics; stroke placement; Association rules; Data mining

I.  INTRODUCTION Data mining rose in 1990s, which is extract or mine the  knowledge from the large amounts of data [1], and it is the combination of many subjects and technology. Data mining is mainly based on the method of discovery to find new knowledge and laws in large amounts of data, so it is also known as knowledge discovery in database ( KDD)  The development of information technology enables people to descript sports events scientifically and quantitatively, which makes it possible to quantify decision- making for people. But it is difficult to discover these hidden rules in large mounts of data by using single statistical method, which is not benefit to make scientific decision-making. Some more valuable information or rules will be discovered by using data mining that will make up the shortcomings of traditional statistical method, and this will be capable of providing decision support for people making tennis technique and tactics decision-making.

Therefore, it is necessary for people to research and use data mining technology to assist them in tennis technique and tactics decision-making.

Association analysis can help people to find interesting, potentially relation between things from a large amount of  database, which can be presented in maximum frequent itemsets and association rules. The algorithm include Apriori algorithm[2] and its improved Apriori ? algorithm, FP- Growth and its improved algorithm[3] etc.



II. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ASSOCIATION DATA MINING MODEL  A. Fundamental conception Let I={i1,i2,i3?in} be a set of literals, called items. Let  T={t1,t2,t3?tn} be a set of transactions, where each transaction T is a set of items such that T ? I. In general?to contain 0 or more items in correlation analysis is called itemset. The transactions contain the number of itemset is called support count, and ?(A) means the support count of itemset A. Association rule is an implication of the form A==>B, where A ? I, B ? I, and A?B= ?.A rule has a measure of its strength called support and confidence, which can be defined as follows:  S (A?B) = N  BA )( ?? (1)  C (A?B) = )(  )( A  BA ?  ? ? (2)  In formula (1), N is the total number of transactions.

Minsup is defined as minimum support, and minconf as minimum confidence. If the support of itemset is above minimum support, then the itemset is called large itemset.

Given a set of transactions, the problem of mining association rules is to generate all association rules that have support and confidence greater than the user-specified minimum support (minsup) and minimum confidence (minconf). The problem of discovering all association rules of sufficient support and confidence can be decomposed into two subproblems[4]. First, find all large itemsets, which are sets of items that have transaction support greater than minsup; Then, use the large itemsets to generate the desired rules which have a computed confidence greater than minconf. Fig. 1 shows an example of algorithm in production of large itemsets.

2010 Second WRI World Congress on Software Engineering  DOI 10.1109/WCSE.2010.53   2010 Second WRI World Congress on Software Engineering  DOI 10.1109/WCSE.2010.53   2010 Second WRI World Congress on Software Engineering  DOI 10.1109/WCSE.2010.53   2010 Second WRI World Congress on Software Engineering  DOI 10.1109/WCSE.2010.53       Figure 1.  Production of large itemset of association analysis algorithm.

B. Algorithm Apriori algorithm is a basic algorithm that be used to  discover large itemsets, and it used iterative structure method by pass over the database to generate large K+1- itemsets by extensions of the large K-itemsets generated in the previous iteration.

Algorithm Apriori Codes are as follows: Inport input?? 1? transactions data base  ? 2?  minsup, minconf output?itemsets included in transactions data base code? K=1 Fk={i? i?I???{i}??N?minsup}  // To generate  large1-itemsets For?k=2?Fk-1???k++? Ck=apriori-gen(Fk-1)  // To generate candidate itemsets For every transactiont?T Ct=subset(Ck,t)  // obtain all candidate itemsets  contained in t For every candidate itemset C?Ct ?(c)= ?(c)+1  //count increment Fk={c?C?Ck ???{c}??N?minsup}  // To generate  large K-itemsets Until Fk=? Large itemsets =?Fk  C. The realization of association rule data mining model According to the concept and algorithm theory of  association analysis, the association can be analyzed between an indicator and stroke result in tennis game. In consideration of the requirement characteristic in tennis technique and tactics decision-making and on the base of previous research [5] of team, the relationship of stroke placement and win or lose point is researched in this paper.

The data mining main steps (Fig. 2) were realized on the platform of Weka.

1) Data collection Tennis technique and tactics information were collected  by using tennis technique and tactics data collection software system, main indicators including stroke  placement, stroke technique, forehand-stroke and backhand- stroke etc.

Figure 2.  data mining process.

According to expert requirement in decision-making, tennis court was divided into 6 areas in tennis technique and tactics information collection system. Tennis court area code was shown in table ?. Serve placement are coded independently (table?). Table ?, table ?, table ?, table ? show stroke line code, stroke technique code, stroke Hand orientation code and stroke result code respectively.

TABLE I.   TENNIS COURT PLACEMENT AREAS CODE    TABLE II.  SERVE PLACEMENT  AREA CODE  Code Placement area Code Placement area  30 Right area external angle 36 Left area external angle  31 Right area middle 37 Left area middle  32 Right area internal angle 38 Left area internal angle    TABLE III.  STROKE  LINE CODE  Code Line name Code Line name 1 Down the line shot 5 Middle area to left area  2 Middle area to middle area 6 Right area to middle area  3 crosscourt shot 7 Left area to middle area  4 Middle area to right area    Code Placement area(upper half court? Code Placement area(lower  half court? 1 Back court right area 7 Back court right area 2 Back court middle area 8 Back court middle area 3 Back court left area 9 Back court left area 4 Front court right area 10 Front court right area 5 Front court middle area 11 Front court middle area 6 Front court left area 12 Front court left area  Collection of techniques and tactics information  Data extraction  Data processing  Data mining analysis     TABLE IV.  STROKE TECHNIQUE CODE  Code Stroke technique Code Stroke technique 1 Drive 6 Chop 2 Volley 7 Drop shot 3 Lob 8 Passing shot 4 Smash 9 Half-volley 5 Ground smash 10 Other technique    TABLE V.  STROKE HAND ORIENTATION CODE  Code Hand orientation 1 Fore-hand 2 Back-hand    TABLE VI.  STROKE RESULT CODE  Code Stroke effect 1 Win 2 Lose   2) Data extraction  According to the requirement of decision-making, database interface was used to select meet requirement data fields and records.

3) Data processing Anomaly data in database was checked and processed,  such as deleting or modifying default data etc; data format was converted that extraction from the database, in order to make it meet the requirement of data mining tool in data format and data type.

4) Data mining analysis According to  the collected technique and tactics  database and combining requirement of tennis technique and tactics decision-making, processed data was imported to data mining tool, and technique and tactics rules was mined and reasonably interpreted to provide decision support for tennis technique and tactics decision-making.

5) To be solved the problem by association rules data mining model  The character of tennis technique and tactics can be reflected by such attributes as stroke placement, stroke technique, stroke line, and so on. Considering the character of association algorithm, i.e. combination is adopted to generate large itemsets once for one transaction, and based on this, association rules were generated.  Therefore, the association data mining model can be applied to mine one technique and tactics attribute character once. Moreover, the stroke sequence must be considered in data mining that is demanded in tennis technique and tactics decision-making.

Only in this way, the rules that are mined have directive significance for actual decision-making of tennis technique and tactics. Theoretically, this data mining model can realize data mining analysis in any number of sequence stroke information. But in consider of the demand of the  rules' confidence and support, the actual data mining analysis results indicate that the number of sequence stroke should be between 1 and 3 strokes. The research has obtained better decision making effect on these aspects as follows: the association analysis between stroke placement and stroke results (win or lose) in the first 1 to 3 sequence strokes in serve or receive of research object, the association analysis between stroke placement, stroke line and stroke results (win or lose) in the last two stroke of a rally.



III. CASE ANALYSIS The technique and tactics information of Thirteen  international open championships of Chinese elite female athlete Li Na was collected, and association data mining model that was established was used to mine the association rules between stroke placement, stroke line and stroke result (win or lose). The basic parameters setting of data mining model are as follows: minsup (10%), minconf (70%).

A. The last two stroke placement and line association analysis  As are shown in table ? and table ?, the association rules indicate that both Li Na and her opponents stroke the placement on middle area of court, the confidence of the stroke results are losing is more than 90%. The main stroke placement of Li Na wins the point on the last stroke are back court right and left area, which confidence is more than 86%, and with relatively high support are 27.3% and 24.2% respectively. These rules indicate that on more than 2 strokes per point content Li Na should decrease stroke to the opponents' middle court area, and increase stroke to the left or right side of the court, so as to enhance the rate of win point.

Table ?  shows the results of the last two stroke association analysis between stroke line and stroke result.

The rule indicates that the confidence and support that Li Na loses the point are 79% and 18.7% when Li Na stroke line is down the line shot. It suggests that Li Na should strengthen the ability of stroke down the line shot successfully. The opponents stroke two kinds of line in the next to the last stroke, i.e. crosscourt shot and Middle area to middle area, and then Li Na stroke back, the results show that Li Na lose the points with high rate. The confidences of these two rules are 74% and 72% respectively. The rules reveal that the capability of Li Na return crosscourt shot and middle area to middle area shot should be improve further.

TABLE VII.  THE LAST TWO STROKE (LI NA LAST STROKE) PLACEMENT ASSOCIATION RULES     rules confidence support The last stroke placement=back court  middle area ==>lose  97% 11.5%  The next to the last stroke placement = back court left area ==> win 80% 13.3%     TABLE VIII.  THE LAST TWO STROKE (OPPONENT LAST STROKE) PLACEMENT ASSOCIATION RULES  rules confidence support The last stroke placement= front  court middle area(opponent stroke) ==> lose  97% 13.1%  The last stroke placement= back court middle area(opponent stroke)  ==> lose 92% 17.9%  The next to the last stroke placement= back court right area (Li  Na stroke) ==> win 88% 27.3%  The next to the last stroke placement= back court left area (Li  Na stroke) ==> win 86% 24.2%    TABLE IX.  THE LAST TWO STROKE (LI NA LAST STROKE) LINE ASSOCIATION RULES    B. The first three association analysis (Li Na serve) The main results of association rule data mining are  shown in table ? (Li Na serve). The result of Li Na stroke to opponent's back court middle area in the third stroke is lose, which confidence is 100%, and its support is 20.7%.

This rule means, when Li Na serve, she should decreases the number of stroke to the middle area after the opponent receive in order to minimize lose rate. The second rule indicates that Li Na serve to the opponent's Right area internal angle, and then the opponent stroke to back court middle area, the stroke result is opponent win the point with confidence of 93% and support of 14.9%. This rule indicates that Li Na should strengthen defending of middle area placement   TABLE X.  THE FIRST THREE STROKE  ASSOCIATION RULES  (LI NA  SERVE)  rules confidence support The third stroke placement= back  court middle area ==>lose 100% 20.7%  The First stroke placement= Right area internal angle, the second stroke placement =back court  middle area==>win  93% 14.9%  C. The first two stroke association analysis(Li Na receive) Li Na receive to the back court with high lose rate, and  its confidence is 100%, and also with high support of 32.3%  (table ?). The opponents win point when they serve to the right area external and left area internal, which the confidence is reach to more than 95%. These rules indicate that Li Na should decrease stroke to middle area when she receive, and strengthen the defense of right area external angle and left area internal angle in order to reduce lose rate.

TABLE XI.  THE FIRST TWO STROKE  ASSOCIATION RULES (LI  NA  RECEIVE)  rules confidence support The second stroke  placement=back court middle area ==>lose  100% 32.3%  The first stroke placement=right area external angle, the second placement=back court middle  area==> lose  100% 11.6%  The first stroke placement= left area internal angle ==>win   95% 21.7%

IV. CONCLUSION Using association analysis data mining technology, and  combining tennis technique and tactics decision-making requirement, data mining analysis was realized on the relationship between tennis stroke placement, stroke line and stroke result. The case analysis indicates that adopting this method inherence relation between tennis stroke placement, line and result can be capable of discovering, and this will be benefit to provide science decision support for tennis game and daily technique and tactics training of athlete.

