BENPro: A Blinding Protection Method in   Digital Right Management

Abstract?Internet is a global system of interconnected computer networks that helps users reach to all digital data, such as multimedia files. So, this leads to plagiarization, violation of copyrights and data over the Internet.  Thus, the digital intellectual property becomes a big issue of the Internet sharing system.  Various techniques have been proposed to protect these violations; unfortunately, they became the hackers? stimuli in breaking the protection mechanisms.  Therefore, this paper proposes a protection mechanism, Byte Encoding Protection (BENPro), for preventing an audio file, such as mp3 format from copying and distributing by illegal distributors. The aim of this paper is that the protection mechanism cannot be recognized from hackers and users.  The result of this experiment indicates that most users believe that the defects occur from the transfer mechanism rather than the protection mechanism. Thus, the protection of IP is maintained as expected.

Keywords-byte encoding; digital right management; encoding technique; intellectual property; multimedia protection

I. INTRODUCTION It is an undeniable fact that the Internet is the biggest  valuable resource of people around the world to obtain data or information as needed because it is the place to post and pickup information in various formats, such as documentations, multimedia, and audio, via services of the Internet Service Providers (ISP).  Thus, it is a responsibility of ISPs to protect this information.  Therefore, every ISP must have a suitable policy and mechanism to manage and protect their customers? information; otherwise, this information might be illegally duplicated and easily infringed the copyright of owners.

From the Internet characteristics, the sharing system is a part of users? expectation.  However, one serious issue for the sharing system over the Internet is that the limitation of the sharing has been defined but it is hardly to be operated, especially when a digital file has been downloaded and stored in a user?s hard disk.  Once the digital file is recorded in the hard disk, there is no protection and users can distribute unlawfully and unlimitedly.

The downloaded file can be used independently by users, or it can be distributed as an element in the sharing system among friends or partners.  Nevertheless, most of these  distributions break the copyrights law since the copyrights are always applied to the person who is authorized for the download process only. This leads to the significant issue when IP transgression occurs in the business world since all digital media always have values.  Although ISPs might have responsible for external intrusion protection, the business organization must have digital right management (DRM) mechanism to protect their own files before distributing to their customers.

Presently, the infringement of musical file types, especially .mp3 and .mp4, widely occurs over the Internet, and it cannot be easily prevented. Hence, there are many researches and developments of new techniques and methods to protect these file types. One of the existing methods to manage and restrict the access right to a file for each user is implementing the member system.  Unfortunately, the protection cannot cover when members download files according to their rights; then, distribute it without permission.

Although various techniques and methods have been proposed and installed in the real world, users of these multimedia files can detect these protections.  Thus, the protection mechanism becomes a stimulus for users who are also hackers because of the challenge in breaking the prevention mechanism.  As a consequence, the implementation of these mechanisms should be blinded from these users as much as possible.

Referring to the problems mentioned above, this paper presents a mechanism to protect the downloaded file from any faithless distributors under the objective of eliminating hackers? motivation.  The proposed mechanism will not only be obviously recognized as the blocking of the IP protection, but also guarantee that users cannot use and distribute without authorization from the company.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  In Section 2, some related works are drawn. Section 3 described the protection mechanism proposed in this paper while the implementation and experimental results are explained in Section 4.  The last two sections are Section 5 and Section 6 where the discussion and conclusions of this work are elaborated respectively.

- 533 -

II. RELATED WORKS Digital right management, or DRM, is known as a set of  technologies used by publishers to protect all digital media from unauthenticated accesses in order to maintain intellectual property that are distributed over the Internet or digital world.

Currently, IP protection is a serious issue for any business companies who provide services in all kinds of digital media.

The digital protection is the main concern of every business multimedia distributors since it is difficult to control media after storing into a storage device, such as a hard disk, or a CD, or distributed over the Internet [1]. Thus, the DRM is an important subject of all digital media servers.

Various techniques have been proposed to manage different kinds of digital media.  The practical method was proposed in the year 2004 by Louma and Vahtera [2]; this paper stated that multiple agreements and the negotiations among actors must be concluded and signed before performing any protections and management processes.

However, these agreements are ideal in the real world since users may break the agreement without intention.

According to Jonker and Linnartz [3], there are two fundamental concepts to secure these digital resources from unauthorized access.  The first method is to encrypt content of these resources using a certified mechanism and the private key concept.  The other alternative method is to store these contents behind a specific device, such as firewall, including access keys. Although encryption methods and implementing of protection are applied when storing multimedia contents into any media, these protections exclude the situation that the media is the Internet channel.

The research of [4] proposed a broadcast encryption method which enables media or broadcast-based distribution possible for any low-cost devices.  Therefore, the media can be protected and distributed over the Internet easily to any consumers.  Moreover, this concept is applied to the consumer products, such as DVD-audio players and DVD recorders.

The similar objective is applied to the research of [5] who proposed the ?family domain? concepts.  Additionally, in the year 2004, the ?Authorized Domain? technique is proposed by [6].

Moreover, the integration between the digital right management and fingerprinting system was proposed by [7] in the year 2006.  This technique embedded a fingerprinting code generated from a fingerprinting server into the audio content, this fingerprint code must be verified when a client requests the file.

One general but efficient method is the use of the watermark technology.  This technology aims to protect the digital media contents. It gives the contents available freely for download as a preview.  Thus, when this technique is applied to the multimedia files, it has to be modified as proposed by [8][9].  In [8], the proposed technique is embedded the removable watermark into the audio files in the way that causes the audio files to be in the lower quality.

Based on the similar objective, [9] proposed an unconventionally invertible perceptible watermarking method based on DCT (Discrete cosine transform) coefficients. This  mechanism is applied to protect the audio content by two methods. The first method is the ?perceptible watermark? which causes the poor quality of the audio by adding an audible removable watermark in a part of the audio signal. The second method is the ?imperceptible watermark? that uses a secret key for digital right management control.

Since DRM is a significant factor related to the business operations, so [10] proposed a scheme that can convert one DRM?s content to other DRM?s content. They provide the conversion process which is separated into two steps.  The first step is the ?mutual authentication? that determines whether it is a legal DRM by verifying the target user and the license to find permission. The second step is the conversion from the source DRM content to the target DRM content.  The conversion means that the specific DRM content is converted into the neutral DRM content format.  This content format provides the secure structure to protect the DRM data which offers beneficial for providers and users; providers can extend their service areas without opening their secret and users can freely enjoy using audio content without considering that DRM system is used on their audio player.

Although various methods mentioned above such as integration of DRM and fingerprinting in [7], removable watermarking in [8] have been proposed, most of them are complicated and might not be practical.  Moreover, significant issues in these researches are noticeable methods that users may recognize the protection of these files, especially audio files.  Unfortunately, this recognition is a motivation for some users who love challenging in breaking the protection mechanism.  Therefore, the destruction of the protection rules begins.  According to this motivation, this paper proposes a mechanism that most users hardly realize as the protection mechanism. Therefore, the IP protection is maintained.



III. PROTECION MECHANISMS  A. System Architecture In this research, the member system of audio files  downloading is applied as a fundamental protection mechanism for the digital right management over the Internet.

However, in order to fortify the IP of digital media over the Internet, the mechanism called Byte Encoding Protection (BENPro) is proposed after the media has been downloaded from a provider.  This proposed system of the digital media provider consists of two subsystems.  The first subsystem is responsible for digital media encoding, while the second subsystem is the digital media access controller.  Fig. 1 shows the BENPro system architecture of the protecting technique.

- 534 -    Audio Preparation System (APS)  Audio file Encodingmodule Embedding  module  ADMP PADB  Byte Encoding Protection (BENPro) System  Digital Media Access Controller (DMAC)  Extraction module  (ExtrcM)  Completed audio file  Screen manipulation  Decoding and Integrating  module (DIM)  Encoded Partial  Audio file  ADMP  Figure 1. BENPro Protecting system architecture for audio files  According to Fig. 1, the audio providers must start their services by passing all audio files to the Audio Preparation System (APS) before broadcasting through the Internet.  In this system, the audio files are encoded and embedded with an executable file.  Therefore, this process is the first step of the protection mechanism because users will obtain the encoding file when requested the access.

Since the BENPro mechanism is relied on the member system, all members must install the Digital Media Access Controller (DMAC) as if it is the media player of the BENPro system.  The system is responsible for decoding and playing the requested audio file downloaded from the Internet.

Moreover, this system will delete the necessary information that DMAC uses to play the audio after the play is terminated.

Therefore, the functions of DMAC are the second protection step for all audio providers. Details of all these systems, APS and DMAC, are described as follows.

B. Audio Preparation System (APS) This system is implemented to prepare the digital files  before they are retrieved or accessed by users over the Internet.  Moreover, under the main objective, these files must not be able to run when it was distributed to an unauthorized person by authorized download.  Therefore, the APS consists of two important modules: the encoding module, and the embedding module. Details of these modules are elaborated as follows.

Encoding Module It is necessary that before all digital media are distributed  over the Internet the providers must encode these files using some available techniques.  One interesting encoding technique is the swapping bytes among contents of the file, as shown in Fig.2. The encoding algorithm is shown in Fig.3.

Encoded MP3  n-byte block  Swap n-byte block  Original MP3  Figure 2.Encoding technique.

Figure 3. Encoding algorithm  Generally, every multimedia file contains fields to inform the file format for media players.  Thus, changing the file content by switching among bytes as shown in Fig.2 will change the values of these meaning fields. Therefore, when the files are encoded and the original formats have been changed according to the encoding technique, these files cannot be run smoothly or be recognized by any media players.

Although the contents are changed, it cannot guarantee that hackers cannot swap them back to normal.  So, the second module, the embedding module, in the APS is applied.

Embedding Module This module is implemented to serve the objective that the  downloaded files must not be run by an unauthorized person under an authorized download.  The concept of this module is based on a security protection mechanism, byte stuffing of the transferred packet over a network.  Nevertheless, the set of stuffing bytes in this research is an executable file, named as ADditional Music Player (ADMP).  This ADMP will be partitioned in n-block bytes as same as the swapping bytes, see Fig. 4.

Encoded audio file  Partial audio content Stored in Partial audio database  ADMP  Protected audio file  extracted n-byte block  Figure 4. Embedding mechanism  - 535 -    The mechanism of this module is that the audio file will be segmented into small pieces as shown in Fig. 4.  However, the total amount of the segments will be equal to the size of the ADMP executable file which will be embedded into the same locations of all segmented contents.  After finishing the segmentation, these segments are stored in the partial audio database (PADB).  These parts of the audio files are called by the ADMP whenever users request for accessing the file under a control of the second system, DMAC. The embedded algorithm is shown in Fig.5.

Figure 5. Embedded algorithm  C.    Digital Media Access Controller (DMAC) The second part of BENPro is the most important part after  the audio file was encoded.  The execution of this system starts when users select an audio content with permission through the DMAC interface.  Then, the downloading mechanism starts, the encoding audio is sent to the user system, called as a client. This encoding audio is extracted to obtain the ADMP as a back-end process by the DMAC system.  Then, the ADMP performs its task to play the audio files as requested while the network connection is available.

Additionally, all clients can control the play through the DMAC interface as shown in Fig.6, as described in Section 4.

According to the functions of the DMAC mentioned above, this system must be installed in the user?s computer after the membership is assigned and it consists of 3 important modules.  The first part is the extraction module (ExtrcM) where the ADMP is re-assembled and temporary saved in the user?s hard disk.  The second part is the decoding and integrating module (DIM); this module will re-organized the encoded audio file to be similar to the original one. Moreover, it is responsible for integrating the remaining part of the requested audio file to the decoded content.  Thus, the final outcome from the process of the DIM is the original audio file that is ready to be played.  Details of these modules are described as follows.

Extraction Module (ExtrcM) This module is an executable file that runs when users call  for a play.  The DMAC will start this ExtrcM after the download of the selected audio finished and the encoded audio is stored in a temporary space. The ExtrcM will extract the ADMP out from the content of the audio file, remaining only the pure encoded content; these output files will be stored in the temporary space in the user?s hard disk.  The ADMP will play the selected audio file as a background process without user?s interference.

Decoding and Integrating Module (DIM) This module is an executable file to re-organize the audio  file content, including re-assembly the partial audio file from the server.  In the process of re-organization, all swapped contents from the encoding process will be restored back to their original locations.  However, this decoded file cannot be accessed by any media players until it integrates with the remaining part from the server site.

Within this module while the content is decoding, the remaining contents from the server site of the audio provider are put back to their original locations.  Thus, after finishing the process of the DIM, the audio file is ready to play. The algorithm of the DIM is drawn as Fig. 6.

How to Play the File?

After passing the process of DIM, the audio player of this  system obtained from the extraction of the ExtrcM, the ADMP, will run under the control of users via the user interface.  The user interface sub-module is the interface that interacts with users when users want to control the play, such as play, pause, and stop.  Whenever the user requests a play through the interface module, the request is sent to the ADMP to run the audio file obtained from the DIM process.

Nevertheless, this audio file will be erased when the user exits the playing mode.

Figure 6.  The Decoding and Integrating Algorithm  In order to control the play, users can press a command icon on the user interface. Once an icon is pressed, the command to manipulate the play is sent to the ADMP, and then ADMP executes the command as requested.

Nevertheless, if the exit command is pressed, all files in the temporary storage such as the ADMP, the completed audio  - 536 -    file, and the partial audio file will be eliminated.  Thus, users cannot perform any illegal distribution with or without intention.



IV. IMPLEMENTATION AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS The BENPro system was implemented using a common  language, Visual basic .NET, on the Microsoft Window XP platform.  After finishing the implementation, the system was tested by users in various academic backgrounds from Bachelors to higher degree. Fig. 7 shows the interface of digital media access controller program.

Since the objective of this research is to implement a protection technique that users cannot recognize, the testing indicators are the quality of sound evaluated by a sample group, and number of users in the samples who has curiosity in the IP protection mechanism.  The sample group, 170 persons, consists of various academic backgrounds which are computer technicians and non-technicians.  Moreover, 30 audio files were tested.

Figure 7. Digital Media Access Controller Program  The first step of the test is performed by developers.  The results from testing 30 audio files indicate that when the encoded audio file is accessed by the DMAC, the quality of the voice is the same as the original file.  Unlikely to the play with the general audio players, the presentation quality of the general existing methods is low and unsmooth.

TABLE I. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  Experimental Results  Audio types Presentation Quality  BENPro Other audio players  Original Audio files Smooth Smooth Audio files after passing encoding mechanism Smooth  Unsmooth and annoying  The second step is to test the presentation quality by 170 samples, using BENPro and other audio players. The results are shown in Table I. The 30 audio files after passing the encoding mechanism are run with the DMAC system of BENPro, the rating score is the same as all 30 original files running by other audio players.  However, if the encoding audio files from the APS are run on other audio players, the presentation quality is unsmooth and vary annoying to all  listeners.  Moreover, the test is also performed in the situation that a downloaded audio file was distributed to other users.

The evaluation score indicates that the illegal distribution of this file running by other audio players causes poor presentation in an unacceptable rate.  Nevertheless, only 10% of these samples believed that the audio files were encrypted or protected.  The majority of this sample group, about 80% believes that the defect is an effect from the transfer mechanism rather than the protection mechanism.

Furthermore, more than 80% decide to delete and reload the files rather than finding the crack software to fix the problem.



V. DISCUSSION According to the high demand in digital media over the  Internet, especially audio and video files, the DRM to protect IP becomes an important role in the digital businesses.

Various researches are proposed and implemented to protect these media.  One popular and acceptable method is the implementation of a member system where all agreements are signed among providers and clients based on the concept of [2]. Moreover, most protection methods applied encryption techniques to protect the files from unauthorized accesses [3][4]. Another technique that is applied to the digital documents is the use of the watermark mechanism.

However, these methods mentioned above are complicated and cannot protect the digital files from hackers or illegal distributers after the files were legally downloaded.  In addition, prohibition in accessing the files that is obviously noticed or informed to clients is a good simulator to all hackers. Therefore, these interdiction mechanisms cannot complete the mission.

Considering the BENPro technique, the protection mechanism applies a simple shifting and stuffing bytes of the audio contents with an executable file.  Additionally, some part of the audio file is extracted and stored in the database of the audio provider.  So, although the audio files were unfaithfully distributed by some authorized users, these files cannot be played by any audio player as expected. Thus, the audio files are protected because some part of the audio in the PADB still needs the authority checking when users request the play.

The result of the test indicates that after downloading the files and running it by other audio players, most users hardly realize the shield mechanism.  This is because all downloaded files that run by other audio players can play without satisfaction and correction.  Thus, the evidence leads to indicate the defense mechanism of these digital files is unclear to hackers.  Therefore, the motivation in illegally cracking the files is low comparing to other implementing methods.



VI. CONCLUSION Since the audio services are very popular over the Internet,  the IP protection becomes a serious issue for all audio providers.  Although many methods have been proposed and implemented, especially the encryption technique, these methods cannot protect the illegal usage from unauthorized users after legal downloaded was granted.  Moreover, these protection mechanisms are obviously detected by users,  - 537 -    especially hackers.  Thus, they are strong stimuli with high challenge for hackers.

This paper proposes the BENPro mechanism which is a simple protection method.  Nevertheless, this mechanism can prevent the unlawful usages of unauthorized users by storing some part of the audio files at the PADB; this part of the audio will be retrieved and merged to the rest of the file at the client when the audio was accessed through the ADMP functions only.  In addition, the partial audio file that is retrieved by users will be able to play unclearly and unsmooth by general audio players.  Consequently, the hacking motivation will be decreased. Therefore, the objective of the IP media protection is satisfied and maintained.

