

Abstract? Association rule mining is one of the most important problems in image mining. We propose a new approach to apply association rule on weather forecasting image. We build an image system to store weather forecasting images and retrieve them later for further research, for example, to predict future temperature, relative humidity, rainfall, wind speed and atmospheric pressure. Image retrieval technology is therefore important. We describe weather forecasting image retrieval system based on content-based image retrieval. Currently, content based image retrieval technology does not exploit high- level semantics, and it is hard to obtain predictive information from retrieved images. Association rules mining is applied in the search for these weather forecasting images. Most traditional data mining models focus on mining association rules among attributes within one transaction. Our improvement involves a spatial reference method that is used to get the spatial relationships between objects for a certain image. Spatial association rules are also mined and are subsequently used as a basis for retrieving additional images. As the spatial semantics in both the query image and spatial association rules retrieved images are more accurate. The proposed intelligent image retrieval system can get more images to help user predict future on weather forecasting.



I. INTRODUCTION Atmospheric conditions change rapidly, weather  forecasting is a very important activity, weather forecasting is a process of  collecting data on atmospheric conditions, including temperature, humidity, pressure, wind speed, and its direction etc , high-speed computers, meteorological satellites, and weather radars are tools used to collect the weather data , Such data are fed into the sophisticated computers to interpret the weather conditions it provides very comprehensive forecasting services for different users [1],[2]. Many countries are now concerning more about global climate change and its regional impacts and are investigating more research in to environmental changes in weather. Unisys is a global research organization that provides weather satellite images. This facilitates continuous monitoring of atmospheric conditions.

The data collected, including weather satellite images, are made available to the public.

We can build data base system to sore weather satellite images and retrieve them later for research purposes [12]. In order to get effective retrieval results, the image retrieval  technology is critical to image data base systems. Currently, content based image retrieval technology is not so effective, especially when the image volume is large. Several content based image retrieval strategies have been proposed already.

These strategies usually se low level features such as texture, color and shape to calculate the similarity between images.

Here, the spatial relationship between the objects within the images are ignored since these low level features are not reveal spatial information such as the location  of an object.  It is hard to get predictive information from the retrieved images in content based image retrieval system [7], [11]. User never want to retrieve with similar low level features, rather prefers to have spatial relationships between the image objects that match those of the query image.

This paper describes weather forecasting images and retrieves them later for further research, for example, to predict future temperature, relative humidity, rainfall, win speed an atmospheric pressure. Where content based image retrieval and inter transaction association rule mining methods are used to achieve the above goal.



II. CONTENT-BASED IMAGE RETRIEVAL Content-based image retrieval (CBIR), also known as query  by image content (QBIC) and content-based visual information retrieval (CBVIR) is the application of computer vision techniques to the image retrieval problem, that is, the problem of searching for digital images in large databases. Content- based means that the search will analyze the actual contents of the image rather than the metadata such as keywords, tags, and/or descriptions associated with the image. The term 'content' in this context might refer to colors, shapes, textures, or any other information that can be derived from the image itself. CBIR is desirable because most web based image search engines rely purely on metadata and this produces a lot of garbage in the results. Also humans manually enter keywords for images in a large database can be inefficient, expensive and may not capture every keyword that describes the image. Thus a system that can filter images based on their content would provide better indexing and return more accurate results.

Modern multimedia technologies have led to huge and growing archives of images in diverse applications such as medicine, remote-sensing, entertainment, education and online        information services. Traditional DBMS does not work well for image data due to the lack of semantic information in the data. To exploit the full benefit of the explosive growth of image data, there is an urgent demand to develop efficient techniques for storage, browsing, indexing and retrieval. In recent years, automatic indexing and retrieval based on image content has become more desirable for developing large volume image retrieval applications [9]. Color, shape and texture are the main features both humans and computers used to recognize images. Several systems have been proposed in the research community for content-based information retrieval such as QBIC (Query by Image Content) by IBM, and Visual SEEK by Columbia University. Most content-based image retrieval techniques employ the following two steps to retrieve the images. First, each image?s feature vector is computed and then stored in the image database. Secondly, given a query image, the feature vector of the query image is computed and then is taken to be compared with the feature vector of each image stored in the image database. A certain image?s feature vector that is close to the feature vector of query image is returned to the user. Weighting Euclidean distance is used to measure the distance between images which is described by equation (1).

=TQ, ii i  i tq ???                                   (1)  Where Q is query image and qi is low level feature of Q. T is a certain image in database and ti is low level feature of T. ?i is the weight factor.



III. ASSOCIATION RULE ALGORITHM Association rule mining is one of the important advances  in the area of data mining. The initial application of association rule mining was on market basket data. Recently study on association rule mining has been extended to more areas, such as multimedia data. An association rule is a relationship of the form X?Y, where X and Y are sets of items. X is called the antecedent and Y the consequence. An example of the rule can be, ?customers who purchase an item X are very likely to purchase another item Y at the same time?. There are two primary quality measures for each rule, support and confidence. The rule X?Y has support s% in the transaction set D if s% of transactions in D contain X?Y. The rule has confidence c% if c% of transactions in D that contain X also contain Y. The goal of association rule mining is to find all the rules with support and confidence exceeding user specified thresholds.

Conceptually, Apriori-based association rule algorithm is designed to deal with the boolean type data set. In detail each item can be regarded as a boolean type attribute, each transaction can be viewed as a row record, and the entire data set can be organized as a table with the boolean type attributes as the fields and the transactions as row records. The value of an attribute for a given record is ?1? if the item corresponding to the attribute is present in the transaction corresponding to the record, and is ?0? if the item is not in the transaction. Our data have richer attribute types, more specifically, they are all  quantitative. Therefore how to convert these numeric attributes to boolean-type has become an important issue in our study.

Fortunately there is a straightforward solution. We can break down the attributes into several disjoint ranges. Thus instead of having just one field in the table for each attribute, we can have as many boolean fields as the number of attribute ranges for each attribute. The value of a boolean field will be ?1? if the attribute has a value falling in the corresponding range, and ?0? otherwise.

A. Spatial Transactions and Spatial Semantics ?Fig. 1? shows a visible satellite image and ?Fig. 2? shows  a monthly temperature image downloaded from Unisys [2]. In order to simplify our research, only the environmental changes in weather Inter-transaction association rules mining are employed for discovering Weather forecasting or temperature variation patterns. However, association rule mining algorithms assume that a finite set of disjoint transactions are given as input to the algorithms [3], [8], and there is no explicit finite set of transactions in a Weather forecasting image. This study adopts the strategy proposed in [8], where the spatial transaction is defined around the instances of a special reference feature. An image is chosen as the reference site and concentric circles are used to define neighboring regions to the reference site. Fig. 3 shows this enhanced infrared satellite image. The weather forecasting or temperature variations are extracted first from each image. The variations within the concentric circles are treated as a single transaction. The concentric circles are also used to annotate the location of the salinity or temperature variations. The sub-zones defined by the concentric circles represent different distances and directions to the reference image.

B. Inter-transaction Association Rules Mining This section introduces fundamental concepts defined in  [12] related to inter-transaction itemset and intertransaction.

Let I = {i1,i2 ,...,iu} be a set of items. Let D be a dimensional attribute and Dom (D) be the domain of D. A transaction database is a database containing records in the form (d,Ij) , where d  Dom(D) and Ij I. We call this type of database a one-dimensional database. The dimensional attribute usually describes the occurring time or location of an item.

An inter-transaction association rule that spans p intervals is found if an association exists between items that are p intervals apart. Since an inter-transaction association rule may encompass many intervals, finding all such rules is time consuming. In order to minimize the effort involved in mining uninteresting rules, a sliding window denoted by w is introduced. When mining inter-transaction association rules, only the rules spanning shorter than or equal to w intervals are considered. The sliding window is thus used to avoid mining rules that span many consecutive intervals [4].Each sliding window forms an inter-transaction. An inter-transaction M that is contained within W can be described as follows:  M = {ik ( j) | ik W[ j];1  k  u,0  j  w-1}          (2)  Where W is a sliding window with w intervals and u is the number of items in I = {i1,i2 ,...,iu}.

To distinguish the items in an inter-transaction from the items in a traditional transaction, the items in an intertransaction are called inter-transaction items. The set of all possible inter-transaction items are denoted I?. Given I? and w, then: I?= {i1(0),...,i1(w-1),i2(0),...,i2(w-1),...,iu (0),...,iu (w-1)}.An inter-transaction itemset is a set of inter-transaction items B  I ?such that ik B,1 k u .An inter-transaction association rule has the form X Y,  Where  1. X  I?, Y  I? .

2. ik (0) X,1  k u.

3. ik ( j) Y,1  k  u, j  0.

4. X Y = {}.

The support and confidence of an inter-transaction association rule X Y can be defined by equation (3).

xT xyT  confidence S xyT  port == ,sup                    (3)  Where Txy is the set of inter-transactions that contains a set of extended items X Y and Tx be the set of inter- transactions that contains X. S is the number of transactions in the transaction database.



IV. DISCUSSION ?Fig. 1? is the equivalent of taking a black and white photo  of the earth. The bright areas show where the sun is being reflected back into space as a result of clouds or snow cover.

Clouds and snow show up white. The thicker cloud is represented as brighter the color. Land surfaces show up as gray and ocean surfaces nearly black. The major limitation to visible imagery is that it is only valid during daylight.

A. Selecting a Template (Heading 2)   ?Fig. 2? shows heat based radiation from the infrared spectrum. In other words, the warmer the surface, the more infrared radiation it emits. For a satellite image, cooler surfaces are bright and warmer surfaces are dark. Since the atmosphere cools as increase in altitude, clouds would show up as bright areas and land surfaces as dark areas. In addition, low clouds will be grayer and higher clouds will show up more white. Tall thunderstorm clouds will show up as bright white and fog will be hard to discern from land areas. A large advantage of IR is that we can view it 24 hours a day.

?Fig. 3? is an infrared image enhanced to highlight the cloud areas and the coldest cloud tops. Since, IR images could be used to determine cloud height these images are enhanced to highlight the highest, coldest cloud tops. Areas of strong precipitation will show up as shades of cyan. Thunderstorms will show up in blue and green. In addition, the contrast of warmer clouds is increased so that low clouds will show up.

A color bar at the top of the Table I will describe the enhancement scheme. The tick marks at the top of the bar represent 10 degree Celsius increments starting at 50C on the left and going to -110C on the right. In table 1 the attributes used in our study is given. First, confirm that you have the correct template for your paper size. This template has been tailored for output on the A4 paper size. If you are using US letter-sized paper, please close this file and download the file for ?MSW_USltr_format?.

Figure 1. Visible Satellite Image   Figure 2. Infrared Satellite Image   Figure 3. Enhanced Infrared Satellite Image        ?Fig. 4? shows an infrared band which is affected strongly by the presence of water vapor and also it shows the altitude of the highest moist layer in the atmosphere. Bright areas reflect the location of high clouds either due to jet stream cloudiness or due to thunderstorm activity. The dark areas reflect the location of dry area at high altitudes. This is associated with dry air intrusion and sinking motion associated with high pressure systems. This image is a decent tracer of jet stream winds which will show up as bright streaks.

?Fig. 5? is the infrared image overlaid with the radar summary. The infrared image will highlight the deeper/higher clouds as bright white and the radar summary allows correlating the high clouds with precipitation. The radar summary is stippled so that the image will partially show through the radar summary.

TABLE I.  THE ATTRIBUTES  USED IN OUR STUDY   Colors Temps (C) Temps(F) Description  Dark cyan -32 to -43 -25 to -45 Jet stream and anvil clouds Cyan -43 to -54 -45 to -65  Light blue -54 to -60 -65 to -76 Thick jet stream clouds  Dark blue -60 to -64 -76 to -83 Strong thunderstorm tops  Dark green -64 to -70 -83 to -94  Green -70 to -76 -94 to -105 Severe thunderstorm tops Brown -76 to -81 -105 to -114 Strong Hurricane tops Yellow -81 to -90 -114 to -130

V. CONCLUSION This study proposes a strategy where segment of images are  used as a reference model to annotate location information to the objects in image. This allows the spatial semantics to be maintained for either the images in database or the query image. In order to obtain additional information from images that are used to predict future variation trend, an improved inter-transaction association rules algorithm is employed to discover weather forecasting and temperature variation patterns. In query stage, images similar to the query image in both color and spatial semantics are retrieved. The retrieval results are more accurate. The proposed intelligent image retrieval system can get more images to help user predict future on weather forecasting.

