The idea, analysis, and system formation of network teacher evaluation system in   Chienkuo Technology University

Abstract?In order for Chienkuo Technology University (CTU) to improve the quality of  teaching, research, counseling and services, we localize three efforts (the effort of studying, strength, and willingness) and pursue vitality, quality, excellence and outstanding performances. There are 8 medium indexes and 33 detailed indexes in teaching performance, 7 medium indexes and 54 detailed indexes in research with industrial cooperation, 9 medium indexes and 76 detailed indexes in service with counseling, 6 medium indexes and 25 detailed indexes in teacher?s professional growth, totally 189 detailed indexes.

The network teacher evaluation system not only brings a big impact to our teachers, but also gives them the goal to work in the future.  Teachers usually check the evaluation items first and then find the items that are easy for them to achieve.  The school has put this teacher evaluation system in its academic policy.  Therefore, teachers all need to face this system with a positive attitude and work hard to succeed.

Key word: Teacher?s evaluation, The effort of studying,  strength, willingness, Research with industrial cooperation, Service with counseling, Teacher?s professional growth.



I. INTRODUCTION Because of the drop down of birth rate, in order to protect  excellent teachers? work right, Taiwan MOE added college teacher evaluation in academic college policy.  Therefore, for school to pursue teaching excellence and improve teaching quality, the practice of teacher evaluation is a must do.

In order to uplift full time teachers? performance of teaching, research, service and counseling to improve overall teaching quality and teacher?s professional image to receive social acknowledgement and respect, the teachers in our school not only need to teach in a excellent way, they are also required to do research, counseling, and services to localize three efforts(the effort of studying, strength, and willingness) and pursue vitality, quality, excellence and outstanding performances, moreover, to setup an important referential index of promotion, continuing contract, lay off, discontinuing contract , reward and counseling for improvement of full time teachers, we established ?CTU teacher evaluation methods? according to academic college policy of item 21.

Our teacher evaluation items include: teaching performance, research with industrial cooperation, service with counseling, teacher?s professional growth.  We hope that by the practice of teaching evaluation we can help the  teachers to improve themselves in all academic aspects and students? learning.

The main tasks of teacher is teaching, lecturing, and answering questions.  There are also the main items in ?teacher evaluation? topics.

A. Motivation and Research Goal In our school?s teacher evaluation method, we  established a lot of items to cover all teachers? all efforts for the school and student.   It is a very complicated and diversified system.  Such a diversified and complex evaluation system not only need school faculties to collect and verify the substantial evidence of certain items, evaluated teacher also need to upload their own evidence data.  After summing all the tasks from all related ones, we will calculate each section?s scores and give the result to higher management level for follow-up consequential counseling and later on policy making.

The goal of teacher evaluation: 1. to provide a proper system and portfolio for evaluator and the one being evaluated for improving teaching method and teaching innovation. 2. by using systemized portfolio to assist new teacher or teacher with teaching difficulties 3. Provide a standard for teacher?s promotion, adjustment, and dismissal.

4. Provide a fair base of classification and continuous studying of teachers.  5. Provide a knowledge base of teacher?s on job education, seminar.  6. to provide a motivation for teacher to revise class planning, improving and career planning, on job training, reappointment and promotion in academic fields[1-2].

B. The Aspects of Teacher Evaluation Foreign scholars like Dr. Rifkin believed the universities?  teacher evaluation should include classroom teaching, student counseling, teaching services (paper instruction), publications, performance, public services and research[1,8].

Dr. Peng figured out in a university teacher evaluation mechanism research of MOE the six main domains of university teacher evaluation : 1. academic contributions, 2.

creative showcase, 3. teaching and counseling, 4. school services, 5. industrial cooperation, 6. teacher?s profession moral, characters and team cooperation[2-3].

C. The Importance of Constructing Teacher Evaluation Indexes Teacher evaluation should include Qualitative and  Quantitative.  The qualitative evaluation index means the   DOI 10.1109/ICGEC.2010.118     way the evaluators use words to describe the attainment of each index is very detailed but there is still the space of improvement for objectivity.  The quantitative evaluation index is to use numeric method to present the performance of evaluated teachers in a scientific and convenient way but not humanly and its objectivity is also a question for further study.  Therefore, a system with equal importance of Qualitative and Quantitative is a rather appropriate method [2].  The most important thing for the construction of a teacher evaluation index is whether or not the content of indexes could actually reflect the evaluation result of evaluated teachers.  If the evaluated index content couldn?t be substantially described and defined, it could not really reflect the outcome of teacher evaluation.

D.  The Method of Constructing Teacher Evaluation Indexes Teacher evaluation is always the pain inside every  teacher.  No teacher will like to be evaluated. However, this policy was setup by Taiwan MOE and every school all need to execute this policy to respond to MOE.  Therefore, it is very important to construct a fair, objective system, coving the scope and depth of all aspects, preventing from subjective disturbance.  It need to cover all the contributions of every teacher substantially and abstractly to let teacher feel better about this evaluation system and will be more gladly to contribute more efforts and labors for school and students.

The main entity of teacher evaluation is teachers.  All the administrative units need to provide necessary resource and support to every evaluated teacher. The items and standards of teacher evaluation also should be flexible, having every college?s uniqueness and whole school?s overall development direction.

The construction of teacher evaluation indexes should substantially indicate and define every index [6]. The most important thing for a teacher evaluation system is whether or not the content of evaluation indexes could actually reflect the expected outcome of teacher evaluation.  It usually needs to have professors from inside and outside of school to exam the effectiveness of evaluation indexes.  Later the school should hold public hearings and then submit to academic meetings for final decision and publishing.  Through such strict examine process to construct a proper teacher evaluation system [4].

Our school first formed a professional discussion group consisted of professors from inside of school and outside of school.  After summarizing all opinions, we decided the percentage of more detailed items, the way of operation and finally formed 4 main indexes, 30 medium indexes and 189 detailed indexes in the year of 2008; and revised in the year of 2009 to 210 detailed indexes.



II. THE DATA PROCESS OF TEACHER EVALUATION SYSTEM  The items of teacher evaluation include: teaching performance (D1), research with industrial cooperation (D2), service with counseling (D3), teacher?s professional growth  (D4).  Totally there are 30 medium indexes: E1, E2, E3, and E4, ?..E30; 189 detailed indexes : F1, F2, F3, ?.F189.  The structure is as below:   Figure 1.  Statistic flowchart  The sum of total 189 detailed indexes of teacher evaluation is k=189, A1, A2, A3, A4?.Ai  are the index weights of every detailed index, X1, X2z X3, X4?Xi are the actual number of specific detailed index, I is the number of every teacher?s detailed index, F1, F2, F3, F4?..Fk are every teacher?s actual score of every detailed index:  ?=++++= i  iiii XAXAXAXAXAF  3322111 ....  (1)  The 30 medium indexes are E1, E2, E3 ?.E30, Fj is the sum of every medium index, and every college?s medium average divide by the people number of ?n?, the sum of every medium index is as below:  ?= j  ji FE  .    i=1,2,3,?.,30(medium index)        (2)  ?= j  jiDeptAvg Fn E  _ .

1  for i=1 to 16   (15 dept. and 1  general education center)                 (3)  .1  _ ?= j  jiCollegeAvg Fp E   for i=1 to 5                   (4)  The 4 main indexes are D1, D2, D3, and D4, and the sum of every main index is as below, k=30, Ek is the sum of medium index of every main index.  Four colleges and one general education center divide by the total people num of colleges ?p?, the average of main index of department divide by the number of people of every department ?n?.

.

?=  k  ki ED   for i=1 to 4 (4 main indexes)           (5)     .1  _ ?= k  kiiDeptAvg En D    for i = 1 to 16 (15 dept. and  one general education center)               (6)  .1  4,1_ ?== k  kiCollegeAvg Ep D   for i = 1 to 5 (4 colleges  and 1 general education center)              (7)   C1: represents the sum of college engineering, C2 : the sum of college of management, C3 : the sum of college of design, C4: the sum of college of humanity, C5 : the sum of general education center.  D is the sum of every main index, m is the item number, the number of college or general education center?s teacher is p, the main index sum and average of 4 colleges and general education center is as below:  ?= m  mi DC  for i=1 to 5                        (8)  ?== m  mavgi Dp C  5,1  1                         (9)  The average of every medium index of 15 departments and general education center is as below; n is the number of department teachers.

?== m  mavgi En S  16,1  1                         (10)

III. ANALYSIS OF EVALUATION RESULT In order to conveniently observe analysis of result, below  we listed out 4 main indexes, 30 medium indexes and 189 detailed indexes.  The reasons there are so many indexes are for school to cover all the efforts teachers contributed before to get a better evaluation score.  We try to review and revise to make it become more complete and perfect.

A.  The Analysis of Main Index of College The purpose of teacher evaluation system is to present  the performance data of teachers as references for improving teaching and future development. From figure 2 we can see the distribution chart of every college.  In the college of engineering, the department of Automation Engineering had the highest score. In the college of management, the department of Industrial Engineering and Management had the highest score.  In the college of design, the department of Space Design had the highest score; in the college of humanity and general education center, the department of Styling Cosmetology had the highest score.  After us analyzing the reason of why the department of Automation Engineering and the department of Civil Engineering had the highest average score, we found out that the teachers in these 2 departments had the most projects of cooperation with industries.

Table 1 show that every college had their focus points separately. We can see that the college of engineering, the college of management, and the college of design  emphasized on research and cooperation with industries.

The college of humanity emphasized more on services and counseling. The general education center is focused on teaching only.

TABLE I PERCENTAGE AND RANK OF EVERY COLLEGE IN 4 MAIN INDEXES   From figure 2 we can see the department of Automation  Engineering had the highest average score of main index.

They had the best teaching performance and research with industrial cooperation.  For the index of service with counseling, the department of Styling Cosmetology had the highest score.  The teachers of the department of digital media design had the highest score of teacher?s professional growth.

Because our school encourages the invention of patent and the cooperation with industries, the department of Automation Engineering and the department of Civil Engineering combined the cooperation with industries to transfer excellent patents and technologies to industries.

This really set up the best model of creative education.  In the year of 2008 the department of Automation Engineering had the most cases of research with industrial cooperation.

The department of Civil Engineering is only a little bit below the department of Automation Engineering. The department of Mechanical Engineering was ranked the third.  The teachers in the department of International Business Administration, the department of Applied Foreign Languages, the Office of Physical Education, and general education center had the lowest scores in cooperation with industries.  However, we only compare the scores of teachers in the same department.  The impact is not very serious.

B.  Analysis of the Scores of Mmedium Index of Every Department From the figure 3 we can observe that the college of  engineering had better performance in the medium item of 1.6 about government aided teaching related plans of Main Project Director, Sub-project leader, Sub-project collaboration Moderator, Subprojects of implementation, Program Moderator, Cooperative Program Host.  Every teacher had averagely 2.1 government aided teaching related plans; the college of management, 1.68; the  teaching performance research with  industrial cooperation  service with counseling  teacher?s professional  growth the college of engineering  27.5%(2) 39.0%(1) 23.9%(3) 9.6%(4)  the college of management  28.7%(2) 32.1%(1) 28.3%(3) 10.9%(4)  the college of design 24.8%(2) 34.2%(1) 32.0%(2) 9.1%(4)  the college of humanity 34.2%(2) 15.4%(3) 38.0%(1) 12.4%(4)  the general education center  40.9%(1) 17.3%(3) 28.0%(2) 13.8%(4)     college of design, 1.05; the college of humanity, 3.13; General education center, 1.93.

From figure 4 we can observe the college of design had the highest score in the index 2.1 of research plan.  Every teacher in the college of design had averagely 3.81 research cases; the college of engineering, 2.85; the college of management, 2.34; the college of humanity, 2.16; general education center, 1.14. We can observe the second highest score of cooperation with industries where the teachers of college of engineering had averagely 5 projects; the college of humanity, 3.53; the college of design, 3.39; the college of management, 2.27; general education center, 1.68.



IV.  SUMMARY Under the impact of low birth rate, there are getting  fewer students and government resources are available.

From the real data record of teacher evaluation system, those who got more budgets for research and cooperation with industries (including project plan of NSC) all had better evaluation scores.  Therefore, we conclude the following contributions of CTU?s teacher evaluation system:  ? Teachers need to have enthusiasm for their work; the ability to self-examine is crucial.

? Teachers generally understand more about the processes of teacher evaluation and by referring other teachers? last time evaluation performance to set up a future goal and direction for themselves.

? Those who are senior in school can provide assistance to younger teachers for mutual learning and growth.

? To improve teachers? ability to organize, manage and use their own teaching data to vitalize teaching.

A. Application of Evaluation Result We use the result of teacher evaluation as the reference  for the directions of teachers? growth to improve teaching and uplift the effectiveness of students? learning.

? From our teachers? evaluation data to discover the problems of the teachers in school work.

? The completeness of evaluation indexes could evaluate the conditions of teachers? professional growth.

? With both qualities and quantities to provide rich result of teacher evaluation system.

B. Future Development and Suggestions ? To generate timely feedbacks and assist the revised  processes of evaluation system.

? School managers should create a harmonious, fair,  and reasonable environment by not focusing on using evaluation as a tool to exam teachers working here.  It is better for our school to create an environment to gather all teachers? attentions to work together so that the school can become a place for teachers to develop themselves and have their dreams come true.

