Context-Aware Ubiquitous Musafir

Abstract - Population using Mobile phones and Mobile applications is increasing every day. Emergence of Cloud Computing and advances in Wireless Communication technologies has changed the dynamics of mobile applications by providing Scalable On-Demand High Available Infrastructure at minimal cost with zero maintenance and empowered with faster data transfer. Enterprises have started to develop Cloud based mobile applications that can target their Customers who are on the move. This paper presents a Cloud based Context Aware mobile application that targets Travel, Healthcare, Education and Retail Enterprises and their Users. Machine Learning techniques such as Association rules were used to analyze the mobile end user data on the Cloud towards predicting the services preferred by the End User.



I. INTRODUCTION   Marriage of Cloud computing and Emerging Wireless Technologies could ensure Pervasive Access and help towards Seamless Scalability, Zero Maintenance, Fault Tolerance, Minimal Infrastructure and On-Demand delivery of various Vital services such as Healthcare, Education and Shopping/Business experiences [1].  This has a tremendous impact on Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) which could eventually bridge the ?Digital Divide? and specifically enables an innovative way to deliver ubiquitous services. We had developed a service platform entitled ?Pervasive Cloud? on which various applications can be developed [2].  These applications could require high computing power, or could be database applications where huge amount of data has to be stored and accessed.

Pervasive Cloud is based on convergence of emerging technologies such as Cloud and Mobile computing and could be used to provide inexpensive solutions with minimal infrastructure.

Our Application ?Musafir? which has been deployed on the ?Pervasive Cloud? empowers the People-On-The-Move and provides context aware Travelling support, which at present is being extended to Education, Healthcare and Shopping applications. ?Musafir? is a Rich Internet Mobile application which runs on a Mobile Internet Device (MID)  or in general, any Mobile device and would be able to connect to a Public Cloud at Real Time.  ?Musafir? enables an End User (a) A Context Aware Business Application that could assist Consumers for their Travel Needs. (b)To register Health Complaints and receive proper Diagnosis and Medicine (c) Access to Educational Videos (d) Demos of various Retail products to understand and estimate the quality of the products and the location they are available.



II. MUSAFIR  A. Context Aware Travel Assistant Owing to the personalized nature of services, context aware applications could be developed to target personal travel [3]. Context aware applications are usually built by a set of manually defined rules which can define user behavior for varying context or user defined preferences.

This could lead to inaccuracies and hence improper services. Machine learning empowered context aware application can improve the accuracy of such service discoveries. Bayesian network could be used to develop an intelligent engine, as this could address context aware problems by analyzing historical activity (behavioral log) of individual persons [4].  Reasoning could also be used to the study context in an ubiquitous environment [5]. The prominence of context aware application is steadily growing with the advent of mobile devices and other wearable wireless sensors. Indeed there was a lot of research literature available towards context awareness in an ubiquitous environment [6-8]. However when we talk about context awareness it mostly focuses on personalized services and it is well known that the number of end-users is also a constantly increasing factor. Scalability could well be an issue if the data collected for such an application is too large. ?Cloud Computing? could be of help in such a scenarios.

Musafir employs Association Rules [9] towards Context Awareness, and could be used by End User/ Consumers or by Travel Service Providers to facilitate travel of their customers. Association rules find association or relationships among large sets of data. These rules are  Dr.G.Subrahmanya VRK Rao Global Technology Office  Cognizant Technology Solutions Chennai, India  Email: subrahmanyavrk.rao@cognizant.com  Dr. Karthik Sundararaman Global Technology Office  Cognizant Technology Solutions Chennai, India  Email: karthik.sundararaman@cognizant.com  Jinka Parthasarathi Global Technology Office  Cognizant Technology Solutions Chennai, India  Email: parthasarathi.jinka@cognizant.com  Prashant Parekh Retail Tech Consulting Group  Cognizant Technology Solutions Chennai, India  Email: prashant.parekh@cognizant.com  2010 IEEE Conference on Open Systems (ICOS 2010), December 5-7, 2010, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia     Probabilistic in nature and provide results of Data Mining in the form of ?if-then statements?. Appropriate rules are selected from the set of all possible Rules, Constraints on various measures of Significance and Interest. Association rules have often been used to perform Market Basket Analysis successfully. In this study we had used Apriori Algorithm of the Association rules to determine Traveler?s preference.

We had used a part of the Public Mobile User Data set that was provided by the MIT media Lab [10], which consisted of User Profiles, Cell Tower ID and their Daily Routines etc. These details were stored in a Database which we hosted on a Public Cloud. In order to understand the usage of the said Datasets for a Travel based application, we had prepared a detailed travel record for each of the mobile user. The dataset we developed for user travel was divided into different categories viz. Very Frequent /Often/ Rare Travelers according to user Profile. Travel records consisted of their preferred mode of travel viz flight, train, bus or own car, journey date, their mobile and IMEI number. System context View of Musafir is shown in figure 1.

Fig. 1. System Context View of Musafir    Client End Form for the Mobile End User was developed using JAVA / J2ME for Services, which have Push Buttons for Services, an End User may require (figure 2a).

Fig. 2a. End User Form for Musafir?s Travel Module   The End User clicks on the ?Travel? button and fills in  the details (see figure 2b).

Fig. 2b. Travel Service Form    End User?s IMEI Number, Mobile Number, Time of Request and Place of request and other filled details would be sent to the JAVA Servlet running on the Cloud. Study was only concentrated on mobile phones whose IMEI number could be extracted [11]. Snapshot view of travel database used in the study is shown in figure 2c. The Servlet first executes SQL queries to extract History details about the Mobile user based on IMEI and Mobile Number.

A temporary table, which consists of travelling patterns of a particular person, is formed and Aprori algorithm is applied on the resultant temporary table. The algorithm will extract rules based on the history details and would provide probabilities for mode of travel of a particular person as     illustrated in figure 2d. Mode of travel that has the highest probability would be chosen and send to the person who initiates the travel request. Mobile screen shot of the response to the travel request is shown in figure 2e.

Fig. 2c. Snapshot view of travel record database     Fig. 2d. Results of running Apriori Algorithm on the travel  database for a particular person      Fig. 2e. Response from Servlet on the Cloud after processing End  User request   End User would then be able to view his choice on their mobile screen. Once the End User confirms the Mode of Travel, a list of schedules of Preferred Mode of Travel from Source to Destination with all the details is retrieved and shown on the Mobile Screen of the End User (figure 2f). End User can then book for the Travel.

Fig. 2f.  List of Flights from source to destination with details of  Discounts   One of the main objectives of context aware applications is to discover service according to the user?s preference.

Web has transformed so much that many enterprises  provide certain services like Map, RSS, product search etc as API (Application Programming Interface) which can be invoked by general users. These API?s could be very useful for a traveler. For example a Map service can help to locate a place or provide driving directions from a place to another. In Musafir we had used the Map Service API [12] to help the end user by  providing the Driving Direction (from source to destination) if they opt for driving their own Transport / Car (figure 2g). Musafir provides a separate servlet to address this. This servlet has two functions viz. (a) map service API (b) API function provided by a 3rd party bulk Short Message Service (SMS) service provider. Once the end user indicates to the servlet that they prefer driving their own transport, Map Service API is invoked to get the driving directions for the travel and the link to page is sent as an SMS using the SMS API function to the users mobile phone.

Fig. 2g. Map showing the Driving Direction between the Source  and Destination   The two Servlets mentioned above are actually connected to a MySQL database table called ?journeydet? present in the Cloud. Once the user confirms the bookings travel details of the users along with their mobile number, IMEI number, date of journey, source and destination of journey, mode of journey etc are stored in a table ?journeydet?. This will help in eliminating static rules and the dataset for Apriori algorithm will have an improved support such that it can provide more accurate results based on the Dynamic Database details.

A small automated program (procedure), would run at the start of everyday.  It has three main functions (a) search function, which is basically a SQL query to select details (Mobile number, source and destination of travel) of those who are travelling on that particular day from journeydet table (b) Invoke weather service API [13] and find out the respective weather conditions for each of the identified     destination (c) SMS API which would then send the respective weather information to the corresponding mobile numbers. This information would help to facilitate the travel arrangements of the end user.

B. Healthcare, Education and Shopping Modules End User forms (figure 3a) were developed based on Flex Technology which would facilitate Rich User Experience. User can fill in the Health Complaints and submit the details to the Cloud. A third party API which facilitates SMS to a Mobile device was integrated with the Servlet program.  Once the Database (on the Cloud) is updated with the Health complaints, the API can trigger an alert to a registered expert Physician.

Fig. 3a. End User entering the health complaints   Physicians were provided with a mobile application,  which would help them to assess the Patient?s Health Complaints from the Cloud database [2]. Physician, up on analyzing the case,  can submit their Diagnosis and Prescription details to the Cloud Database seamlessly, which would send an SMS alert to the patient who filled in the Complaint. This application also empowers the End User to transfer ECG and images to the Cloud which could also be viewed by the Physician (figure 3b).

Fig. 3b. Physician?s view of the ECG signal of a Patient retrieved  from the Cloud  Education Module of Musafir empowers an End User to select and watch Videos relating subjects of their interest.

The typical End User could be any consumer and specifically academic community around the world.  The videos will be streamed from the Cloud (figure 4).

Performance of such an application depends on bandwidth of the network and type of communication technology used. In our lab environment we were able to upload a 5MB file to the Cloud in roughly around 2minute 30 seconds to 3 minutes and the time taken to download the file / stream the file from the same is around 1 minute 30 seconds to 2 minutes considering the connection speed to be a maximum of 512KBPS DSL Connection.

Fig. 4. Educational Videos that could be accessed by a Touch Screen interface   Shopping module of Musafir enables an End User /  Consumer, to watch Demos related to various Retail Products, to understand the Location of their availability, their Price and to store their personalized shopping choices in a ?Shopping Cart?, which could connect to a Billing/Credit Card System (figure 5).

Fig. 5. Demos of Retail products available at a particular location  Security is a major concern for web based applications, where there is a possibility of a large number of users.

Having realized the sensitivity of datasets we are trying to address security issue by using 128 byte Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) algorithm on the datasets [14].

For each application there would a set of administrators and end users. Hence a role based access to the database is also being studied and implemented. We are currently working towards making Healthcare, Education and Shopping modules more ?intelligent? by making them Context- Aware.



III. CONCLUSION   Musafir was targeted towards Healthcare, Retail, Travel,  Education /Content Management Business Groups and its Users. The application provides (a) Pervasive learning access through videos and On-Demand Education (b) Empowers Online Shopping and Business On-the-Move (c) Real Time and Pervasive Primary Health Care Service (d) Context aware Travel Solution.



IV. REFERENCES [1] G Subrahmanya VRK Rao, Jinka Parthasarathi, S. Karthik  and GVN Appa Rao, ?Implementation of Virtulization Oriented Architecture ? A Healthcare Case Study?. IT Revolutions 2008, LNICST 11 proceedings, Springer.

[2] G Subrahmanya VRK Rao,Karthik Sundararaman,Jinka Parthasarathi, Dhatri ? A Pervasive Cloud Initiative for Primary Healthcare Services ? Proceedings of IEEE-ICIN 2010, Berlin.

[3] Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchell, K., Friday, A., Efstratiou, C.: Developing a contextaware electronic tourist guide: some issues and experiences. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (The Hague, The Netherlands, April 01 - 06, 2000). CHI '00.

ACM Press. (2002).

[4] Masaki Matsudaira, Kyoko Hoshikawa, Kohei Taki ?Context Awareness and Its Applications?, Oki Technical Review, April 2008/Issue 212 Vol.75 No.1,94-97.

[5] Donghai Guan, Weiwei Yuan, Seong Jin Cho, Andrey Gavrilov, Young-Koo Lee, and Sungyoung Lee* ?Devising a Context Selection-Based Reasoning Engine for Context- Aware Ubiquitous Computing Middleware? UIC 2007, LNCS 4611, pp. 849?857, 2007.

[6] Dey, A.K., Abowd, G.D., Salber, D.: A Conceptual Framework and a Toolkit for Supporting  the Rapid Prototyping of Context-Aware Applications. J. of Human- Computer Interaction (HCI) 16, 97?166 (2001)  [7] Hong, J.I., Landay, J.A.: An Infrastructure Approach to Context-Aware Computing. J. Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), London, UK, 287?303 (2001)  [8] Shafer, S.A.N., Brumitt, B., Cadiz,J.J.: Interaction Issues in Context-Aware Interactive Environments. J. Human- Computer Interaction (HCI), London, UK, 363?378 (2001)  [9] Zijian Zheng, Ron Kohavi, Llew Mason, ?Real world performance of association rule algorithms?, Proceedings of Knowledge discovery and data mining San Francisco, California, Pages: 401 ? 406,Year of Publication: 2001,ISBN:1-58113-391-X  [10]   N. Eagle, A. Pentland, and D. Lazer (2009), "Inferring Social Network Structure using Mobile Phone Data", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(36), pp. 15274-15278  [11] http://mobilepit.com/10/how-to-get-imei-number-in-j2me- javame.html  [12] http://code.google.com/apis/maps/documentation/examples/d irections-simple.html  [13] http://weather.weatherbug.com/desktop- weather/api.html [14] Christof Paar, Jan Pelzl, "The Advanced Encryption  Standard", Chapter 4 of "Understanding Cryptography, A Textbook for Students and Practitioners". Springer, 2009.

