Mining Association Rules from HIV-Human Protein Interactions

Abstract?Identifying possible viral-host protein-protein inter- actions is an important and useful approach in developing new drugs targeting those interactions. In this article, a recently published dataset containing records of interactions between a set of HIV-1 proteins and a set of human proteins has been analyzed using association rule mining. The main objective is to identify a set of association rules among the human proteins with high confidence. The well-known Apriori algorithm has been utilized for discovering the association rules. Moreover, we have predicted some new viral-human interactions based on the discovered association rules.

Index Terms?Protein-protein interaction, HIV-1?human inter- action, association rule mining, Apriori algorithm.



I. INTRODUCTION  Analysis of the regulation between viral and host proteins in different organisms is an important step to uncover the underlying mechanism of various viral diseases. Human im- munodeficiency virus (HIV) is a lentivirus (a member of the retrovirus family with long incubation period) that can lead to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), a condition in humans in which the immune system begins to fail, leading to life-threatening infections [1]. HIV-1 is a species of the HIV virus that relies on human host cell proteins in virtually every phase of its life cycle. One of the main goals in research of Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) is to predict possible viral- host interactions. This is specifically aimed at assisting drug developers targeting protein interactions for the development of specially designed small molecules to inhibit potential HIV- 1?human PPIs. Targeting protein-protein interactions has rel- atively recently been established to be a promising alternative to the conventional approach to drug design [2], [3].

There are several computational approaches for predicting PPIs [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. Most of these approaches are mainly used for determining PPIs in a single organism, such as yeast, human etc. However, determination of PPIs across multiple organisms such as between viral proteins and the corresponding host proteins can contribute to the development of new therapeutic approaches and design of drugs for these viral diseases. Moreover, these methods are mainly based on designing some classifiers which need both positive and negative samples for PPIs. Although there are several online resources that systematically store information about experimentally validated interacting proteins, there is  no such resource for non-interacting proteins which should be used as the ideal negative samples. Therefore in most of the works in this area, negative samples are prepared by taking random protein pairs which are not found in the interaction database. This is done with the expectation that this random protein pairs are less likely to interact physically, which may not be true always. The performance of the classifier highly depends on the choice of the negative samples.

With this observation, in this article we have proposed an approach based on association rule mining [11] that uses information based on positive samples of experimentally val- idated PPIs only. The PPI information among HIV-1 and human proteins are organized as a binary matrix with rows representing the viral proteins and columns representing the human proteins. Thereafter, the well-known Apriori algorithm [11], [12] has been used for discovering association rules among the columns, i.e., human proteins. Finally these rules have been utilized to predict some new viral-host interactions.

The remaining part of the article is organized as follows: the next section discusses the basic concepts of association rule mining and describes the Apriori algorithm in brief for association rule mining in this regard. Section III discusses how association rule mining can be used for predicting new interactions based on an existing HIV-1?human PPI database.

In Section IV, the experimental results have been provided.

Finally Section V concludes the article.



II. ASSOCIATION RULE MINING The principle of association rule mining (ARM) problem  lies in the market basket or transaction data analysis. Many information is hidden in the day to day transactions tak- ing place in supermarkets. For example a customer who is buying nappy also likes to purchase baby food in the same time. Association analysis is the discovery of rules showing attribute?value associations that occur frequently [13]. Let I = {i1, i2, . . . , in} be a set of n items and X be an itemset where X ? I . A k-itemset is a set of k items.

Let T = {(t1, X1), (t2, X2), . . . , (tm, Xm)} be a set of m transactions, where ti and Xi, i = 1, 2, . . . ,m, are the transaction identifier and the associated itemset respectively.

The cover of an itemset X in T is defined as follows:  cover(X,T ) = {ti|(ti, Xi) ? T,X ? Xi}. (1)  16-18 December 2010, IIT Kharagpur, India     The support of an itemset X in T is  support(X,T ) = |cover(X,T )| (2)  and the frequency of an itemset is  frequency(X,T ) = support(X,T )  |T | . (3)  Thus support of an itemset X is the number of transactions where all the items in X appear in each transaction. The frequency of an itemset is the probability of its occurrence in a transaction in T . An itemset is called frequent if its support in T is greater than some threshold min sup. The collection of frequent itemsets with respect to a minimum support min sup in T , denoted by F(T,min sup) is defined as  F(T,min sup) = {X ? I : support(X,T ) > min sup}.

(4)  The objective of ARM is to find all rules of the form X ? Y , X  ? Y = ? with probability c%, indicating that if itemset  X occurs in a transaction, the itemset Y also occurs with probability c%. X and Y are called the antecedent and consequent of the rule respectively. Support of a rule denotes the percentage of transactions in T that contains both X and Y . This is taken to be the probability P (X  ? Y ). An  association rule (AR) is called frequent if its support exceeds a minimum value min sup.

The confidence of a rule X ? Y in T denotes the percent- age of the transactions in T containing X that also contains Y . It is taken to be the conditional probability P (X|Y ). In other words,  confidence(X ? Y, T ) = support(X ? Y, T )  support(X,T ) . (5)  A rule is called confident if its confidence value exceeds a threshold min conf . Formally the ARM problem can be defined as follows: Find the set of all rules R of the form X ? Y such that  R = {X ? Y : X,Y ? I,X ? Y = ?,  X ? Y ? F(T,min sup),  confidence(X ? Y, T ) > min conf}. (6)  Generally the ARM process consists of the following two steps [14], [15] :  1) Find all frequent itemsets.

2) Generate strong ARs from the frequent itemsets.

Apart from the above mentioned general framework adopted in most of the research in ARM, there is another approach for immediately generating a large subset of all ARs [16].

The number of itemsets grows exponentially with the num- ber of items |I|. A commonly used algorithm for generating frequent itemsets is the Apriori algorithm [11], [12]. This is based on the idea that if even one subset of an itemset X is not frequent, then X cannot be frequent. It starts from all itemsets of size one, and proceeds in a recursive fashion. If any itemset X is not frequent then that branch of the tree is pruned, since any possible superset of X can never be frequent.



III. ARM IN VIRAL-HOST PPI  In this section, the procedure for mining ARs from HIV-1? human PPI network has been described. First we describe the preparation of the input data set. Thereafter, how to apply Apriori algorithm on the input data set to discover highly confident rules and how these rules are used to predict new interactions are discussed.

A. Preparation of Input Data Set  The interaction information reported between HIV-1 and human proteins in [17], which has been prepared based on a recently published PPI data set [18] has been collected. The interaction data set contains three types of interactions, viz., group-1 interactions representing direct physical interactions, group-2 interactions representing indirect interactions, and the other interactions that are predicted using their method. The third kind of interactions are marked as ?Novel? interactions which are computationally predicted by Tastan et. al. [17].

We have concentrated our study only on group-1 and group-2 interactions, since these are experimentally validated. There are total 1288 group-1 and group-2 interactions between 17 HIV-1 proteins and 773 human proteins. We have constructed a binary matrix of size 17? 773. An entry of 1 in the matrix denotes the presence of interaction between the corresponding pair of HIV-1 and human proteins, and an entry of 0 represents the absence of any information regarding the interaction of the corresponding viral and human proteins. Initially it is treated as non-interaction. The resulting binary matrix is treated as the input to the ARM algorithm.

B. Application of Apriori ARM Algorithm  As discussed above, the rows of the input binary matrix represent the viral proteins and the columns represent the human proteins. Here each row (viral protein) has been con- sidered as a transaction and each column (human protein) has been considered as a item. Thereafter, the Apriori algorithm is applied on this transactions to find frequent itemsets and from these frequent itemsets, highly confident ARs are extracted.

Note that we have only concentrated on the rules with only one item in the consequent. Hence an example of a discovered AR may be of the form:  {HP1 HP2 HP3 ? HP4}.

Here HPis, i = 1, 2, 3, 4, represent four human proteins. In words, the rule can be read as follows: if the human proteins HP1, HP2 and HP3 interact with some viral protein, the human protein HP4 also interacts with the same viral protein.

Corresponding to each rule, there is an associated set of HIV-1 proteins for which the rule is true.

C. Prediction of New Interactions from ARs  We have utilized the discovered ARs that have high con- fidence to predict new viral-host interactions as follows: Consider a rule {HP1 HP2 HP3 ? HP4}. Suppose in the frequent itemsets, the antecedent of the rule is true for 8 viral proteins {V P1, V P2, . . . , V P8}. Now without loss  16-18 December 2010, IIT Kharagpur, India  ID:32 345    of generality, assume that among these 8 viral proteins, the consequent of the rule is true for the first 6 viral proteins {V P1, V P2, . . . , V P6}. Therefore the rule has a confidence of 75% (6 out of 8), which can be thought as reasonably high. From this we can predict that the human protein HP4 is likely to interact with the viral proteins V P7 and V P8 also and the confidence of this prediction is 75%. Thus two new interactions are predicted (V P7 ? HP4 and V P8 ? HP4).

This way, from all the high-confident rules, we can predict some new interactions with certain levels of confidence.



IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  This section describes the experimental results. First the effects of the parameters min sup and min conf on the number of extracted ARs have been investigated. Thereafter, the discovered high-confident rules have been reported for a particular min sup and min conf . Finally we have reported the newly predicted interactions among the HIV-1 and human proteins.

A. Effects of min sup and min conf  To study the effect of min sup and min conf on the number of generated ARs, the min sup has been varied from 30% to 50% (with step size 5%) and the min conf has been varied from 65% to 90% (with step size 5%), and the number of ARs generated for all the combinations of min sup and min conf have been noted down. Fig. 1 shows the variation of number of rules for the different values of min sup and min conf . The number of ARs have varied from 0 (min sup=50%, min conf=90%) to 671 (min sup=30%, min conf=65%). It is evident from the figure that the number of ARs is large when both min sup and min conf are on the lower side, whereas the number of ARs is small when both min sup and min conf are high. This is quite obvious, since large min sup and min conf impose more constraint on the ARs and thus reducing their numbers.

Fig. 1. Variation of number of rules with respect to different values of min sup and min conf  B. Demonstration of Generated Rules  In this section, we have reported the rules generated with min sup and min conf values of 40% and 70%, respec- tively. Table I shows these rules with their support and  confidence. There are total 34 rules generated with the above mentioned values of min sup and min conf . For each rule, the human proteins in the antecedent part and the consequent part of the rule are shown. Note that here we have only considered rules with only one protein in the consequent part.

As is evident from the table, there are 21 rules with only one human protein in the antecedent part (Rules 1 to 21), 11 rules with two human proteins in the antecedent part (Rules 22 to 32), and 2 rules with three human proteins in the antecedent part (Rules 33 and 34). As the min sup value is set to 40%, each rule (the associated frequent itemset) has support>40%.

More specifically, there are 22 rules with support 41.2%, 7 rules with support 47.1%, 4 rules with support 52.9% and 1 rule with support 58.8%. Similarly, as min conf=70%, all rules have confidence>70%. There are 5 rules with confidence 75%, 4 rules with confidence 77.8%, 1 rule with confidence 80%, 15 rules with confidence 85.7%, 1 rule with confidence 87.5%, and 8 rules with confidence 100%.

The rules with one human protein in the antecedent part signify that among all the HIV-1 proteins with which the human protein in the antecedent interacts, the human protein in the consequent is found to interact with c% of those viral proteins, where c is the confidence of the rule. For example, the Rule 1 implies that the human protein ACTG1 interacts with 75% of the viral proteins with which the human protein ACTB interacts. Hence it can be inferred that the human protein ACTG1 also interacts with the remaining 25% viral proteins and the confidence of this inference is 75%. The rules with 2 or 3 human proteins in the antecedent can be interpreted similarly.

For example, Rule 22 can be interpreted as follows: the human protein PRKCD interacts with 85.7% of the viral proteins with which both PRKCB1 and PRKCQ interact. Similarly Rule 33 says that the human protein PRKCD interacts with 85.7% of the HIV-1 proteins with which all of PRKCB1, PRKCQ and PRKCA interact.

C. Predicting New Interactions  In this section, we have reported the new interactions predicted from the rules generated (as shown in Table I) using the method discussed in Section III-C. It should be noted that the new interactions can be predicted only from the rules with confidence less than 100%. Hence for predicting new interactions, the rules with 100% confidence are discarded first. Thereafter, the method discussed in Section III-C is applied to predict new HIV-1?human PPIs. Table II reports these new predicted interactions between viral and human proteins. The confidence of the prediction is also given for each predicted interaction. Note that a particular interaction may be predicted from more than one rule, but each of these rules may have different confidence. While reporting the confidence of such predicted interactions, the maximum confidence among the confidences of the predicting rules has been reported. The interaction between a viral protein V P and human protein HP has been denoted by V P ? HP .

The predicted interactions have been grouped by confidence level. There are unique 22 newly predicted interactions that are  16-18 December 2010, IIT Kharagpur, India  ID:32 346    TABLE I GENERATED RULES FOR min sup=40% AND min conf=75%  Rules Antecedent Consequent Support Confidence Rule 1 ACTB ACTG1 47.1 75 Rule 2 ACTB PRKCA 47.1 87.5 Rule 3 PRKCA ACTB 52.9 77.8 Rule 4 PRKCB1 PRKCD 41.2 85.7 Rule 5 PRKCQ PRKCD 41.2 85.7 Rule 6 PRKCB1 PRKCE 41.2 85.7 Rule 7 PRKCQ PRKCE 41.2 85.7 Rule 8 MAPK3 MAPK1 47.1 100 Rule 9 MAPK1 MAPK3 58.8 80 Rule 10 MAPK3 PRKCA 47.1 75 Rule 11 IFNG MAPK1 47.1 75 Rule 12 IFNG PRKCA 47.1 75 Rule 13 CD4 CASP3 41.2 85.7 Rule 14 CASP3 CD4 41.2 85.7 Rule 15 PRKCB1 PRKCQ 41.2 100 Rule 16 PRKCQ PRKCB1 41.2 100 Rule 17 PRKCB1 PRKCA 41.2 100 Rule 18 PRKCA PRKCB1 52.9 77.8 Rule 19 PRKCQ PRKCA 41.2 100 Rule 20 PRKCA PRKCQ 52.9 77.8 Rule 21 PRKCA MAPK1 52.9 77.8 Rule 22 PRKCB1, PRKCQ PRKCD 41.2 85.7 Rule 23 PRKCB1, PRKCA PRKCD 41.2 85.7 Rule 24 PRKCQ, PRKCA PRKCD 41.2 85.7 Rule 25 PRKCB1, PRKCQ PRKCE 41.2 85.7 Rule 26 PRKCB1, PRKCA PRKCE 41.2 85.7 Rule 27 PRKCQ, PRKCA PRKCE 41.2 85.7 Rule 28 MAPK3, MAPK1 PRKCA 47.1 75 Rule 29 MAPK1, PRKCA MAPK3 41.2 85.7 Rule 30 PRKCB1, PRKCQ PRKCA 41.2 100 Rule 31 PRKCB1, PRKCA PRKCQ 41.2 100 Rule 32 PRKCQ, PRKCA PRKCB1 41.2 100 Rule 33 PRKCB1, PRKCQ, PRKCA PRKCD 41.2 85.7 Rule 34 PRKCB1, PRKCQ, PRKCA PRKCE 41.2 85.7  shown in Table II. Among them, 7 have 75% confidence, 8 have 77.8% confidence, 1 has 80% confidence, 5 have 85.7% confidence, and 1 has 87.5% confidence.

Unlike classification problem, it is difficult to validate the predicted interactions computationally. Therefore, for valida- tion, we have taken the interactions predicted in [17] (denoted as ?novel? interactions) and compared our predictions with that. Out of 22 predicted interactions, 14 have been found to be predicted in [17] as well. These 14 predicted interactions have been shown in bold faces in Table II. The remaining 8 interactions need more attention and should be studied experimentally to validate the computational predictions.



V. CONCLUSIONS  This article poses the problem of predicting new HIV-1? human protein interactions based on the existing PPI database as an association rule mining problem. This is motivated due to the lack of experimentally validated negative samples needed to pose the problem as a classification problem. The well- known Apriori algorithm has been used to mine the frequent itemsets from the HIV-1?human PPI database organized as a binary matrix. The association rules of high confidence have been generated and a novel method for predicting new interactions from the generated rules has been proposed. The  proposed method has been shown to predict new viral-host interactions with certain confidence levels. It is needed to validate the predicted interactions both computationally and biologically. The authors are working in these directions.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  A part of the work was carried out when Dr. U. Maulik was visiting German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Ger- many with Humboldt Fellowship for Experienced Researchers.

