Kongu Engineering College, Perundurai, Erode, T.N.,India.27 ? 29 December,2010.pp.410-414.

Abstract?  Data mining techniques are used for the knowledge discovery process under the large data set environment.

Clustering techniques are used to group up the relevant data sets.

Hierarchical and partitioned clustering techniques are used for the clustering process. The clustering process is the complex task with high process time. The pattern extraction scheme is applied to find frequent item sets. Association rule mining techniques are applied to carry out the pattern extraction process. The pattern extraction scheme and the clustering scheme are integrated in the simultaneous pattern extraction and clustering scheme. The clustering process is improved with pattern comparison and transaction transfer process. The simultaneous clustering scheme is implemented to analyze the cancer patient diagnosis reports.

The cluster accuracy is represented using the fitness values. The system is enhanced with the K-means clustering algorithm. Fuzzy clustering used to optimize the system.

Keywords? Datamining, document clustering, pattern cluster, pattern discovery, data cluster

I. INTRODUCTION The clustering techniques are used to group up the  transactional data based on the similarity values. The pattern extraction methods are used to find out similar patterns in the transactional data sets. The system integrates the pattern extraction scheme with clustering method to improve the clustering process. The simultaneous clustering scheme uses the pattern and the transactional data for the clustering process. The partitioned clustering technique is enhanced in the system. The association rule mining technique and clustering technique are integrated in the simultaneous clustering process. The system is designed with the following objectives.

To maintain the patient diagnosis reports for the breast cancer patients  To correct the noisy records using the data preprocessing techniques  To apply the query based techniques to remove the redundant records  To use the aggregation based method to correct incomplete records  To use apriori algorithm to extract association rules To extract patterns from the frequent item set values  To perform data clustering using the transactional data sets  To prepare pattern clusters using the patterns To carry out simultaneous clustering using the  patterns and transactional data To find the fitness values for cluster accuracy  measurement process To conduct a study to find out the performance  of the clustering algorithms The simultaneous pattern extraction and clustering system  is designed to perform the pattern extraction and clustering process in an integrated manner. The system reduces the process time for clustering process. Generally the data clustering and pattern extraction operations carried out separately. This system integrates the pattern extraction and clustering tasks to reduce the process time and improve the clustering accuracy. The breast cancer data sets are used in the system. The symptoms and their severity levels are maintained in the database. The symptom and their indication values are maintained as quantitative values.

The system uses the association rule mining techniques and clustering techniques for the mining process. The pattern extraction is done using the association rule mining techniques. The frequent items are extracted using the priory algorithm. The patterns are extracted from the frequent items.

The clustering algorithm is used to group up the transaction data based on similarity value. The system performs three type of clustering tasks. They are data clustering, pattern clustering and simultaneous clustering operations[8]. The data clustering tasks group the transaction data in the actual data set. The pattern clustering tasks is applied on the extracted patterns.

The K-means clustering algorithm is used for the data clustering and pattern clustering process.

The simultaneous clustering mechanism uses the patterns and actual transactional data. The K-means clustering algorithm is modified to perform the simultaneous clustering process. The K-means clustering algorithm uses the same data        values for the similarity computation and cluster assignment process. The modified K-means clustering algorithm uses the pattern information for the distance measure process and uses the associated transactional data for cluster assignment process. In this case minimum patterns are used for the comparison process but a set of transactional data are assigned into the corresponding cluster. The system also performs a preprocessing task to clean the data set from noisy records.

The simultaneous clustering process uses more memory than data clustering technique. The process time is very low. The clustering accuracy is very high.

The simultaneous pattern extraction and clustering technique is developed to improve the performance of the clustering system. The system uses the breast cancer patient diagnosis report for the clustering process. The pattern extraction and clustering process are integrated in the system.



II.  MOTIVATION The major contributions of this work are summarized as follows:  1. A simultaneous pattern and data clustering method is proposed. It is able to cluster not only patterns but also their associated data while making the relation between patterns and data explicit.

2. Since the effectiveness of a pattern-clustering algorithm is highly dependent on the distance measures between patterns and their associated data, in this work, several distance measures are proposed, and their relations to existing common measures are studied. The key component of the proposed approach is the simultaneous pattern and data clustering. If it is able to cluster patterns and the associated data effectively in the divide phase, the subsequent analysis of individual clusters in the conquer phase will become simpler and more effective and can be conducted using existing well- studied techniques.



III. RELATED WORK Data mining, the extraction of hidden predictive  information from large databases, is a powerful new technology with great potential to help companies focus on the most important information in their data warehouses1. Data mining tools predict future trends and behaviors, allowing businesses to make proactive, knowledge-driven decisions.

Data warehousing represents an ideal vision of maintaining a central repository of all organizational data. Centralization of data is needed to maximize user access and analysis [2],[10].

Information is the backbone of any organization. An effective information system should be able to provide information to those in need of it at any time that they need 3.

Data is an externally valuable corporate resource affecting productivity, profitability and strategic decisions, and any community of each importance requires planning from top management.  Data mining has attracted a great deal of attention due to the wide availability of huge amounts of data  and the imminent need for turning such data into useful information [4].

Association rule mining for multiple database management Systems have continually evolved from primitive file systems to sophisticated and powerful relational and object oriented models5. Present day systems implement various constructs in the form of query optimizing modules, event-condition action rules to trigger events of interest and other mechanisms that have made their use imperative in most applications.

Clustering is the process of grouping the data into clusters with high intra-cluster similarity and low inter-cluster similarity. There are several clustering techniques: partitioning methods, hierarchical methods, density-based methods, grid- based methods, and model based methods. The basic difference between classification and clustering is that classification is a supervised learning method, which assumes predefined class labels, while clustering is an   unsupervised learning method that does not assume any knowledge of classes.

The effectiveness of clustering mainly depends on the distance measure, several distance measures between patterns and their associated data are proposed. Once pattern clusters and their associated data clusters are obtained, each of them can be further analyzed individually[6]. This paper presents a knowledge exploratory method using multiple pattern associations to conjecture structural and functional characteristics of bimolecular[7].  To uncover qualitative and quantitative patterns in a data set is a challenging task for research in the area of machine learning and data analysis.

Due to the complexity of real-world data, high-order patterns or event associations, in addition to first-order class-dependent relationships, have to be acquired[8].   An attribute clustering method which is able to group genes based on their interdependence so as to mine meaningful patterns from the gene expression data. a small pool of selected genes can be used to build classifiers with very high classification rate.

From the pool, gene expressions of different categories can be identified [9].



IV. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION  A. Pattern Discovery Concepts Today, a primary challenge in data mining and knowledge discovery is to discover interesting relationships from data sets.

The basic idea of PD can be illustrated by a simple XOR problem with three binary variables: A, B and C for C = A * B. Suppose that the user want to check whether or not the occurrence of a compound event |A = T,B = T;C = F) is just a random happening. Given the observed frequency of occurrences o of the compound event, if the system could estimate its expected frequency of occurrences e under the random assumption, the system knows whether it is random or not by checking the difference (o ? e). Such a notion is formulated as a hypothesis test. A compound event is called an event association pattern or simply a pattern if the    Fuzzy pattern cluster scheme for Breast cancer datasets     difference (o ? e) is significant enough to indicate that the compound event is not a random happening.

PD is a useful tool for categorical data analysis. First, the patterns produced are easy to understand for those who are not data mining experts. Hence, it is widely used in business and commercial applications. Second, it assumes very little knowledge about the data from the users. Thus, when the users do not have any a priori knowledge about a data set, PD is a good starting point for exploring the data set. Third, correlation relationship often reveals useful information hidden in the data. Finally, the discovered patterns provide an alternative perspective for further analysis of the data.

B. Pattern Analysis Using the discovered patterns, the user can conduct  inference such as classification. The classifiers built from association patterns are known as associative classifiers, which may be easier to understand than conventional classifiers. In addition, there is no systematic and objective way of combining fragments of information from individual patterns to produce a more generalized form of information.

Since there are too many patterns, it is difficult to use them to further explore or analyze the data. Hence, the problem of too many patterns limits the usefulness of PD.

In non-fuzzy or hard clustering, data is divided into crisp clusters, where each data point belongs to exactly one cluster.

In fuzzy clustering, the data points can belong to more than one cluster, and associated with each of the points are membership grades which indicate the degree to which the data points belong to the different clusters.

C. S  The FCM algorithm is one of the most widely used fuzzy  clustering algorithms. This technique was originally introduced by Professor Jim Bezdek in 1981. The FCM algorithm attempts to partition a finite collection of elements X={ , , ... , } into a collection of c fuzzy clusters with respect to some given criterion.

Given a finite set of data, the algorithm returns a list of c cluster centers V, such that V = , i =1, 2, ... , c and a partition matrix U such that U = , i =1, ..., c, j =1,..., n  where is a numerical value in [0, 1] that tells the degree to which the element belongs to the i-th cluster.

The following is a linguistic description of the FCM algorithm, which is implemented Fuzzy Logic. The functions that implement this algorithm can be found in the Clustering.m file.

Step 1: Select the number of clusters c (2 c n), exponential weight  (1 < < ), initial partition matrix , and the termination criterion  . Also, set the iteration index l to 0.

Step 2: Calculate the fuzzy cluster centers { | i=1, 2, ..., c} by using  .

Step 3: Calculate the new partition matrix by using { | i=1, 2, ..., c}.

Step 4: Calculate the new partition matrix = || - || =  | - |. If > , then set l = l + 1 and go to step 2. If , then stop.



V. MATERIALS AND METHODS A.. Pattern- Induced Data Clusters  A simultaneous pattern and data clustering method is presented. To begin with, the notion of pattern induced data clusters is introduced. It relates patterns to the set of compound events containing them and makes the relation between patterns and their associated data explicit.

It can be used as a natural threshold for stopping a clustering algorithm. It is not possible cluster two rules / patterns together if dR > 1, since there is more dissimilarity than similarity between the two patterns. It has been reported that distance / similarity measures based on matched samples such as dT and dG work fairly well for clustering similar patterns, because they go back to the samples where the patterns / rules share or differ. However, these measures do not give special consideration to the attributes where the patterns share or differ. As an illustration, consider the two  pairs of patterns ji s j  s i xx ,  & ri, rj and rij bear the same  meaning. Ci (Cj) is the number of attributes matched by  ( )ji sjsi xx ,    but not by ( )ij sisj xx , . That is, ci = |si \ sj|, and cj = |sj \ si|. Let cij be the number of attributes matched by both  is ix  and j  s jx . That is, cij = |si ? sj|.

The system measures dT, dG, and dR will yield the same value for the two pairs of patterns, since ri = rp, rj = rq and rij = rpq. However, it seems more reasonable to consider  that i s ix and j  s jx are more similar, since they share certain  attributes (cij>0).

This motivates to introduce the notion of pattern  induced data cluster I(i) in (6), which consider both the sets of matched samples and matched attributes. In Figure.1, the four highlighted rectangles are actually the induced data clusters I(i), I(j), I(p), and I(q). In addition, when two data clusters, say, I(i) and I(j) are merged, the compound events in the upper right and bottom left corner regions are added into the merged data cluster. The corner regions are defined by I (i/j) = {xs ? x | x ? m(i) / m(j), s = sj/si}  -----(6) I (j/i) = {xs ? x | x ? m(j) / m(i), s = si/sj}  -----(7) where Wr and Wc are the weights of the samples and the attributes, respectively. If wr + wc = 1, dRC > =1, again, can be used as a natural stopping criterion. The number of matched samples and matched attributes are equally important.   wr and wc are set to 0.5.

One problem of the measure dRC is that it does not consider the variation within the data clusters. The measures, including dT , dG, dR, and dRC, discussed so far are designed to measure the distance among patterns.

This allows us to analyze pattern clusters via their associated data clusters by using standard analysis techniques.

A simple technique is introduced for effectively analyzing individual data clusters. On the other hand, knowing which set of patterns induces which data clusters allows users to use understandable patterns for interpreting and validating the data clusters. In view of this, it is desirable to simultaneously cluster patterns and data and keep their relations explicit. To obtain good data clusters the variations could be minimized.

A common measure of variation/uncertainty for discrete- valued data is entropy:  )(log)()( s Ix  s xPxPIH s ?  ?  =  ?.(8)  where P(xs) is the joint probability distribution of xs, and I is the abbreviation of I(1 . . . n).

However, the number of parameters in estimating P(xs) is exponential. For |s| binary variables, it is of order O(2|s|).Hence, it is impractical to estimate P(xs) directly due to the lack of data in most real-world problems. To reduce the number of parameters, this approach adopts a naive assumption that the attributes are conditionally independent, given a data cluster. The joint entropy is then estimated by summing up the entropy of individual attributes:  ? ? ? ??  = si Ixxx  ii ss  i  xPxPIH ,  )(log)()( --- (9)  where s is the attribute index set of I. P(xi)is the probability of xi in I and is estimated by  I o  xP ixi =)(   ------- (10)  where ix  o is the observed frequency of xi in I, and |I| is the number of  compound  events in I.

The computation complexity of H(I) in (9) is O(|I| |S|). Since |s| is usually much smaller than |I|, the complexity could be O(|I|), which is linear. All constant clusters have zero entropy.

For example H(I(1)) = 0, and H(I(2)) = 0. When merging patterns x1{3,4,5,6} and x2{7,8,9,10}, the entropy of the merged data cluster increases indicating that the variation / uncertainty of the clusters increases due to the merging. Note that H(I) is bounded as 0 ? H(I) = ?i?s log mi, where mi is the number of possible values of the ith attribute. Hence, H(I) in (9) can be normalized:  ( ) ? ?  = si  im IHIH  log )(  ---------- (11)   Methods can be applied to analyze the data clusters  without being heavily affected by noises and the unrelated data. Essentially, once patterns and data are clustered by pattern clustering in the divide phase, any data analysis techniques can be applied to the obtained data clusters in the conquer phase. A simple technique is proposed for discovering subgroups in a data cluster. To measure the interdependence between attributes, a Normalized Mutual  Information measure Rij between attributes Xi and Xj was introduced.

),( ),(  jiH jiMIRij =   ?(12)  where MI(i,j) and HI(i,j) are the mutual information and joint entropy between Xi and Xj, respectively. The higher the dependence between attributes Xi and Xj, the higher the MI|i| value. Rij = 1 if Xi and Xj are totally dependent, and Rij = 0 if they are independent. One advantage of using the normalized mutual information is that a hypothesis test can be formulated to test for the significance of attribute dependence. Two attributes Xi and Xj are interdependent if  ),(2 )1)(1(2  jiHI mm  R jIij ??  > ?  ?.(13)  Otherwise, the two attributes are false.

To account for the overall significant dependence of an attribute Xi with other attributes, the system introduces the sum of normalized interdependency redundancy SR|I| of Xi with other attributes Xj for all j, j ? i, in the data cluster.

Thus, ?  ?  = *),(,  )( Njij  ijRiSR           ???. (14)  where N* is the set of (i,j) attribute pairs satisfying (13). Based on SR(i), a simple recursive algorithm is proposed. A sub- grouping tree is used to discover subgroups in a data.



VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS The patient diagnosis data is collected from the UCI  machine learning data sets. It is benchmark data set used for data mining researches. The data set has noisy records.

Redundant and incomplete records are referred as noisy records. Patient identification number and diagnosis details for 10 symptoms of breast cancer are maintained for each patient.

The data set is provided in University of California Irvin research institute. The data sets are presented in text format.

Fitness point Analysis-Data cluster Vs Fuzzy cluster      Transactions  Fi tn  es s  po in  t ( %  )  Fuzzy cluster  Data cluster  Fuzzy cluster  69 70 75 83 82  Data cluster  38 42 40 45 43  200 400 600 800 1000     Fig 1. Fitness Point Analysis -3 Clusters    Fuzzy pattern cluster scheme for Breast cancer datasets

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTION Data clustering is a time consuming and complex task for  large data sets. Transaction relationship is used in the pattern extraction and clustering process. This concept is applied in the simultaneous pattern extraction and clustering scheme.

The pattern extraction is carried out and clustering process is performed with the pattern relationship. Distance measure is the important issue in the clustering process. In the integrated system the distance measure is estimated for the patterns and transaction transfer process is done with the actual transactions.

The simultaneous pattern extraction and clustering system is implemented to cluster the breast cancer patient diagnosis records. The symptom details are collected from the UCI machine-learning repository. The system is tested with 1000 records in the interval of 200 records. The redundant records removal and incomplete records are correction operations are performed in the preprocessing stage. Pattern extraction, data clustering, pattern clustering and simultaneous clustering operations are tested. The pattern extraction is performed with different support and confidence level.

The system uses three metrics to analyze the performance of the simultaneous clustering scheme. They are memory, process time and fitness point. The simultaneous clustering scheme requires 40% more memory than the data- clustering scheme. The process time reduced 25% than the data clustering process. The fitness values show that the simultaneous clustering scheme produces more accurate clustering than data clustering scheme.

The simultaneous pattern extraction and clustering system is implemented to perform the clustering process in minimum time period. The association rule mining techniques are used to fetch frequent items. The pattern extraction process uses the frequent items. The data-clustering scheme is integrated with the pattern clustering mechanism. The system uses the patient diagnosis report for the testing process. The system can be enhanced with the following features: The integrated pattern extraction and clustering scheme is implemented with the K-Means clustering algorithm. The genetic algorithm can be used in the future development. The system can be enhanced to perform the pattern extraction and clustering process on image data collections. The current system is implemented as a stand-alone application. The simultaneous clustering algorithm can be updated for distributed environment.

