_____________________________________________________________  This research work was supported by Shanghai college outstanding

Abstract?At present, detecting customs declaration frauds with limited examination of imported goods by available scarce resources is posing considerable challenge to the customs authorities world over. Data mining techniques  could be utilized to sift through the past data and develop predictive model for examination of limited goods with higher probability of fraud. This paper puts forward a classification data mining method based on association rules. Following the analysis on customs inspection results and the exploration on the regularity of ?non-consistent between customs declaration and actual commodity? by use of data mining based on association rules, a classification model is established to predict the risk of commodity through customs clearance and form the reference for customs inspection and monitoring.

Keywords-Customs; Risk management; Classification model; Association rules; Data mining

I.  INTRODUCTION Customs is a main body of a country to administrate the  action of importing or exporting commodity and to collect the duties. The customs clearance efficiency and service level not only affects the trade efficiency, but also creates great impact on the investment, employment and even regional economic development. With the rapid development of world economy and international trade, various tariffs and non-tariff measures have been removed gradually and business volume of customs has increased substantially. The rapid growth in business volume makes customs be short of administration resources. On the other hand, with the rapid development of economy and trade, the domestic and international markets are integrated gradually and advanced modern enterprise management concept puts forward higher requirements on the efficiency of customs clearance, i.e.

modern enterprises request customs to speed up customs clearance. Along with the rapid development of customs information technology, customs database has collected vast customs revenue management data especially since H2000 customs administration system and risk management platform are implemented in all customs of China. These business data cover all the fields in customs administration and present the features of large amount, rapid growth and complex relationship. Hence, data mining at in-depth level on vast customs business data are required to identify the  regularity and mode based on the analysis of customs administration demands and port status analysis to help customs staffs make better use of the potential knowledge to put forward monitoring proposals according to actual conditions.

This paper puts forward a classification data mining method based on association rules. Following the analysis on historical customs inspection results, the regularity of ?inconsistent between customs declaration and actual commodity? is explored by use of data mining based on association rules, and a classification model is established on the basis of these regularities to predict the risks of commodity clearance and form the reference for customs inspection and monitoring and improve the seizure rate in the end. The contents of this paper are as follows: The second section is the related study on current risk analysis techniques for customs. The third section introduces how to establish a classification model based on association rules including association rules mining and classification model generated by association rules. In the fourth section, the experiment and the related analysis are made. The fifth section is the summary.



II. RELATED WORK Association rules and classification are two important  data mining technology[2]. The target of classification is to establish an accurate classification model to predict the unknown category of data objectives. Presently, many classification methods are based on heuristic search technology, such as the Decision Tree algorithm, Bayes network and some statistical methods. Association rules are proposed by Agrawal etc[1]. And association rule mining is to identify the data to meet pre-specified frequency and accuracy threshold. The major problem of data mining by use of association rules is how to select the interesting rule particularly from the rules found. Association rule mining has no pre-determined objectives, and if the frequency threshold is too low, so there may be many frequent itemsets resulting in many rules. For these rules, some are unremarkable for users but some are very interesting.

For data mining, the search for association rules is just the start work. The collection of association rules does not present single overall model for systematic ratiocination, but a series of simple models, which can be used to form global   DOI 10.1109/ISDEA.2010.276         data model. The association rules and classification model can be combined to form a list of decision-making or rule collection and create a new classification based on association rules so as to solve classification problems.

Classification model using simple rules can be traced back to 1R (or OneR) [8]classification algorithm appeared in 1993.

In 1998, Bing Liu presented classification algorithm based on association(CBA)[4]. This algorithm uses Apriori algorithm to generate classification rules. Afterwards, Han J presented CMAR algorithm using the deformation of FP- growth method, which is more effective with scalability and higher average accuracy compared with classification algorithm based on association (CBA) presented by Bing Liu.

These methods are to integrate data mining and classification to achieve higher classification accuracy than that of traditional classification methods (e.g. C4.5).



III. CLASSIFICATION MODEL BASED ON ASSOCIATION RULES  A. Basic Concepts The establishment of classification model based on  association rules includes categorical association rules mining and the processing on the obtained association rules by using a heuristic method in order to structure the classification. Category Association Rules (CARs) are a kind of special rule collection, and the rule consequents are fixed the attribute of classifications.

Let I={i1,i2,?,im} be a collection of items, one of the elements ij(j=1,2,?,m) is denoted as (item), C={c1,c2,?,ck} is a collection of classification labels, a category of association rules is a containing type in form of X?Y (X?I, Y?C). D is denoted as the collection of transaction T, which is an itemset of Ij that contains ck (Ij?I, ck?C). Set X is a collection of middle items in I, if X?T, then transaction T contains X.

The support of association rules X?Y in the transaction database D is a ratio between the transactions containing X and Y and all transactions, and the probability of X and Y occurred simultaneously in all transactions to be support(X?Y). That is support(X?Y)=|{T: X?Y?T, T?D }| /|D|. The confidence of association rules X?Y in the transaction set is the percentage of D containing X and Y transactions. This is taken to be conditional probability, P(Y|X), to be confidence(X?Y). That is confidence (X?Y) = P(Y|X).

Rules of support and confidence are two interest measures. They are found in the rules to reflect the usefulness and certainty. Association rules are considered interesting if they satisfy the minimum support thresholds and minimum confidence thresholds. The rule to satisfy the minimum support thresholds and minimum confidence thresholds simultaneously is called a strong rule. Given a transaction set D, our goal is to generate all of the CARs sets according to the given minimum support minsup and minimum confidence threshold minconf and then build a classifier according to the generated CARs.

B. Generated Association Rules Association rule mining process is generally divided into  two sub-issues: a) find all the support is greater than the minimum support of itemsets, these itemsets are called frequent itemsets; b) use step 1 to find the rules of frequent itemsets to generate the desired value. The first step, "frequent itemsets production" is the most critical.

1) Frequent Itemset Mining Apriori is one of most influential algorithm for mining  frequent itemsets for association rules. Apriori employs an iterative approach known as a level-wise search, where k- itemssets are used to explore (k+1)-itemsets. First, the set of frequent 1-itemsets is found. This set is denoted L1, then L1 is used to find L2, the set pf frequent 2-itemsets, which is used to find L3, and so on, until no more frequent k-itemsets can be found. The finding of each Lk requires one full scan of the database.

Apriori is one of most influential algorithm for mining frequent itemsets for association rules. Apriori employs an iterative approach known as a level-wise search, where k- itemssets are used to explore (k+1)-itemsets. First, the set of frequent 1-itemsets is found. This set is denoted L1, then L1 is used to find L2, the set of frequent 2-itemsets, which is used to find L3, and so on, until no more frequent k-itemsets can be found. The finding of each Lk requires one full scan of the database.

To improve the efficiency of the level-wise generation of frequent itemsets, an important property called the Apriori property. Any non-frequent (k-1)-itemsets can not be subset of frequent k-itemsets to determine whether the candidate item in set is frequent. If the (k-1)- subset of a candidate k- itemsets is not in frequent (k-1)-itemsets, then the candidate subset can not be frequent, which can be deleted from k- itemsets. Therefore, the number of candidate itemsets can be reduced in a certain degree, the search space on frequent itemsets can be deducted effectively, and the number of support calculation can be decreased.

A two-step iterative process from frequent (k-1)-itemsets to frequent k-itemsets is followed, consisting of join and prune actions:  a) The join step: a set of candidate k-itemsets is generated by joining (k-1)-itemsets with itself.

b) The prune step: frequent k- itemsets is determined by candidate k-itemsets by use of Apriori property to compress candidate k-itemsets.

2) Association Rules Generated by Frequent Itemset Frequent itemsets to satisfy the minimum confidence  constitute the collection of CARs based on association rules, and the generated algorithm is as follows: / * association rules algorithm generated by frequent itemset * / Input: all the frequent itemsets and minimum confidence minconf.

Output: categorical association rules, CARs begin  (1)  The category attribute values are denoted as the consequent of the rules (category attribute: Y), and the         combination of remaining attribute values as the antecedent of the rules to generate the rules.

(2) Calculate the confidence of every rule confidence (X?Y) =P(Y|X)=support(X?Y)/ support(X),  Among them, support(X?Y) is the transactions record number of X?Y itemset, and support(X) is the transactions record number of X,  If confidence(X?Y)>minconf is to retain the rule, or delete the rule.

(3) If a certain set of association rule is lack in categorical association rules (CARs), the minimum confidence minconf is adjusted automatically to the maximum in this rule, and then execute 2 again.

end  C. Classification Model Establishment Based on Association Rules In order to build the best classifier on the obtained rules,  the rules with the least errors are selected. Set R to be all of the generated rules and D is the training data. The basic purpose of the algorithm is to select some rules of relatively higher priority from R to replace D. Hereby, priority here is defined as: two rules are given, ri and rj as well as ri rj (i.e.

the priority of ri is higher than that of rj), must satisfy one of the following conditions:  ? if the confidence of ri is higher than that of rj  ? the confidence of ri and rj is the same, but the support of ri is higher than that of rj  ? both the confidence and support of ri and rj are the same, but the generated time of ri is earlier that that of (namely the former of rules has fewer attributes)  The form of classifier is established as follows: < r1, r2,?, rn, default_class>, Hereby, rj?R, if b>a, then ra rb, default_class is the default classification. In the classification of an unknown transaction, the first to meet this rule can be classified into this transaction. If not, this transaction is classified as the default classification.

The establishment of classifier consists of three steps as follows:  ? Arrange all the rules of R in descending order according to relations. This ensures that the classifier can select the rules with the highest priority.

? For each rule r?R, the cases can be selected in D to replace r (i.e. they satisfy the former attribute values of rule r). If r can be classified correctly at least, r can replace a transaction, and it is a potential rule of the classifier. For those transactions that can be classified, they are moved away from D. For the transactions in D that can not be replaced by rule r, default_class is marked. And then the quantity of transactions classified by the classifier and default classification category. Hereby, default_class refers to the classification attributed by the majority of transactions remained in D.

? Abandon the rules not to improve the classifier accuracy, and the classifier is made up of the remained non-abandoned rules and default_class together.



IV. CLASSIFICATION MODEL APPLIED IN CUSTOMS RISK MANAGEMENT  A. Classification Model Establishment of Customs Inspection The classification model based on association rules is  established by use of information of customs inspection to be applied in customs risk management. The customs inspection information table records the customs inspection results, such as correct declaration, weight discrepancies, incompatible production countries, different consignors and consignees, incorrect commodity classification, incompatible declaration prices etc. According to comprehensive analysis of these inspection results, the enterprise type, commodity classification, trade partner, commodity flow and trading method etc. mentioned in customs declaration form are selected as risk factors to extract sample data for mining, as shown in figure 1.

Figure 1.  Customs Inspection Data Table  The mining method based on association rules can adjust the minimum support and minimum confidence adaptively, resulting in an optimal classification model. The establishment of classification model based on association rules mainly consists of the following steps:  (1) Preprocessing the data.

(2) Generate all categories of association rules.

(3) Build a classifier based on the generated  association rules.

(4) Classify the unknown classification data by use of  the classifier.

Because transaction data to be unsuitable for data mining  is stored in the database, these original data is required for preprocessing. For the continuous attribute values, they are required to be discrete such as the attribute of ?price?. In order to facilitate the classification mining based on association rules to generate meaningful association rules, these original data is also required for attribute specification.

For example, ten conditions with unusual inspection result attribute occur in the experiment data. Only several records for some types is not conducive to the discovery of association rules, which requires attribute specification on inspection result types. All the inspection results with         abnormal attribute values are classified into ?inconsistent declaration?.

B. Explemetion and result analysis A certain customs inspection data in total 26613 samples  is adopted in this experiment, in which 2500 samples are identified to be inconsistent between customs declaration and actual commodity and the seized rate reaches 9.4%. The ultimate purpose of experiment is to establish a classification model based on association rules for real-time monitoring on classification in customs inspection. The experiment includes classification mining based on association rules mining and the establishment of classification model.

Figure 2.  Association Rules Collection Generated by Apriori Algorithm  Classification mining based on association rules can generate different sets of rules collection according to different minimum support and minimum confidence. And the selection of minimum support and minimum confidence depends on classification accuracy of established classification model. The results of mining association rules by use of Apriori algorithm in the support of 2% and the confidence of 20% are shown in Figure 2. Due to the customs seized rate less than 10%, the support and confidence can not be set too high. Otherwise, those small models may be ignored.

TABLE I.  CLASSIFICATION TESTING BY USE OF DIFFERENT ASSOCIATION RULES  minsup minconf the number  of rules the classification  accuracy 1% 60% 76 81.3% 1% 36% 115 75.2% 1% 20% 128 67.8% 2% 60% 34 82.6% 2% 36% 45 77.1% 2% 20% 68 69.2%   To make the classification accuracy achieve optimal  threshold, this problem can be resolved through repeated tests. Different support and confidence is required to be set  and the generated model is required to be tested and evaluated whether accord with the required accuracy or not.

Association rules generated in different support and confidence are shown in TABLE I, which also includes the classification testing results by use of these association rules.

It can be seen from TABLE I that the accuracy of classification model generated by use of classification method based on association rules is not very high. The main reason is that the experimental data is lack of some important attributes, for instance, ?commodity type? is also an important risk factor, but this attribute is not identified in the experimental data. On the other hand, it is related to the characteristics of customs inspection data collection. Due to the customs seized rate of ?abnormal seizure? less than 10%, it is difficult to establish classification model based on this set of data.



V. CONCLUSION This paper puts forward a classification data mining  method based on association rules. Following the analysis on historical customs inspection results, deep patterns and regularities are explored by use of data mining based on association rules, and a classification model is established on the basis of these regularities to predict the risks of commodity clearance. The customs supervision can use the potential knowledge to put forward the customs inspection and monitoring proposals to local conditions. The experiment in this paper shows that this classification model based on association rules can achieve good results in customs inspection data collection.

