Study on Monitoring Data Mining of Steam Turbine Based on Interactive Association Rules

Abstract?Real-time monitoring data mining has been a necessary means of improving operational efficiency, economic safety and fault detection of power plant. Based on the data mining arithmetic of interactive association rules and taken full advantage of the association characteristics of real-time test-spot data during the power steam turbine run, the principle of mining quantificational association rule in parameters is put forward among the real-time monitor data of steam turbine. Through analyzing the practical run results of a certain steam turbine with the data mining method based on the interactive rule, it shows that it can supervise stream turbine run and condition monitoring, and afford model reference and decision-making supporting for the fault diagnose and condition-based maintenance.

Keywords-Interactive association rule? Data mining? Steam turbine.



I. INTRODUCTION Currently, to meet the requirement of continuum  production, the DCS system is used for real-time monitoring and control on the key equipments of the thermal generator set in many power plants, so the large numbers of generator sets run data are stored in the DCS system. These data have recorded the power plant equipments operation condition and operation process, and included many useful hidden information, therefore they should be analyzed. The traditional data analysis method is only carried out the simple data classification and statistic, and it is difficult to reveal the internal relationships and law among the data. However, if the current popular data mining technology is applied, the change rule in the data can be captured conveniently, quickly and effectively, which used to improve power plant run efficiency, and control efficiency and safety of the generator sets, so the data mining technology will be necessary in performance analysis for the power plant equipments.

Data mining is an advanced method for data exploring and relevant model establishment based on a large amount of data, and to explore interactive association rules in the transaction database is an important research topic in the data mining domain, the main ideas of association rule mining is to extract transaction database and specify minimum support and credibility degree, and then use the produced frequent item sets to mine the required association rules. However in the traditional data mining technology, there is little mining algorithms involving the users interactively, therefore based on the interactive data mining association rules algorithm, it  will contact the actual situation of the power plant, confirm the monitor spots, the monitor period etc. and set the fit improvement degree by users to get the expected quantitative association rules in the related parameters and find the hidden rules to guide the steam turbine of power plant run and condition monitoring.



II. OPERATION STRUCTURE OF THE DATA MINING FOR STEAM TURBINE  During the optimal operation of thermal power units, there is complex interactive rule among the steam turbine run performance index, the operation level of the users, and units loaded operation and operation parameters. Namely, the relationship in the historical plentiful data is that of every data item of the steam turbine, therefore the association relationship can be reflected quantificationally by the data mining, and fed back to the actual operation of the steam turbine.

Based on the power plant practice and the data mining algorithm of interactive association rules, it has analyzed the real-time data acquired by DCS system to get the expected quantitative association rules, which can guide the steam turbine of power plant run and condition monitoring [1]. The structure sketch of the data mining for the steam turbine is shown in Fig.1.

Here, the data source for mining is supplied by the real-time flow database of eDNA, the technical personnel may extract the data of the monitoring spots from the historical data to pre-treat, eliminate the redundant attributes and blank data and false data, then the waiting analyzed database is obtained, after the analysis and abstraction for it with the data mining technology, the aim association rules of the current database can be gotten, which guides the operators to adjust the corresponding controllable parameters of the machinery to optimize the operation.

Fig.1 Data mining Sketch of steam turbine  S team turbine  operation  DCS control system  eDNA database  Extract & transform of data  Data mining disposal  Association rules   DOI 10.1109/CDCIEM.2011.423

III. DATAMINING ALGORITHM OF INTERACTIVE ASSOCIATION RULE  The mining algorithm of association rule is firstly put forward by R. Agrawl etc. in 1994. It extracts the relations from the recordings or objects of the database and reveals the positional dependent relationship, which aims at searching the relations or relativity hidden in the large numbers of data items.

The advantage for the algorithm is that: it can integrate the user?s customized information to the mining process and introduce constraints with a friendly way to mine the information more accorded with the user?s demands, and improve the mining efficiency.

A. Aim Database & Data Pre-treat It should be familiar with the background knowledge of  object first for data mining process and the definite aim of data mining, and confirm the relevant data according to the target of data mining, and then takes it as aim database to complete the data pre-treat, mining and rule estimate. During the operation of power plant steam turbine units, the heat consumption rate can comprehensively reflect the steam turbine operation efficiency, so taking the heat consumption rate as steam turbine operational evaluation criteria, the run parameters closely linked to it, can be analyzed. In this way, the aim data need analysis is confirmed, and then pre-treated.

Data mining pretreatment is to carry out the legal examination for the gathered aim data, eliminate the redundant attributes, blank and false data, and smooth the noise data combined computer with manual checking mode by the translation and compression treatment for all data, and finally eliminate the wrong estimation caused by the difference in the varied character parameters.

The heat consumption rate of steam turbine can be defined by the ratio of the heat acquired from outside to the output power, it can be described by the formula (1):  ( ) (1)j j  M h HR  Pe ?  ? ?  Here, Mj is mass flux, kg/h; ?hj is enthalpy drop, kJ/kg; Pe is the output power of generator end, namely active power, kW; HR is the heat consumption rate of steam turbine, kJ/ (kW. h).

According to the literature [2], it indicates that: when the inlet steam flux is definite, the relation between the output power of steam turbine Pe and the heat consumption rate HR is matched to the second-order curve, so the change of the output power Pe can be expressed the varied trend of the heat consumption rate HR and reflected the thermal economic performance. Therefore, in this paper, it has carried out the data mining for the historical data of the main controllable parameters of the steam turbine to determine the rules in the controllable parameters with the aim of the active power Pe.

B. Algorithm & Flow  To suppose ? ?1 2, , nI i i i? ? is the set composed by n items, and give a transaction database D, in which each transaction T with the only one identifier is the set of some items in set I,  namely, T I? . Taken A as an item set, when A T? , it shows that transaction T contains set A.

For two arbitrary item set A and B, when A I? , B I? and A B ? ?? , the rule is expressed as follows:  ; %, %A B S S C C? ? ?  It shows that if A comes into existence B too, and in the formulation, the credibility C and support degree S are given.

The credibility C is the measurement of the accuracy for association rules, namely the probability of B appearance under A emergence. The support degree S is the measurement of the importance for association rules, i.e. the probability of A and B appearance at the same time. They can be expressed in ?2? respectively [3]:   1 1  ( ) ( ) ( ) /  ( ) ( ) / ( ) ( ) / ( ) (2)  n  i n m  i j  S A B S A B A B D  C A B S A B S A A B A  ?  ? ?  ?  ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ?  ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ? Here, ( )A? is the subjection function of A, and D indicates the transaction sum of the database.

In fact, people are only interested in the association rules which can satisfy certain support and credibility. The so-called strong rule is able to meet a certain requests (such as larger support and credibility) [4]-[6], so, in order to find meaningful association rules, it should be given two threshold values-the minimum support Smin and credibility Cmin.

The Smin and Cmin can?t guarantee the association rules to meet the user's requirements completely [7], and other related parameters need be introduced to restrict the rules, therefore, based on actual process for mining, it has selected the improvement degree to support the strong rules and abandon the meaningless rules. The improvement degree denotes the user?s expectation for the rules. It is the user?s comprehensive consideration to excavate the knowledge originality, usability and interpretability. It can be said as the formula (3):  ? ? ? ? 1 ( )( ) (3)  1 ( ) 1 ( ) S BI A B  S A S A B ?  ? ? ? ? ? ?  The realization flow of the interaction association rule as follows:  1) In the historical database D, according to the minimum support Smin, it can get the one-dimensional frequent set 1-item set L1 from the candidate sets C1.

2)To combine the item sets one another in different dimensions (L1(Ai) ? L2(Aj)), it can get two-dimensional candidate set 2 - item set C2.

3)To scan each item in C2, the credibility degree C of the each item is obtained from the database, compared with the     minimum credibility Cmin, it can pick the two-dimensional frequent set L2 out.

4)According to item amount in the database, to repeat the step 3), the k- dimensional frequent sets may be gotten.

The frequent sets gathered are the result produced by the algorithm. To calculate the improvement degree for each frequent item, the association rules which meets the user?s requirements, can be acquired finally.

The flow chart for the interactive association rules is shown as Fig.2.

Based on the mining algorithm above, the constraint form of the association rules can be gained with the description in Fig.3.



IV. REALIZATION OF DATAMINING The operation data from a certain power plant in GanSu  province on April 26, 2009, is introduced in the paper. It has extracted the time interval 14:55-22:00 with the sampling frequency 2-3 seconds/times by the real-time monitoring sampling modes, and then 7595 groups data have obtained. In  the data analyzing process, the main controllable parameters which influence steam turbine units, have extracted and pre- treated, seeing as Fig.4.

Here, the parameters include: the rotate speed of steam turbine n, active power Pe, the initial steam pressure PIni, the governing stage pressure PGov, and the intermediate pressure steam-cylinder exhaust press PIP. To concretely analyze it, the paper takes the rotate speed design value 3000r/min of steam turbine as an example.

It disposes each controllable parameter data with the curve- fitting method, and produces the data table for analyzing the association rules. Given minimum support degree Smin =0.35 and minimum credibility Cmin =0.6, and ascertained the important controllable parameters by the interactive association rule mining, the active power recording data under the steam turbine steady run condition, is used for the object of association rules mining. The association rules are described when the expected degree selected is 1.8, 2.1 and 1.73 respectively under 100%, 80% and 60% load working condition.

In above expressions, the unit of the PIP, PIni, PGov and Pe is Pa, MPa,MPa andMW in turn.

The association rules above indicates the optimal changed interval association among the intermediate pressure steam- cylinder exhaust press, initial steam pressure and governing stage pressure under 100%, 80% and 60% load working  Given Smin& Cmin  Fig.2 The realization flow of interactive association rules  Historical data source D  k=1  To calculate credibility Ck?1 by set Ck  To scan D and calculate credibility Ck, compared with Cmin to get frequent sets  Lk  Ck?1<Cmin  To produce the rules by frequent set Lk  output  Combined Lk one another to get the candidate set Ck?1  One-dimensional candidate set C1 by support Smin  To select improvement degree  Fig.4 Curve sketch of the main controllable parameters  ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??  ?? ?? ?? ??  695.25,700.98 16.07,16.26 10.23,10.50  260, 263 ;  569.7,597.7 15.43,15.50 8.34,8.72  200, 210 ;  450.34,492.58 14.22,15.22 5.94, 6.64  150,160  IP  IP  IP  P P P  Pe  P P P  Pe  P P P  Pe  ? ? ?  ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  Ini Gov  Ini Gov  Ini Gov  Controllable parameters of the heat consumption rate HR of steam turbine  Association rules  Active power Pe Intermediate pressure steam-cylinder  exhaust press PEx Initial steam pressure PIn  Governing stage pressure PGov ??  To adjust HR value by the combination of optimal range of every parameter, namely, { PIP + PIni + PGov +? }? Pe  Fig.3 The constraint form of steam turbine sets     conditions. Taken the arithmetical average of all data as the optimal value of each parameter in the optimal interval, the object value for each parameter is gotten by the data mining, sees as Tab.1.

Through the analysis, the object value, confirmed by data mining, has the same change trend relation with the design value acquired by the traditional heat account method, and meets the operation requirement under every working condition of steam turbine units. In the steam turbines of power plants, compared the data mining technology of association rules with the traditional method, it has the following merits:  (1)Data mining technology may mine different measuring parameters of steam turbine sets. It is simple, available and maneuverable, and easily accepted by operators.

(2)With the technology of the association rules data mining, it can more flexibly control the data mining process, and the disposed object value is intuitive and convenient to the on-site operation instruction, and improves the run efficiency.



V. CONCLUSIONS According to the operation characteristics of the steam  turbine in power plant, and based on the association attributes in every parameter and the association rules data mining algorithm, it has put forward the interactive association rules to mine the parameters and confirm the quantitative relation.

Through analyzing the actual run data of the steam turbine in the 250MW generator sets, aimed at the run economic  performance of the turbine and confirmed the required object data, the association rules for every parameter under every working condition is obtained, which can provide the reference for actual run and optimize the generator sets operation process.

In order to find the satisfied association rules for the decision-maker, it must continuously adjust the minimum support and credibility degree to mine the useful association rules, which is a dynamic interactive process, so it needs the manager?s plentiful experience and more effective mining algorithm to realize the maintenance of the association rules.

