Computer Data Mining and Exploration   of The Audit Practice

Abstract? Today?s fast developing modern information technology not only has a great impact on the social and economic activities but also more importantly has caused the innovation of modern auditing technology. In order to keep pace with the development of modern audit, the author adopted the method of computer data mining to analyze large quantities of data collected from the audited corporate, and work out the feature of the business data collected from the corporate. This could reveal whether the audited corporate has any anomalies, which in turn will help to reduce the quality problems and audit risks in modern audit.

Keywords-Data Mining; Database; Audit Risk; Audit Practice

I.  INTRODUCTION  The development of modern information technology had a great effect on audit: paperless transaction resulted in the audit trail difficult to find; online data processing led to the change of the focus in internal control evaluation; a variety of transactions led to changes of the modern audit methods. In addition, with the economic development and popularization of information technology, many enterprises start using artificial intelligence (AI) to assist management, such as enterprise resource planning system (ERP) and supply chain management system (SCM), etc. These systems enable enterprises to create data warehouse which contain a large number of accounting data and even operational management data about all aspects.

Auditor's duty is obtain useful audit evidence from the mass data in data warehouse, and made the appropriate audit opinion.

In the environment, use the data mining technology can help us to achieve the original data query and analysis and find the characteristics of suspicious data, so as to improve the audit efficiency and reduce the audit risk, maximum guarantee audit quality.



II. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF COMPUTER AUDIT DATA MINING As the new technologies developed in the information age, data mining can be used to extract implicit, unknown and potentially useful information from the database, help auditors for data analysis in order to find suspicious data. It is not only the technological breakthrough of modern audit techniques and  method, but also the result of developed of the information techniques to using data mining technology to the mass data of audited to conduct audit   ?  Data mining audit is a new type of audit evidence  collection methods that is suitable for modern information technology environment. Introducing audit data mining techniques into the audit system has a huge advantage. It is a leap in the development of modern auditing technology.

? Data mining technology allows traditional audit methods could not be done. There are vast deposits of financial or non financial electronic data in each of the audited entity?s computer system and even in their network. Traditional audit approach The traditional audit approach becomes helpless when faced with the complex situations and huge amounts of data. Data mining technology becomes the only way to complete audit work.

? Data mining as an advanced information technology to help auditors in a very short period of time the audit selected a representative sample, to a certain extent, reduce audit risk. Only a comprehensive audit can eliminate the random audit risk. But sophisticated data mining software makes it possible to review the overall data of the audited entity  ? Data mining technology can also be used to find the illegal invasion data of the information system, confirm the security of information systems and expand the boundaried of audit. With the rapid development of data mining technology, a systematic analysis of large numbers of log data of the audited entity can help to create an automated intrusion detection system.

? Data mining Audit can provide comprehensive, multi- mode audit information to improve the quality of audit decision-making.



III. THE PRIMARY STEPS IN COMPUTER DATA MINING AUDIT APPROACH         Data mining is not only a highly abstraction and generalization for  the intrinsic and nature of the data, but also on data from perceptual to rational knowledge of the distillation. Auditors using data mining technology starting from the original data, in-depth look into the details of the evidence which, through in- depth analysis of the data to find that data and its regulation in order to find anomalies. Computer data mining audit approach includes the following primary steps:     Figure 1.  The steps of Computer data mining audit approach  The first is to receive the data logging unit being audited to gather system information, and require departments to submit a unified format for the audit data. Entry point for the use of data mining is to obtain large amounts of data, audit data mining is the starting point of work is a work of its most important.

Secondly, the data obtained by the implementation of audit data preprocessing, such work including format conversion, digital cleaning, refining and so on. Obtained from the audited entity may be chaotic raw data, there are some interference terms, is not conducive to the auditors from that problem.

Therefore, the auditor must convert the raw data format of the audit staff can identify and eliminate interference with the project so that data can truly reflect the real business of the law to control the accuracy of data mining.

Third, using of appropriate data mining algorithms to process the audit data and found that the hidden law of the data and look for abnormal data.  Due to different industry background, business features and data models, the data mining methods adopted by auditors vary: association rules, sequential pattern mining techniques, access to data law audited units to detect the presence of exception.

Fourth, statistics, statistical results based on an audit professional judgments. Statistical information, including business size, unusual data, identify invalid illegal, the business process, which is the core of the audit work, but also data mining technology used in the audit of the major achievements of the expression.

Finally, the auditors conducted the audit should be systematic analysis of the data processing (OLAP) and trend forecast. Auditors according to the data analysis can further be audited to determine the problems and issues that improve the methods and ideas.



IV. THE MAJOR TECHNIQUES IN COMPUTER DATA MINING AUDIT APPROACH  Auditors, after an analysis of the data obtained, will gain the audit traces, identify and eliminate doubt. It is in fact a process of identifying and testing of the real problem. Use data mining techniques to obtain the model and law within the data which could help us to discover the unusual circumstances of business operations. In the audit work, we could   use outliers mining, outlier detection, anomaly detection, clustering analysis, association rule discovery, classification and prediction, sequential pattern mining and other methods to obtain valid audit evidence.

A. Outlier Mining Outlier data is the data that was significant departure from  other data, does not meet the general pattern or law. Outlier mining, including outlier detection and analysis, which task is excavated the data model that existed in the small part of the abnormal data from a large number of complex data, and the model was novel and significantly different from the Conventional data models. That is, given a collection contains N data points or objects, K is the expected number of outliers, the process find the K is deferent, abnormal or inconsistencies objects from remain data. It is contains valuable information for the analysis of outliers than general data1 . Such as: in reviewing the sales revenue, auditors  can analyze the basic law of sales operations based on past experience, and then use outlier mining techniques to analyze sales data for the current year, they can take the abnormal data isolated from the normal course of business and review in detail, so that  savings in audit resources significantly. In addition, the auditors also use this technology to extract business model and management behavior from sales data audited automatically, to reduce participation of person, reduce the burden of audit staff, and improve the accuracy of the audit conclusions.

B. Outlier Detection Outlier detection is an important data mining technique  used to find data objects in the data source was significantly different from the others. In the data source be audited, often contain a certain number of outliers, they are different or inconsistent from the other parts of the audited data source; such data are often named as isolated points (Out-lier)2. For the outlier is wholly different in the data sources, people suspect that these data are not random error, but from completely different mechanisms. Because the suspicious data often showed outlier data, that may be caused by measurement or execution error, or the result of inherent variability. Therefore, by detecting and removing outliers in the data source can achieve the purpose of data cleaning, so as to to improve data quality; using outlier detection algorithms to deal with the relevant audit data, to achieve the audit objectives. Such as: in the review of production cost of enterprise, we can use the   1 Han J, Kamber M. Data mining: concepts and techniques[M]. San Fransisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2000, 381-389 2 Hawkins D M. Identification of Outliers[M]. London: Chapman and Hall, 1998   The data collected by the audited  entity  Pretreatm ent of raw audit data  Using data mining  techniques to discover  rules  Auditor?s analysis,  recommen dations  Auditor?s professional judgments,  to find abnormal      outlier detection technology, to find the cost data that may be have a big difference from the index data of production, then, the auditors confirm the data on the basis of the specific production to detect fraud.

C. Anomaly Detection Anomaly detection is one of the important research content  in data mining area, which is mining the data object with abnormal behavior from a large number data of audit. In many cases, these data contains more information auditor interested compared to the normal patterns of behavior data object. It is widely used in network-based intrusion detection, information systems auditing risk control areas. When data mining methods used for anomaly detection, that is generated simple and accurate detection model automatically from a large number of log data, extract the actual pattern of normal behavior or network intrusion, Removed the manual analysis and coding to invasion, at the same time removed the infer in feature selection of normal mode, so as to reduce the risk of audit subjective judgments. Such as: when group company began to review the marketing cost of the sales outlets across the country, they could build the model according to the relationship between market size and cost, and then use the anomaly detection technology, individually sort the cost of marketing in database system, find the suspicious information to confirm and review in detail, make sure the truth and reliable of marketing data.

D. Cluster Analysis There are many kind of data analysis, cluster analysis based  intrusion detection systems are often build a detection model, that is give an abstract model about normal behavior or abnormal behavior patterns from audit data, and use it as the basis for intrusion detection. By clustering the similar data of audit to the classified category, auditor can divided the audit data into several group according different data standard feature. For example, in the phase of testing internal control of the procurement operation, in order to test the execution of control in procurement, the cluster analysis technology can be used for all the procurement operations in audited unit according similar future. By this time, auditor can chose different cluster analysis methods according the specific procurement of audited unit, such as such as: system clustering method, decomposition method, addition method, the dynamic clustering method, fuzzy clustering method, operation method, etc3. In this way, the auditor need not individual identification of large procurement operations, but a review in accordance with certain types of analysis, that will improve the efficiency of audit work greatly. In audit practice, auditors will classify the audited data into different categories based on past experience, and then use classification methods to analysis the audit data collection, mining classification rules of each category; after that, re-classification the collection by these classification rules, so as to obtain better results. Auditors can use both methods cycle until get satisfactory results. When auditors choose different method, they can confirm it in line with the specific type of business of the audited units and the   3 S. Kantabutra, AL Couch. Parallel k-means clustering algorithm on Nows [J].

NECTEC Technical Journal, 2003, 1 (1) :243-247  information of data future .This method can be used widely in audit of Group Company?s inventory, or audit of expenses of operation.

E. Association Rules Association rules founding was by analyzing the data to  find information that will appear at the same time in different event. The association rules in data mining is one of the most useful information, association rules mining for large data sets found significant association or correlation between the contacts4, which focuses on data links between different areas, has broad application prospects. Audit Information System can extract the association characteristics of data using association rules, can analyze the correlation between security events effectively and improve the accuracy of audit risk rate of alarm events. Such as, when the auditor to recognize the cost of audited unit, they should to face the large number materials, labor, cost data, and have difficult to deal with. And now, they can use association rule techniques, to find that the correlation between cost of the project and the production quantity, then determines its yield according to inventory data and related inventory out of the warehouse, storage records, and according to the relevance of association rules, they can determine whether or not the cost is a reasonable. Auditors can introduce the weighted association into the work, which can solve the problem of time effect of the data5 in partly.

F. Classification and Prediction In the audit information system, classification is separate of  the different type of data according to certain rules and characteristics, divided into different categories, and using the appropriate audit strategy in line with different categories.

Classification includes two events: normal and abnormal.

Auditors can pre-processing the system audit data and network data, and then classify it. In the audit, the first step is number for all the systems, and then takes the appropriate length sequence to analysis and mining. Audit activities must take into account the time limit and the audit risk of audit results, which is consistent with the consideration of cost-effective on economic activity. Appropriately of looking for statistical data to take part in the classification of analysis in the process of data pre-processing, this can help improve accuracy and speed of mining analysis. For network data, the better way is to mining the time frequency data and associated data, and then get classification use of the statistical data usually used classification methods are decision tree classification method, statistical methods, rough set methods 6 , and the use of classification can reduce the workload greatly, and at the same time reduce audit risk. In the audit practice, in recent years a class known as associative classification of the new   4 Yang Ming, Yang Ping, Jigen Lin, et al. A kind of default rules based on association rule mining algorithm [J]. Southeast University (Natural Science), 2003, 33 (6) :689-693 5 Shen Xiangdong, Zhang Chao. Weighted association rules based intrusion detection. Modern electronic technology, 2004 (18) 6 Zou Hong, Chen Hai, Wei Jingting. Intrusion detection based on data mining technology. Computer and Modernization, 2005 (4)       classification method arises in the research7, by integrated the association rule mining and classification, auditor can detect anomalies and key risk points of audit data.

G. Sequential Pattern Sequential patterns are an important way in data mining.

There are very closed relation between audit discover and associated sequences .the difference is in sequential founding the related objects is based on time to distinguish the difference8. Sequence mining analysis of audit data, that is, from the audit database of the network event to dig out the frequent sequential patterns about the normal behavior and abnormal behavior of the audited entity, and found the relation between the audit data before and after the (causal) link. For example: auditors can use sequential pattern to find record by mining the production database of audit unit ,and may be they can find some regular sequence of events model in database of enterprise production. This frequently occurred at a time picking business sequential pattern that can help auditors? select valid statistical characteristics in construction the abnormal detection model of materials business in the production. And then use it to find abnormal situation. Using sequential patterns, the auditor can mining the distribution and regulation of the audited entity based on a lot of historical data, and from which they can confirm the reasonableness and authenticity of accounting books, to achieve the audit objectives. The practice of data mining is still ongoing development and improvement, with the rapid development of information technology, auditing practice is also on going with each passing day, there will be updates of data mining technology used in the audit practice.



V. THE AUDIT PRACTICE OF  COMPUTER DATA MINING AUDIT APPROACH   To carry out the computer data mining audit approach, the  financial statements of prior years need to be selected from the database of the audited entity first. Then auditors will find the regular pattern of the data. In this way, they can determine the level of organizational risk on the basis of organizational and operational nature of the audited entity, industry conditions.

Auditors should also carry out a chronological analysis of the historical data and economic indicators to assess the organization's acceptable level of audit risk. On this basis, the auditor, determine the audit scope and audit focus. Second, in substantive testing of the business of the audited unit, a series of data mining should be carried on  the mass of data in the database, and found abnormal collection of audit evidence provided for further information.

Data mining technology in the audit of the specific applications as follows:   7 Liu B, Hsu W, Ma Y. Integrating classification and association rule mining[A]. In KDD?98[C]?New York, Aug, 1998 8 Lin Mingyen, Lee Suhyin. Interactive sequence discovery by incremental mining[J]. Information Sciences, 2004, 165 (3,4) : 187-205  A. Assessment of The Audited Entity Assessment of the audited entity understands of the audited  entity and its environment, including internal controls.

That is including use classification technology of data mining to extract the previous year?s annual financial statement from the database of audited unit, selection and application of accounting policies, business objectives, strategies and related business risks and other factors. According to the analysis of the financial statements, corporate nature and industry conditions, through classification and prediction methods to determine the business operation risk is higher or lower.

Finally, use time series model to analysis the historical data and economic indicators, to assess the acceptable level of business risk. In addition, correlation analysis can be used to determine the various types of risk incentives of audited unit, such as financial ratios, business grade, internal control, and so on.

Then take the risk incentives as a standard, determine the scope of the audit risk level, make focus of audit work.

B. Compliance Testing of Internal Control Systems Many data mining software can be used for risk assessment  of internal control testing. In other countries, many companies have adopted COSO control model, some companies and organizations design the specific audit package, such as Deloitte's Visual Assurance, International internal Association?s COSO software, Patrol 400 and so on. Such audit software can be used for continuous monitoring of business activities, like the automatic audit. Auditor use these software can help to find in the high-risk transactions, preparation of report on exceptions, investigate fraud, and track trends. These packages can also be used to record the traces of computer use, test a number of control elements, such as password useless and confidential documents browser, and so on. Other data mining software like Risk Ranking Advisor, can be used under various Windows operating systems, provide the comprehensive technological methods for the audit planning, implementation and management ,help auditors assess the internal controls ,to detect defects in the control areas , so as to determine cause of abnormal data occur in information system.

In order to test the implementation of the control link, auditors can use clustering technology to group accounting transactions by similar characteristics,. For example, in the control link of approving the purchase of materials, we through  cluster analysis we can find :  ? Transactions approval by non-authorized (Agency in Excess of Authority)  ? Transactions changes by authorized person. For example, a profit center business there is always a sign required authorization of A, but there are few transactions authorized by B.

? Transaction is always approved by the provisions authorized  ? Transaction does not belong to any cluster, i.e. trading outliers (outlier), and so on.

C.  Substantive Testing Audit Typically, it is impossible to have a comprehensive review  of the overall object being audited; the best choice is use sampling methods to select the appropriate part of the overall as a sample and for this review. If the samples have not include the significant errors but the error exist in fact, the auditors may be make the wrong conclusions. such objective limitations of sample audit is the important reason for audit risk produce.

As an advanced information technology, Data Mining can help auditors in short time selected a representative sample which not obvious, and enhancing the representativeness of the sample, to some extent , it can help to reduce the audit risk, and improve audit efficiency significantly. It can be said, the sample selection is the most important area for data mining application, and also one of the most areas of greatest potential  During the substantive test, auditors can use a variety of data mining technology to the audited entity's financial data and operating data for cluster analysis or association rules analysis, to find the problem or anomalies. for example, in substantive testing of accounts payable the use of the Apriority association rules algorithm class to separate with the similar characteristics accounting data, we can find the fact like below:  ? The amount of accounts payable is significantly different from the other months  ? Duplication of the accounts payable account;  ? The amount of accounts payable are different from the general ledger, subsidiary ledgers  ? The accounts payable before and after the balance sheet, to confirm the existence of the phenomenon of concealed liabilities;  ? Repeated non-conventional accounts payable transactions, such as the end of each month to buy the same amount of fixed assets, and so on.

Through the Correlation analysis of data mining, the auditors still take professional judgments on samples selected for further examination. But, the sample itself is not the overall, sampling audit risk still exists. In order to complete eliminate this risk, only to conduct a comprehensive audit.

With the development and improvement of data mining technology, the audited entity?s data warehouse matures, the auditing technology is also exploring innovative, more and more data mining techniques are applied to the study of audit risk, in order to improve audit quality continuously , and reduce audit risk, to achieve the audit value maximization.



VI. THE LIMITATION OF COMPUTER DATA MINING   In audit area, Data Mining Application is still in the initial stage,its application has some limitations. Firstly, the problem lie in the data quality of audited entity. Application of data mining depends on the quality of the data itself, if the data itself is false, or incorrect, in particular, the data to be audited  have been modified by audited unit, and then we can not draw any meaningful conclusions even use the advanced data mining technologies.

Secondly, there requires some investment to use data mining technology. The application of data mining will cause some cost related the cost of data maintenance, data analysis and personnel training costs, especially the cost of some software. So we need to consider certain cost factors when using data mining techniques to collect evidence.

Third, there have a higher quality requirement to staff. Such as, in misuse detection, the rule of intrusion detection need provided by security expert hand-coding, in anomaly detection, the audit data future and testing is based on the experience and knowledge of model creator. So the use of data mining technology must go through professional training. They can not only identify a variety of mining techniques, but also the correct selection and application and, finally, to analyze and evaluate the results.

Nevertheless, It have been shown great advantages compare to traditional auditing methods to use of data mining technology in audit and control vast amounts of data audit risk,.

And its broad prospects can not be ignored.

