

Feasibility Study of the Quantitative Corrections for the Brain Input Function Imaging from the  Carotid Artery Images by an Ultra-high Resolution Dedicated Brain PET  Yuxuan Zhang, Member, IEEE, Hongdi Li, Member, IEEE, Hossain Baghaei, Member, IEEE, Shitao Liu, Member, IEEE, Rocio Ramirez, Shaohui An, Chao Wang, Member, IEEE, Wai-Hoi Wong, Member, IEEE  Abstract ? Quantitative PET imaging usually requires the arterial blood sampling, which is an invasive measure and may introduce risks or other complications to patients. People are trying several non-invasive methods to obtain the quantitative tracer concentrations by measuring the reconstructed intensity of the artery in the PET imaging. However, all these methods have certain limitations for brain study due to difficulties such as the partial-volume-effect (PVE), no artery big enough in the FOV for obtaining the required data as the cardiology does, etc. Here we carried a simulation study on the feasibility of the quantitative corrections by carotid artery with an ultra-high resolution, large axial FOV dedicated brain PET system. This brain PET has a detector ring diameter of 48 cm and the axial length of 25 cm.

The large AFOV ensures that the camera could cover both the brain and the carotid artery region at the same time for dynamic study. The detectors are the 1.4x1.4x11 mm3 LYSO crystals. The conservative estimation of the resolution is 1.7 to 2.0 mm, which is about 1/3 of the human carotid artery inner diameter. To evaluate the PVE on the quantitative results, a head-and-neck phantom with different-sized sources (5 to 20 mm) embedded that has a 6:1 concentration ratio between source and background is studied using Monte Carlo simulations. As the comparison, a whole-body PET?Siemens TruePoint scanner is also studied. From the reconstructed source intensities we find that with this brain PET, the recovery coefficient could reach 76% to 86% for a typical human carotid artery size source with the diameter between 5 to 7 mm; with the TruePoint scanner the recovery coefficient is only 34% to 54%. The simulation shows that with the help of an ultra-high resolution large axial FOV brain PET camera, the goal of non-invasive quantitative corrections by carotid artery for the brain dynamic study is feasible, which is not possible with other commercial whole-body scanners current available.



I. INTRODUCTION Tracer kinetic imaging [1] with PET camera will give more information than the static imaging in the study of diseases, evaluation of the therapies, and gain insight into molecular processes of the different organs. However, the tradition dynamic study with PET usually requires the drawing of the   This work is supported in part by: NIH-R01EB004840-01A2 Grant, NIH- R01EB001038-08A1 Grant.

Yuxuan Zhang, Hongdi Li, Hossain Baghaei, Shitao Liu, Rocio Ramirez, Shaohui An, Chao Wang and Wai-Hoi Wong are with the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, 77030, USA (e-mail: yuxuan.zhang@mdanderson.org).

arterial blood sample, which is an invasive measure and may introduce risks or complications to patients and is not practical for routine clinic practices. Therefore other non-invasive methods for quantitative estimation of the tracer concentration of the artery blood are proposed and tested, which are to obtain the tracer concentrations by measuring the intensity of the artery in the reconstructed PET images. Those methods have been proved effective in cardiology study but not for the brain imaging due to several difficulties such as the partial- volume effect (PVE), no large volume of arterial blood inside the FOV for acquiring the accurate intensity data as that in the cardiology imaging [2], etc.

The human carotid artery diameter ranges roughly from 5 to 7 mm [3]. If a PET camera has a resolution high enough, e.g. less than 1/3 of the artery diameter around 2 mm, then we might get an accurate quantitative estimation of the tracer concentration with little errors arise from the PVE. In order to achieve a dynamic imaging, the axial FOV of this camera must be long enough to cover the whole brain and the carotid artery at the same time.



II. METHODS AND EXPERIMENTS  A. Ultra-high resolution brain PET Here we propose a dedicated brain PET camera with ultra- high resolution and large axial FOV for brain dynamic study.

The detector system consists of LYSO block detectors which have a crystal pixel dimension of 1.4?1.4?11 mm3. The block dimension is 19?19?11 mm3 with 13?13 crystal array. The technology to build such block detectors is matured in our lab [4,5], and the ultra-high resolution 1.4-mm crystal size is already achieved with our PMT-Quadrant-Sharing detector design using low cost PMT [6,7]. The inner diameter of the detector ring is about 48 cm and the axial length is 25 cm.

According to the well know equation for PET resolution estimation:  2 2 21.25 ( / 2) (0.0022 ) _resol d D Positron range= + + this PET system will have a resolution of 1.7 mm.

Considering other errors such as 1-mm block effect and/or mechanical error in the ring assembly, the resolution will degrade to around 2.0 mm. The 1.7 to 2.0 mm resolution is       higher than any commercial wholebody PET scanners and is crucial for the dedicated brain PET study.

B. Monte Carlo study with head-and-neck phantom To study the feasibility of this brain PET system for quantitative corrections in brain input function imaging from carotid artery images, Monte Carlo simulations of a head-and- neck phantom with different-sized cylinder sources are performed.

A cylinder phantom with the diameter of 18 cm is used to simulate the human head and neck. Eight cylindrical sources with the diameters from 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15 to 20 mm are used to simulate the different arteries. The distance from the sources to the FOV center is 40 mm. The materials for these cylinders and the phantom are set as water. The concentrations in all sources have the same value, and the ratio of the concentration between the sources and the background is 6:1.

The schematic drawing of the geometry of the phantom and the sources is shown in Fig. 1.

The simulations are performed by GATE [8] and the raw  data is processed with the subtraction of the scattered and random events and the attenuation correction. 3D sinograms are binned with the binning sizes around 1/3 of the crystal size.

The sinograms are reconstructed by 3DRP program with STIR [9] software package. The cut-off frequency for the 3DRP filter is set as 0.4fc.

As the comparison, one commercial whole-body PET system, Biograph TruePoint scanner from Siemens [10], is also modeled and simulated using the same phantom. The detector size of the TruePoint is 4?4?20 mm3, the detector ring diameter is about 83 cm with the maximum axial FOV 21.6 cm.



III.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS With the Monte Carlo simulations, total 3.35?108 coincidence events are generated from the brain PET and 7.8?107 events generated for the TruePoint scanner. The bin size is 0.5 mm and 1.33 mm respectively.

The reconstructed images from the two systems are shown in Fig. 2. The image on the left came from the brain PET and the image on the right came from the TruePoint scanner. Fig.

3 shows the enlarged region of the hot rod sources. From the images, it's obvious that the PVE of the TruePoint image is more severe due to the low resolution; the reconstruction from the brain PET appears much better.

For quantitative study, the recovery coefficients (RC) are  extracted from the reconstructed images. The source intensities are the peak values in a small ROI covers each reconstructed source. The background intensities are obtained in either cases and used for the calibration of the source intensities. The calibrated source intensities are then normalized by the true value (assigned in the simulations), which are the RC for each sources. The curves of the RC as the function of the source diameters from two PET systems are shown in Fig. 4.

4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1.0  1.1  Siemens TruePoint scanner Brain PET scanner    R ec  ov er  y C  oe ffi  ci en  t  Source diameter (mm)   Fig. 4.  The recovery coefficient as the function of source diameter from two PET scanners.

Fig. 3.  Enlarged hot-rods reconstruction shows the Partial-Volume- Effect from two cameras: brain PET (top) and TruePoint (bottom).

Fig. 2.  Reconstructed images. Left: from the ultra-resolution brain PET; Right: from the TruePoint scanner.

20.0  15.0  10.0 9.0  8.0  7.0  6.0  Unit: mm  5.0   Fig. 1.  The dimensions and locations of the hot rod sources inside the head-and-neck phantom.

The RC curves clear shows the difference between the ultra-high resolution brain PET and the whole-body PET.

When the source dimension is as large as 10 to 15 mm, the brain PET could restore the value up to 100%, while the Truepoint scanner could only restore the value from 75% to 85%. For the sources with realistic diameter similar to the common carotid artery of human which is 5 to 7 mm, the PVE is more severe for the TruePoint scanner and the RC vary from 34% to 54%. As the comparison, the brain PET could achieve the RC from 76% to 86%.



IV. CONCLUSION A dedicated ultra-high resolution brain PET can provide high resolution images compare to the conventional wholebody PET, and better quantitative accuracy with less Partial- Volume-Effect. The high recovery coefficient with the brain PET from this carotid artery study demonstrate the feasibility on the brain input function imaging from the carotid artery images, which is not possible with other commercial available wholebody PET such as the Siemens TruePoint PET scanner due to the large PVE and the low recovery coefficient.

REFERENCE  [1] Evan D. Moris, Christopher J. Endres, Kathleen C. Schmidt, et al.,  "Kinetic modeling in Positron Emission Tomography," in Chapter 23, Emission Tomography ? the Fundamentals of PET and SPECT, edited by Miles N. Wernick and John N. Aarsvold, Elsevier Academic Press, UK, 2004.

[2] Arno P. van der Weerdt, Lucas J. Klein, Ronald Boellaard, Cees A. Visser, Frans C. Visser and Adriaan A. Lammertsma, "Image- Derived Input Functions for Determination of MRGlu in Cardiac 18F-FDG PET Scans," J. Nucl. Med., 42(11), 1622 ? 1629, 2001.

[3] Jaroslaw Krejza, Michal Arkuszewski, Scott E. Kasner, John Weigele, Andrzej Ustymowicz, Robert W. Hurst, Brett L.

Cucchiara  and Steven R. Messe, "Carotid Artery Diameter in Men and Women and the Relation to Body and Neck Size", Stroke, 37, 1103 ? 1105, 2006.

[ 4 ] Rocio A. Ramirez, Shitao Liu, Jiguo Liu, Yuxuan Zhang, Soonseok Kim, Hossain Baghaei, Hongdi Li, Yu Wang and Wai- Hoi Wong, "High-resolution L(Y)SO Detectors Using PMT- Quadrant-Sharing for Human and Animal PET Cameras," IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 55(3), 862 ? 869, 2008.

[ 5 ] Rocio A. Ramirez, Yuxuan Zhang, Shitao Liu, Hongdi Li, Hossain Baghaei, Shaohui An, Chao Wang, Meei-Ling Jan and Wai-Hoi Wong, "A Lower-cost High-resolution LYSO Detector Development for Positron Emission Mammography (PEM)," IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 56(5), 2621 ? 2627, 2009.

[ 6 ] W.-H. Wong, "Positron camera detector design with cross- coupled scintillators and quadrant sharing photomultipliers," IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 40, 962?966, 1993.

[7] W.-H. Wong, J. Uribe, K. Hicks, M. Zambelli, "A 2-dimensional detector decoding study on BGO arrays with quadrant sharing photomultipliers," IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 41, 1453?1457, 1994.

[8] S. Jan, G. Santin, D. Strul, S. Staelens, K. Assie, and D. Autret, et al., "GATE: A simulation toolkit for PET and SPECT," Phys.

Med. Biol., 49, 4543 ? 4561, 2004.

[9] Kris Thielemans, Sanida Mustafovic, Charalampos Tsoumpas, "STIR: Software for Tomographic Image Reconstruction:     Release 2", IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Conference Record, 2175 ? 2176, 2006.

[10] Jakoby, B.W., Bercier, Y., Watson, C.C., Rappoport, V., Young, J., Bendriem, B., Townsend, D.W., "Physical Performance and Clinical Workflow of a new LSO HI-REZ PET/CT Scanner," IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Conference Record, 3130 ? 3134, 2006.

