Application of Data Mining on Students? Quality  Evaluation

Abstract?University students? management, especially the decision-making part, is very heavy and complicated, so it may have subjectivity without scientific measures. As key index in students? integrated development evaluation, students? quality evaluation achievements play an important role in their development. This thesis puts forward decision support system for students? comprehensive evaluation based on data mining. On the basis of brief introduction to definition of data mining technique, mining process and routine method, this thesis emphasizes study on application of association rules analytic method in students? comprehensive evaluation. By means of data mining, it analyzes data of students? comprehensive evaluation achievements and gets some useful results, which will aid decision making in university students? objective evaluation and play as guidance for scientific management and evaluation of students.

Keywords- data mining; quality evaluation; index system; association rules; confidence; support

I.  INTRODUCTION University has accumulated abundant data on Students?  quality evaluation for many years, but at present the data has not been used completely, while only obtaining the surface information by statistic and ordering, etc. For example, there is students quality evaluation every term, but there is only simple numerical calculation and qualitative summary, and then inform results to students, which will serve as main basis for evaluating all kinds of honorary titles and various scholarships as well as student subsidies, the inner information hiding in data has not been mined and thought deeply. It has become an urgent problem in teaching field that how to deeply use this data to convert the existing student management data into the further useful information to supply the decision support for university managers.

Data mining technology could acquire useful knowledge from abundant data, through just and objective statistic and analysis, it can find potential rule of data, acquire the implicit mode and correctly master the vision in future. On this basic, the writer consider that introducing the data mining technology into student management field to extract useful information hiding in data from Students? quality evaluation. For example, it uses association rules on Students? quality evaluation system to discuss the key factor influencing Students? quality and the  relation between good or bad of quality effect and moral education, intellectual education, capability and personality development, so as to guide student to better developing themselves and improve their ability.



II. STUDENTS? QUALITY EVALUATION MODEL Using scientific measurement and evaluation method  according to evaluation model is the basis to ensure accuracy of quantitative evaluation results. Combining students? quality evaluation practice of many universities, through analysis and discussion, it is determined that the main quantitative indexes include: moral education, intellectual education, capability, personality development. The main quantitative indexes of moral education include: political record, social responsibility, honest and trustworthy, civilization and orderliness, diligence, frugality and self-improvement; the main quantitative indexes of intellectual education include: literacy programs, physical education and physical ability; the main quantitative indexes of capability include: autonomic learning, practice and innovation, organizational communication and social work; the main quantitative indexes of capability include: innovation, talent and skill and others. As shown in Table I.

In the index system, distribute different weighting according to the different contents of each index; confirm mark range of each index according to the mark, method and particular condition when evaluating; make certain the progression of index and specific weighting of each index according to the complexity of each index. The calculation formula of evaluation index is:    m  i i i  G QW =  =?  (1)  In the formula, G  is the total point of evaluation; Q  is the quantitative evaluation index point; W  is the weighting coefficient. In addition, in order to reflect the practical situation of students? quality more comprehensively and accurately, the system can initialize setting of weighting coefficient according to different situations in different universities.

The key scientific and technological project of the Education Department of Henan Province.

TABLE I.  STUDENTS? QUALITY EVALUATION INDEX  First-level index  Second-level index  Main characteristics  Moral education  Political record Advanced collectives and individuals, participation and engagement in group activity, class attendance and social practice condition, commendation by notice, illegalities, breaching the principle, etc  Social responsibility Honest and trustworthy Civilization and orderliness Diligence, frugality and self-improvement  Intellectual education Literacy programs General subject, special series of lecture, practical course, PE  class, physical ability test Physical education and physical ability  Capability  Autonomic learning Career planning, curricula, social practice, academic contests, scientific research, be in position in league and students? organization and participation in society  Practice and innovation Organizational communication Social work  Personality development  Innovation  Innovation and innovative undertaking competitions, sports competitions, entertainment items, speaking and debating, painting, calligraphy and photography, results of other kinds of activities and recognition  Talent and skill others

III. DATA MINING  A. Concept of Data Mining Data mining (for short DM) is a process that extracting the  information and knowledge which is implicit but potential useful from the abundant, incomplete, noisy, fuzzy and random actual application data. It refers to extraction, conversion, analysis and modeling treatment on abundant data of database, then to extract key data for assisting decision.

Through data mining, it can help decision maker search rules, find neglected factors, predict tendency and make decision. It is the high abstract and summarization on inherence and essence of data, and also the sublimation of data from rational knowledge to perceptual knowledge.

B. Classification of Data Mining Data mining has many ways to classify. According to the  task of data mining, it has been classified into the follows: classification or predictive pattern data mining, data summarization, data cluster analysis, association rules analysis, discovery of sequential patterns, dependency relationship or discovery of dependency pattern, unusual and tendency discovery, etc. According to object of data mining, there are data sources as follows: relational database, OODB (Object- Oriented Database), spatial database, temporal database, text  data source, multimedia data, heterochronous database, legacy database and web data source, etc.

C. Process of Data Mining Data mining process includes data cleaning, data collection,  data selection, data conversion, data mining, pattern evaluation and knowledge representation, etc; they could not be achieved at a time, thereinto, some steps or whole process need be taken again and again. As shown in Fig. 1.

D. The Common Method for Data Mining-- Association Rules Analysis Data mining is a new technology, but it shows the huge  potential when used in various field. At present, the common analysis methods for data mining are association rules analysis, classification analysis, predictive analysis, cluster analysis.

Thereinto, association analysis is the most frequent and effective method used by teaching evaluation.

The mining of association rules can be described as follows: suppose that { }1 2, , , mI i i i=  is the set of m different items.

Give a D  of transaction database, thereinto, each T of transaction is the set of one group of item in I, namely, T I? , T has the unique ID--TID . Association rule is the implication like X Y? , thereinto, X I? , Y I? ? X Y = ?? , the conditions which association rules comes true are follows:     Figure 1.  Basic process and main steps of data mining  logical database  selection  selected data  preprocess conversion mining analysis & assimilation  preprocessed data  conversed data  extracted data  assimilated data        ? It has S  of support. thereinto, there is %S  transaction including X Y?  at least, namely,  ( ) ( )Support X Y P X Y? = ? ; ? It has C  of confidence. that is to say,  there is %C  transaction including Y  at the same time when the transaction which D  including X . Namely,  ( ) ( )|Confidence X Y P X Y? = . The mining of association rules is to fund the association rules which satisfying minS  of the least minimum support and minC of the least confidence specified by customers from D of transaction database.



IV. PREPARATIONS FOR EVALUATION DATA OF STUDENTS? QUALITY  Data is a precious information source, which only has been mined and extracted can change its potential resources into useful fortune just like the mineral resources. Data mining is to extract or ?mine? information and knowledge interested by people from abundant data by series technology. The knowledge or information is implicit, potential and useful but can not be understand by people beforehand; the extracted knowledge is showed as concepts, regularities, rules and patterns, etc, data mining is also a deep data analysis.

A. Data Selection The purpose of data selection is to fund the operation object  of task, extract relevant data from original database to become the target data in accordance with the requirement of customers. Students? quality evaluation is processes that in accordance with requirements of evaluation target and principle to systematically collect information and give value judgment on Students? quality. Students? quality evaluation includes teacher evaluation, evaluation-group evaluation, etc; due to Students? quality evaluation is the main method to obtain the Students? quality information and also the import way to check Students? quality, so the analysis and mining for Students? quality evaluation data mainly aim to the evaluation data; use the Students? quality evaluation data to generally measure Students? quality, and take analysis associated with evaluation data (moral education, intellectual education, capability and personality development, etc.), completely mine the value implicated in these data to improve the Students? quality further.

B. Data Preprocess Data preprocess is to process the extracted data, so it can  conform to the requirement of data mining. The main task is to check spelling error, get rid off the repeat record, supplement incomplete record, deduce and calculate the missing data, complete data type conversation, etc. this step mainly research the data quality, find the data set whose quality has met the requirement and can be mined effectively, so as to prepare for the further step.

At present, data quality has become an important factor influencing data mining, the confidence of final mining conclusions have reduced because of the data which is error,  incomplete, redundant, spare and without relevance with data target. For example, with regard to Students? quality evaluation, due to evaluation staff have not careful attitude or misunderstand, which often led to the abnormal data, so it need eliminate and clean the abnormal data firstly, then to take data mining; otherwise, the data mining could not been taken, even the conclusion has been made, the accuracy is very low and has no much application value. An important task of data cleaning is that the data quality can achieve the requirement of effective mining by cleaning dirty data, according to the abovementioned data selection, so as to take the series data cleaning on evaluation data like data integrity, data consistency, data accuracy and the relevancy with target.



V. APPLICATION OF DATA MINING ON STUDENTS? QUALITY EVALUATION  Students? quality evaluation is one of the most basic filed of educational evaluation, which plays a pivot role in it. By quality evaluation, it means the process of collecting the representation information of the evaluation object in main activity areas by use of scientific method, and then judging one certain quality according to the evaluation goal. In other words, it is an activity to evaluate talents? qualities comprehensively through various means of evaluation, judgment and examination. It aims to identify and assess quality of the evaluation object, which consists of evaluation process and outcome evaluation. Traditional Students? quality evaluation mostly refers the relevant evaluation index system and questionnaires, and more focus on the result of evaluation, and consider them as the basis for evaluating all kinds of honorary titles and various scholarships as well as student subsidies, etc.

Association rules have been applied to Students? quality evaluation will mine some useful data which can guide their developing.

A. Data mining of Students? quality Evaluation Data mining of Students? quality evaluation mainly  includes two parts: one is that use traditional statistical calculation to analyze evaluation data primarily, and give a quantitative result in the form of specific scores; anther is that use data mining technology to mine and analyze the collected evaluation data and characteristic index (moral education, intellectual education, capability and personality development, etc.), so that find the useful knowledge hiding in data, and extract it for university and relevant teachers to learn.

? Statistical calculation. Which is calculation rule according to the weight of each evaluation item supposed in index system and calculation rules aiming at special items established by school, analyze the evaluation data primarily, then obtain the quantitative representation for evaluation result of each evaluated teacher, which include evaluation result and overall evaluation result of each specific evaluated item, they are represented by specific score, line graph and column diagram, etc, meanwhile, give the multilateral comparison and analysis of evaluation results.

? Data mining. According to the collected Students? quality evaluation data and moral education,        intellectual education, capability and personality development before. Along with the data collection perfect and accumulation step by step, the deep-level data mining can be taken.

B. Association Rules Mining Between Students? quality and Characteristic Index In according to instructing the application of data mining of  association rules on Students? quality evaluation, associated with the practice process, it has drawn a university?s 300 Students? quality evaluation sheets randomly; then it entered moral education, intellectual education, capability and personality development and evaluation score into database, neglect other information, find the relations among intellectual education, capability and evaluation score by data mining; there are part of students? quality evaluation information data in Table II, 300 records in total.

In Table II, intellectual education and capability are quantitative attribute, transform it into Boolean type, in order to discretization, the intellectual education has been divided into 4 groups, they are Z1[0?59]?Z2[60?75]?Z3[76?89]? z4[90?100]? the capability has been divided into 4 groups, they are N1[0?59]?N2[60?75]?N3[76?89]?N4[90? 100]?  evaluation level is classification attribute, which need transform into Boolean type further; the scopes of evaluation level have been given a limited range in accordance with the practical situation, evaluation levels are divided into: D1 of excellent, D2 of good, D3 of general and D4 of bad.

It analyzes association relations between students? quality and intellectual education and capability in accordance with association rules, if the evaluation level is excellent, it shows the student? quality is good; it use the abovementioned mining technology and association rules algorithm to mine the intellectual education and capability of student whose quality is good; first, search original database and obtain 80 records which evaluation level is excellent, suppose min 4%S = ,  min 18%C = , the primary association rules can be achieved by mining, as shown in Table III.

The following evaluation results can be achieved from abovementioned rules:  ? Students with high score of intellectual education, who have higher support and confidence of evaluation scores. It shows that ability of intellectual education should be enhanced training of students.

TABLE II.  STUDENTS? QUALITY EVALUATION INFORMATION DATA  No. intellectual education capability results 08410012 45 70 general 08410017 83 75 good 09320015 92 81 excellent 09210011 88 53 good 07120123 76 79 good ? ? ? ? 08240008 68 76 good  TABLE III.  STUDENTS? QUALITY EVALUATION INFORMATION DATA  rules intellectual education capability confidence support  R1 Z4  27.00% 8% R2 Z3  45.25% 13% R3 Z2  22.50 6% R4  N2 24.50% 6.5% R5  N3 51.50% 13.5% R6  N4 19.00% 5%    ? Students with high score of capability, who have higher support and confidence of evaluation scores. It shows that ability of capability should be enhanced training of students.

? We should strengthen training of intellectual education and capability, at the same time, we should strengthen training of others, so that students can achieve better development.



VI. CONCLUSION Data mining technology has been used for students? quality  evaluation can help find the useful information which could not be obtained by traditional evaluation. the research of this text is only the tentative exploration on application of data mining on students? management field, it is intend to play a role in casting a brick to attract jade for further research, through the application of data mining technology on education, it not only to promote the students? management further reformation, development and perfect, but also can objectively reflect the problems, so as to supply effective basis for decision of university management.

