The Application of Association Rules Mining in Data  Processing

Abstract?Private economy is very important in the modern society. But there are some problems in statistical data of it, such as untruth and shortage. The quality problems of statistical data of private economy have received more and more concern from the government and society. Association rules learning is a method of data mining. The article tries to use association rule learning to process statistical data of private economy and analyze the results to improve the quality of statistical data of private economy. Finally the article provides some exploratory comments and suggestions about the application of association rule mining in private economy statistics.

Keywords-data mining; private economy; association rules mining

I. INTRODUCTION Private economy is a kind of non-public sectors of the  economy. It is so adaptable and viable in the intense market competition that it becomes one of the most profitable economic sectors with a rapid development in the national economy and is playing more and more important part in the social and economic activities. As basic and important information, the statistical data of private economy have received more and more concern from the government and the quality problems of it have attracted extensive social attention.

Currently the statistical data of private economy are of low quality, and statistical information distortion has obsessed the statistical work. If we don?t take some necessary measures, it will exercise a great influence on accuracy of national economic accounting and misadvise the decision of economic work.

Association rule learning is a popular method of data mining, which finds out the valuable relationship between the data from the given data set. There is dependence relationship between the statistical data of private economy. According to the interaction between production, allocation, exchange and consumption, we could use association rule learning to find out some association characteristic among the statistical data of private economy and analyze it. We could judge the authenticity and pertinence of statistical data of private economy by finding something which doesn?t conform to economic laws or is full of contradiction. This article tries to  apply association rule learning to statistics of private economy.



II. THE BASIC CONCEPTS AND ALGORITHM OF ASSOCIATION RULE LEARNING  Let { }1 2, , mI i i i= ? be a set of n binary attributes called items. Let 1 2{ , , }mD t t t= ? be a set of transactions called the database. Each transaction in D has unique transaction ID and contains a subset of the items in I. A rule is defined as an implication of the form A B  where  ,A I B I? ? and A B? = ? .The sets of items A and B are called antecedent and consequent of the rule respectively.

The confidence of a rule is defined as confidence A B P B|A= . The support of a rule is defined as support A B P A B= ? .

Confidence can be interpreted as an estimate of the probability P (B | A). Support can be interpreted as an estimate of the probability ( )P A B .

Item set is defined as a set of items. K item set is a item set which contains k items. The support of a item set is defined as frequency of the item set, that is the number of transaction of database D which is the item set. If the support of a item set is larger than the user-specified minimum support multiplied by the number of transactions of database D, we can say the item set satisfies the user-specified minimum support. The itemset which satisfies the user-specified minimum support is called frequent k-item set.

The support and confidence can be interpreted as utility and definitiveness of an association rule. Association rules are required to satisfy a user-specified minimum support and a user-specified minimum confidence at the same time. To achieve this, association rule generation is a two-step process.

First, minimum support is applied to find all frequent item sets in a database. In a second step, these frequent item sets and the minimum confidence constraint are used to form rules.

While the second step is straight forward, the first step needs more attention.

Apriori is a classic algorithm for learning association  This article is sponsored by State Natural Sciences Fund project ?research of agency act and performance appraisal in the family firm? (70972119) and State Statistics Bureau primary project ?empirical research on quality influence factor of regional statistics data based on direct network report? (2009LZ038).

rules. It generates candidate item sets of length k from item sets of length k-1. Then it prunes the candidates which have an infrequent sub pattern. According to the downward closure lemma, the candidate set contains all frequent k-length item sets. After that, it scans the transaction database to determine frequent item sets among the candidates.



III. EXAMPLE OF APPLICATION OF ASSOCIATION RULES LEARNING IN DATA PROCESSING OF STATISTICS OF PRIVATE  ECONOMY The development of the economy in Zhejiang Province  has been very fast since the nineties in last century. People generally regard private enterprises and capital as the important reasons. But we should notice that level of development of private economy varies greatly from city to city in Zhejiang Province. The data of table I prove it.

TABLE I  INITIAL STATISTICAL DATA OF PRIVATE ECONOMY OF  CITIES IN ZHEJIANG PROVINCE IN 2006  area  gross product  (a hundred million RMB)  number of private  enterprises (ten  thousand)  capital (a hundred  million RMB)  total retail sales of  consumer goods  (a hundred million RMB)  Hang zhou 691.7 10.1 1870.4 278  Ning bo 1480.4 8.3 1132.8 361.2  Wen zhou 868.3 4.6 953.3 311.2  Jia xing 1193.7 3.4 473.2 269.9  Hu zhou 502.5 1.4 212.2 237.8  Shao xing 2026.8 3.5 613.4 175.3  Jin hua 846.6 3.6 735.2 242.4  Qu zhou 249.4 8.3 158.8 975.8  Zhou shan 271.3 6.4 121.3 607.7  Tai zhou 596.7 3.4 497.6 128.7  Li shui 173.5 9.1 168.5 32.6 data source: www.zj.stats.gov.cn   We can divide the cities in Zhejiang Province into three  groups according to the level of gross product of private economy. The eleven cities are listed in order of gross product of private economy. The three high level cities are developed areas in private economy, gross product of which can be instead of A. The four middle ones are developing areas, gross product of which can be instead of B. The four low ones are underdeveloped areas, gross product of which can be instead of C. Because the geographical position, economic foundation and surroundings of each area is different, the other three indicators of the eleven cities are also very different. We need to calculate the average of each indicator separately and compare it with the amounts of cities. The logicals will be used to apply association rules.

TABLE II   RESULTS OF INDICATOR CLASSIFICATION  area  gross product  (a hundred million RMB)  number of private  enterprises (ten  thousand)  capital (a  hundred million RMB)  total retail sales of  consumer goods  (a hundred million RMB)  Hang zhou B 1 1 0  Ning bo A 1 1 1  Wen zhou B 0 1 0  Jia xing A 0 0 0  Hu zhou C 0 0 0  Shao xing A 0 0 0  Jin hua B 0 1 0  Qu zhou C 1 0 1  Zhou shan C 1 0 1  Tai zhou B 0 0 0  Li shui C 1 0 0  The average number of private enterprises is 56.5 thousand. The average of capital is 63061 million. The average of total retail sales of consumer goods is 32915 million. If the actual number is larger than average, we should replace it with 1. If the actual number is smaller than average, we should replace it with 0.

The objective of association rules application is to find out the relationship between the private economy indicators and classification results and the connection among the private economy indicators by processing the statistical data of private economy. If minimum support is specified 20%, that means the number is less than 2. Table 3 tells the computational and comparison process which uses Apriori algorithm.

TABLE III   COMPUTATIONAL AND COMPARISON PROCESS BY  APRIORI ALGORITHM  I C I C 1 5 1,3 3 2 4 3 3  Firstly, scan all the items to obtain the counts of 1-item sets. All the accounts satisfy the minimum support. Secondly, link 1-item sets to get 2-item sets and scan all the items again.

Then we can compare the counts of 2-item sets and delete the ones which don?t satisfy the minimum support.

According to the results above, we can know how the three indicators influence each classification result, namely the support. We can also find out the support from the three indicators as a whole.

TABLE IV  RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THREE INDICATORS AND  EACH CLASSIFICATION RESULT  I S(I1,I) S(I2,I) S(I3,I) S(I1,,I2,I3,I) A 33% 33% 33% 33% B 25% 75% 0 0 C 75% 0 50% 0  Some explanation for the support of table IV: ? Four figures are equal to 0. The total retail sales of  consumer goods of developing areas in private economy are all lower than average. The capitals of underdeveloped areas in private economy are all less than average. The areas whose three indicators all reaches average level can not be developing areas or underdeveloped areas in private economy.

? Usually the support of three indicators will reduce if the level of private economy is low. But when in developed areas  developing areas  underdeveloped areas, the support from number of private enterprises is 33 25 75 , from capital is 33 75  0, from total retail sales of consumer goods is 33 0 50 . This seems to be contradictory to our  conclusion. In fact, this is in accordance with economic feature of Zhejiang Province. The support of three indicators as a whole is 33 0 0 , which proves that aggregative indicator supports the classification well.



IV. CONCLUSION AND POLICIES REQUIRED BY APPLICATION OF ASSOCIATION RULES IN STATISTICS OF PRIVATE ECONOMY  This article introduces the basic concepts of association rule learning and applies Apriori algorithm which produces association rules to statistics of private economy. Potential rules of development of private economy can be found out to supply valid information basis for decision-making work of private economy by processing the statistical data of private economy. What we should pay attention to is Apriori algorithm need to scan the data base repeatedly. But there are a lot of data in the statistics of private economy. Every candidate in the candidate set should be checked to determine frequent item sets. How to improve the algorithm and computing efficiency is a problem that we should resolve.

Besides, Apriori algorithm requires that the data in studied data base don?t change, but statistical data of private economy are usually updated. So the previous rules are not adaptive after the new data appear. If we apply association rules mining to the whole data base again, we have to do a lot of repeated work. It increases the computing intension and wastes the former mining results. At present, researchers have got many methods which can improve the computing efficiency of Apriori algorithm or can deal with the changed data, such as hash table technology, data division technology, sampling technology, and dynamic item set counting. These methods could reduce the number of scanning the data set and find new association rules in time to satisfy the need of decision and analysis. Meanwhile the statistics of private economy involve production, allocation, exchange and consumption and relation between the data is very complex, so association rules  mining should be applied with other data mining technology to become an integrated scheme of data mining.

In the present circumstances, if we want to enable the effective application of association rules mining and perform its role effectively, there are some conditions and policies to improve and establish. Therefore, before carrying out the work of association rules mining, we should make range of statistics of private economy and statistical content clear to be more objective about the size, industrial structure, development speed and potential growth of private economy.

At the same time we should organize the training of statisticians, let them understand and grasp the use of data mining software, and be able to analyze the results of association rules mining.

It is a new method that association rules mining is applied to data processing of private economy statistics. This method could improve the quality of statistical data of private economy. Although some scholars have studied application of association rules mining, researches according to the actual needs about the application of association rules mining in private economy statistics are still rare. Appling association rules mining to the field of statistics of private economy will broaden the ideas and horizon of quality control theory research on statistical data of private economy. Besides, using association rules mining to excavate valuable information from a large amount of statistical data of private economy will help the government to make various private economic policies and promote the development of China's private economy.

