Research and Application of Small and Medium- sized Manufacturing Enterprises Sales Promotion

Abstract?How to make an appropriate sales promotion strategy is critical for enterprises, especially those small and medium- sized manufacturing enterprises. In this paper, we propose a customer-oriented model for sales promotion using data mining techniques. The proposed model can efficiently discovery the association rules between goods. To make the mining algorithm more scalable, a sparse data structure is designed and embedded into an improved association rule mining algorithm. We apply the proposed model on a cleaning product manufacturer.

Experimental results show its effectiveness.

Keywords-data mining; knowledge discovery in database; association rules; Apriori algorithm

I.  INTRODUCTION Data mining is a new technology as a main step to  discovery knowledge in database (Knowledge discovery in database, KDD) which is rising in the middle of 1990s[1] . KDD consists of three parts: data preparation, data mining, interpretation and evaluation of results. Date mining, as a tool to systematically examine and understand large amounts of date, can effectively help commercial enterprises to extract valuable information from incomplete, noisy, fuzzy, and random actual data. Therefore it could provide valid basis for enterprise to make scientific decision[2-4].

Data mining techniques, including association rules[5], decision tree[6], clustering[7] and other technologies have been widely used and developed in the shopping basket analysis, marketing and customer relationship management. In the business intelligence analysis, an important task is to understand the hidden relationships among products. Some researchers use association algorithm to analyze the relationship among commodities, which are based on customer purchase history[8-11].

Sales Promotion refers to the behavior of sales propaganda.

The purpose is to encourage consumers to strengthen the enthusiasm of buying products, advertise a product or provide a service. With homogeneous products and channels further increasing, the position of sales promotion in marketing link is becoming more and more important[12]. Making scientific  decisions of sales promotion for enterprises is particularly critical. Making out distinctive promoting program can reduce marketing costs and lead to sales increasing.

Due to their size, capital, technology and other issues, some small and medium manufacturing enterprises do not pay much attention to the wishes of the customers from the quantitative view. They judge customers? demands just by subjective and self-experience, and arrange the production and sales promotion. This is not only inadaptable to the competitive market economy, but also affecting customers? benefits and leading to the loss of patronage.

In response to this phenomenon, this paper develops a promotion model for small and medium manufacturing enterprise based on data mining and uses the improved association rules algorithm in the model. This provides a theoretical basis for small and medium manufacturing enterprises sales promotion from the quantitative view. Using this model to analyze a cleaning product enterprise is to prove its feasibility.



II. AN IMPROVED APRIORI ALGORITHM FOR ASSOCIATION RULE MINING  A. Notations In the data mining community, data are often collected in  the form of transaction database. Given a transaction database D={T1,T2,?,Tn}, each Tj(j=1,2,?n) is called a transaction which is consist of several items {CD1,?CDp}. The corpus of all items contained in database D is denoted by CD={CD1,CD2,?CDm}.A subset of CD is called an itemset, e.g., T is an itemset and T ? CD. Take the sales data analysised in this paper as an example: the items refer to the goods on sale; a transaction corresponds to a sale bill in the sale database, including several sale goods (items). Each transaction has a unique identifier TID[13].

X ? Y is called an association rule where X, Y are subsets of corpus CD. Often two common indicators are used to measure an association rule: support s (probability that a    transaction contains the X Y, i.e., s=P(X Y)) and confidence c (conditional probability that a transaction having X also contains Y, i.e., c=P(Y|X)=s/P(X)).An association rule is said to be frequent when its support sup is larger than a minimum support.

In this paper, we design a sparse data structure for description of the transaction database. Formally, an item is represented by a row vector (dj1,?,djm), where  { ;,0 ;,1 TiCDj TiCDjijd ??=                                             (1) In fact, item CDj lists the indexes of those transactions  which contain this item. Thus all the items form a matrix D = (CD1,CD2, ?,CDn), i.e.

.                                      (2)  A 2-itemset Dij is defined as the intersection of items CDi and CDj which lists the indexes of those transactions which contain both of the two items. It can be easily computed as  (3)  Here " " is the logical AND operator. Hence, support count of 2-itemset Dij is  .                                       (4)  In the similar way, a k-itemset is  .       (5)  And its support is  (6)  B. An modified Apriori algorithm for the association rules mining In this section, we introduce a modified association rules  mining algorithm based on our specially designed sparse data structure. The algorithm is implemented with two steps: frequent itemsets are first mined using Apriori, then, association rules are generated from the mined frequent itemsets. We detail them as follows:  1) Mining of  frequent  itemsets Given a minimum support smin, we are to find all the  subsets of corpus CD with their support more than smin. We modify the classic Apriori algorithm with the specially designed sparse data structure. It consists of four main parts: (1) Initially scan the database once to get frequent 1-itemset; (2) Generate length k+1 candidate itemset from length k frequent itemset; (3) Test the candidates against database W.R.T. the minimum support; (4) Terminate when no frequent candidate set can be generated.

Step (3) is usually time-consuming, which in our setting can be efficiently done. As the database (i.e., matrix D) is sparse, with each element occupying one bit, we can load it into memory and count the support of k-itemset using Eq.(4) which needs only Bit-AND operation. Algorithm 1 gives the pseudocode of our modified Apriori algorithm, as in Fig.1.

Figure 1.  Pseudocode of modified Apriori algorithm  2) Generation  of  association  rules  Given the mined frequent itemsets, it is easy to generate association rules: Test all the frequent itemsets then check all their proper subsets with minimum confidence cmin. For example, F is a frequent itemset; S is one of its proper subsets.

Hence, c(S) = s(S)/s(T). If c(S)>cmin, output rule S ? T\S.

Here T\S is the complement of S.



III. TYPES OF SALES PROMOTION AND DEVELOP SALES PROMOTION MODEL  A. Types of sales promotion Sales promotion SP  can be divided into three types:  ? Level 1 SP: the promotion of manufacturers to wholesalers; the promotion of manufacturers to retailers; the promotion of manufacturers to consumers; the promotion of wholesalers to retailers; the promotion of wholesalers to consumers; the promotion of retailers to consumers.

? Level 2 SP: the promotion of manufacturers to wholesalers and retailers; the promotion of manufacturers to retailers and consumers; the promotion of manufacturers to wholesalers and consumers; the promotion of wholesalers to retailers a the promotion of manufacturers to wholesalers;    ? Level 3 SP: the promotion of manufacturers to wholesaler, retailers and consumers.

The sales promotion model in this paper refers to level 2 SP. That is to say, we develop the sales promotion model of manufacturers to wholesalers and retailers.

B. Develop a data mining model for promotion  in manufacturing industry In data preparation stage, at first, objectives for developing  a sales promotion model should be clear. Then, scan the transaction database D to gain the needed data sheet.

In data preprocessing stage, firstly remove irrelevant items and noise data by data statute from the data sheet.  Secondly code the data by time series. Thirdly classify the data into m sheets from the new sheet .We can define the sheets in this way {sheeti |i=1,2,?m}.

In data mining stage, we use the improved Apriori algorithm based on matrix storage to analyze the data in sheetm.

Moreover, in this algorithm we use adaptive minimum support smin and minimum confidence cmin because of the diversities of data in these sheets.

In summary and evaluation stage, we can get the corresponding association rules from the sheets by using improved Apriori algorithm. Then, we need to interpret rules and make the evaluation[14-15].

According to these stages, we can develop a data mining model for sales promotion in manufacturing industry, as in Fig.2.

Figure 2.  A data mining model for sales promotion in manufacturing industry

IV. APPLICATION The sales promotion model based on data mining in  manufacturing enterprises and improved  associated rules algorithm are applied to the small cleaning products manufacturing company A. The sales data from July to August in 2010 are analyzed to identify strong correlated itemsets to prove the feasibility of the sales promotion model and to provide a theoretical basis for the following promotion.

A. Data preparation All sales orders in every major area systems company A are  taken out from the database D from July to August in 2010 working date. These orders are integrated into a single sheet sheet1. Sheet1 includes 1006 sales itemsets and 233 sales transactions.

B. Data preprocessing 1) Data Statute  The process of data statute is to delete some lines and columns in the sheet, and to reduce the number of column values.

Summary table of sales data sheet1 statute and remove non- relevant data field, the remaining sales order number, stock code, stock name, quantity, unit price, total price, sales of single amount in sheet1. Remove 23 retail lists and seven system adjustment sales orders in Sheet1, the remaining sales orders are 213, that is to say, sales transaction T has 213.

Make data statute for total sales sheet1. Firstly remove non- relevant data fields and remain sales order number, stock code, stock name, quantity, unit price, total price, the amount of sales order. Secondly, cut out 23 retail orders and 7 system adjustment orders. There are remaining 213 transactions in the sheet1.

2) Data classification  With the customers of enterprise A existing the large differences in purchasing scale, association analysis is obviously inaccurate to set only a minimum support and minimum confidence for the overall data. We can classify the sales transactions by purchasing scale. Moreover, we should set the adaptive minimum support and minimum confidence to different classifications. So the total sales sheet1 is classified into small-scale procurement sheet, general scale of procurement sheet, large-scale procurement sheet, and ultra- large-scale procurement sheet, according to the sales amount Si  [0,1000), Si  [1000,5000), Si  [5000,10000), Si [10000,+ ). Besides these four sheets are assigned from sheet2 to sheet5. In this place, we classify data first, then delete the data of sale goods  to ensure the accuracy of classification.

C. Data conversion First, make data coding. With the original database having  the sales data of East China Region, South China Region, Southwest China Region and North China Region, the exported data exist one sales order number corresponding to some sales orders. Therefore the sales order numbers Transaction ID(TID) require rearrangement ID. 213 transactions in the total sales    sheet1 are coded according to chronological order. So we sign TID from 0701001 to 0831213.

Second, because the stock code of goods is complex, the stock code is needed to restate. The codes of the initial rearrangement are from CD1 to CD68. That is to say, the whole itemset include 68 items.

And then subtotal goods frequency which the codes of the rearrangement corresponding to. Draw a figure about goods frequency in original account sales as in Fig.3.

Figure 3.  Goods frequency in original account sales  Finally, the data encoded again: analyzing sheet1, we find the products have the old bar and new bar code. And we also find that some kinds of products are used of old and new bar code, so that the stock code can not lead to one mapping of inventories. We need to classify the products of old and new bar code as a class. So we adds the products of the old bar code to the new bar code . A total of 25 old items are deleted and the remaining 43 items are encoded again. That is, item is expressed as {CDi | i = 1,2 ... 43}. Draw a figure about goods frequency in improved account sales, as in Fig.4.

Figure 4.  Goods frequency in improved account sales  D. Association Rules Mining At first, we need to set the value for minimum support smin  and minimum confidence cmin. By analyzing the data in each group, we can find the obvious diversities between the data in each sheet. So using the same minimum support and minimum confidence will produce large deviation. In this place, we use  adaptive minimum support smin and minimum confidence cmin to reduce the deviation. We can set minimum support in each sheet, as in (7). Specific value as in table .

(7)  TABLE I.  SPECIFIC  VALUE  Sales Amount Transaction Count  Minimum Support  Minimum Confidence  S<1000 117 7 40% 1000=<S<5000 47 10 40%  5000=<S<10000 9 3 40% 10000=<S 39 8 70%    We can take TC=39 as a example to describe the following step. As we can see from table 1, in this group S>=10000 .So it is a large-scale procurement. smin is 8 and cmin is 70%.

Scan the sheet4 to get the Boolean matrix, which we call it candidate itemset C1. In this matrix, line represents the items which every transaction corresponds to and column represents the transactions which every item corresponds to. Then compare support with smin. We can get 1-frequent itemset matrix (FIS1), as in Fig.5.

Figure 5.  The image of 1-frequent itemset matrix  Figure 5: The image of 1-frequent itemset matrix. As each itemset is a row vector which is consist of binary values 0 or 1. All the row vectors form a matrix. Hence, we build a binary image, with black blocks representing value 0 and white ones representing 1.  It is obvious that the matrix is sparse.

Next, we can get candidate itemset Ck  from FIS1. Scan FIS1 matrix to get the support count for Ck and get the k- frequent itemset (FISk), as in Fig.6.

Then, we can get the association rules from all frequent itemsets. As in table . At last, comparing confidence with cmin, we need to cut the table  to get the final association rules, which can provide the basis for large-scale procurement of sales promotion. Final association rules table as in table .

Description of the final association rules as in table .

TABLE II.  ASSOCITION RULES TABLE    TABLE III.  FINAL ASSOCITION RULES TABLE  Condition Conclusion Confidence  CD3 CD17 83.33%  CD18 CD3 90.00%  CD18 CD17 100.00%  CD33 CD17 75.00%  CD35 CD17 72.73%  CD29 CD39 80.00%  CD3 ,CD9 CD17 88.89%  CD9, CD17 CD3 88.89%  CD3, CD9 CD18 100.00%  CD3 ,CD18 CD17 100.00%  CD17,CD18 CD3 90.00%  CD18 CD3,CD17 90.00%          TABLE IV.  FINAL ASSOCITION RULES DESCRIPITION TABLE  NO. Rules  Description  1 Buy multi use flat mop, 83.33% buy economic gloves (Middle Size)  2 Buy stop grease PU (1pcs), 90% buy multi use flat mop  3 Buy stop grease PU (1pcs), 100% buy Economic Gloves (Middle Size)  4 Buy protector gloves (Middle Size), 75%  buy Economic Gloves (Middle Size)  5 Buy PVA Mop,72.73% buy Economic Gloves (Middle Size)  6 Buy household sponge 2pcs, 80% buy bamboo   wiper  7 Buy multi use flat mop  and non-woven wiper 3pcs, 88.89% buy economic gloves (Middle Size)  8 Buy non-woven wiper 3pcs and economic gloves (Middle Size),88.89% buy multi use flat mop  9 Buy multi use flat mop and non-woven wiper 3pcs,100% buy stop grease PU (1pcs)  10 Buy multi use flat mop and stop grease PU (1pcs), 100% buy economic gloves (Middle Size)  11 Buy economic gloves (Middle Size) and stop grease PU (1pcs), 90% buy multi use flat mop  12 Buy stop grease PU (1pcs), 90% Buy multi use flat mop and economic gloves (Middle Size)   Similarly, we can get the corresponding associated  itemsets from other-scale purchasing sheets by using the same model. Then make suitable sales promotion programs for these customers.



V. CONCLUSION According to these, it is effective to make a practical  application by developing a data mining model for sales promotion in manufacturing industry. In order to reduce promotion cost and increase sales amount, we use this model to recommend enterprises kinds of sales promotion strategies for customers who are in different purchasing scale. What is more, this model has taken a successful experience for other small and medium-sized manufacturing enterprises to develop a sales promotion model. However, the improved Apriori algorithm we applied in this paper has a shortage in the efficiency of data mining. Our future work will concentrate on it.

