QuCOM: k nearest features neighborhood based qualitative spatial co-location

Abstract?Spatial Co-location patterns are similar to association rules but explore more relying spatial auto-correlation. They represent subsets of Boolean spatial features whose instances are often located in close geographic proximity. Existing co-location patterns mining researches only concern the spatial attributes, and few of them can handle the huge amount of non-spatial attributes in spatial datasets. Also, they use distance threshold to define spatial neighborhood. However, it is hard to decide the distance threshold for each spatial dataset without specific prior knowledge. Moreover, spatial datasets are not usually even distributed, so a unique distance value cannot fit an irregularly distributed spatial dataset well. Here, we proposed a qualitative spatial co-location pattern, which contains both spatial and non- spatial information. And the k nearest features (k-NF) neighbourhood relation was defined to set the spatial relation between different kinds of spatial features. The k-NF set of one feature?s instances was used to evaluate close relationship to the other features. To find qualitative co-location patterns in large spatial datasets, some formal definitions were given, and a QuCOM (Qualitative spatial CO-location patterns Mining) algorithm was proposed. Experimental results on the USA thesis map data prove that QuCOM algorithm is accurate and efficient, and the patterns founded contain more interesting information.

Keywords? Include at least 5 keywords or phrases

I. INTRODUCTION In spatial datasets, not only spatial attributes, but also non-  spatial attributes play an important role in describing specified spatial features. However, until now, it is still a challenge to handle non-spatial information in spatial data mining because there are so many different kinds of non-spatial attributes exist.

Spatial co-location patterns mining is an important spatial data mining task with broad applications. Examples include symbiotic species discovery, co-located services frequently requested together from mobile devices in location-based services. Traditional spatial co-location patterns mining researches cannot deal with non-spatial attributes in spatial datasets, which lead to poor comprehension of those mining results. Here, we will consider both non-spatial attributes and spatial attributes, to mining qualitative described spatial co- location patterns. Compared with traditional spatial co- location patterns, the qualitative spatial co-location patterns  have better comprehension, and can get the frequent closeness relationship between different spatial features in more details.

For example, it is interesting to know what kinds of schools are near hospitals, secondary school or post secondary school.

The various types of schools are qualitative description for this co-location pattern.

The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II discussed previous work on spatial co-location patterns mining. In Section III, we formalized our definition of qualitative spatial co-location pattern. Section IV presented two characters of the k nearest features based qualitative spatial co-location pattern. Section V is the QuCOM algorithm for mining this kind of patterns. Experimental results were given in Section VI. Then section VII was the conclusion of this paper.



II. RELATED WORKS Extracting interesting and useful patterns from spatial  datasets is more difficult than extracting the corresponding patterns from traditional numeric and categorical data due to the complexity of spatial data types, spatial relationships and spatial auto-correlation [1]. Specially, in the spatial association rule mining problem, transactions are often not explicit. The instances of spatial features are embedded in a continuous space and share a variety of spatial relationships (e.g., neighbourhood, contain, overlap) with each other.

According to the different methods to deal with transactions, spatial association rule mining can be categorized into two classes: spatial predication based rule mining [2] [3] and spatial co-location pattern mining [4].

Shekhar gave the definition of spatial co-location patterns: they represent subsets of Boolean spatial features whose instances are often located in close geographic proximity [4].

However, this definition only considers a close geographic proximity between spatial features, and does not contain the non-spatial effect.

On the other hand, approaches to discover co-location patterns in data mining area can be mainly categorized into four parts:  ___________________________________     (1) The clustering-based map overlay approach [5] [6] treats every spatial attribute as a map layer and considers spatial clusters (regions) of point data in each layer as candidates for mining associations.

(2) The reference feature based approach [1] enumerates proximity neighbourhoods to ?materialize? a set of transactions around instances of the reference spatial feature; transactions are created around instances of one user-specified spatial feature. The association patterns are derived using the Apriori algorithm.

(3) The data-partition approach [7] attempts to measure the frequency of a co-location pattern by grouping the spatial instances into disjoint partitions.

(4) An event centric model based approach [4] defines a participation index as the interestingness measure. The participation index of a pattern is defined as the minimal participation ratio of the objects of each feature in the pattern.

All above mentioned approaches have shortcomings.

Clustering-based map overlay approach assumes instances of each spatial feature are clustered; while many spatial features can be completely spatially random or declustered (i.e.

negative spatial auto regression) at many scales. Other three approaches use a distance threshold to treat spatial close relationship. Spatial features which have a distance below the threshold are considered to be close relationship. However, it is hard to decide the distance threshold for each spatial dataset without specific prior knowledge. More over spatial datasets are not usually even distributed, so a unique distance value cannot fit an irregularly distributed spatial dataset well. Xiong [8] propose a new buffer-based definition of neighborhoods, to mine data sets with extended spatial objects, e.g. line- strings and polygons. But its geometric computation is costly, cannot fit for large spatial datasets.

To avoid those shortcomings of distance based approaches, we choose the k nearest neighbourhood, which is widely used in data mining area, like classification, clustering. However, different from those traditional k nearest neighbourhood based algorithms, the close relationships of spatial features here are between distinguished spatial features. In fact, spatial features? k nearest features are those who are located in the nearest neighbourhood and have different types of spatial features. K nearest features based neighbourhood uses relative distance to measure the close relation among spatial feature objects, which can remedy the disadvantage of distance threshold based spatial neighbourhood, also can handle polygon features better. When a polygon feature is abstracted as a point for the calculations, the distances to its neighbours are increased, but its k nearest neighbours does not change.



III. PROBLEM FORMULATIONS In order to deal with non-spatial attributes in our mining  task, we proposed a qualitative spatial co-location pattern.

Non-spatial attributes in spatial datasets can be simply divided into two parts: classified attributes and numeric attributes.

Here, we only consider classified attributes. Besides, some numeric attributes can be preprocessed into classified attributes through discrete operations.

Generally to say, the qualitative spatial co-location patterns mining are based on the result of traditional spatial co-location patterns, to find the non-spatial frequent itemsets. A formal definition is below.

Definition 1: Qualitative spatial co-location pattern.

Given: (1) A spatial feature type set T with M spatial feature types,  T = {Ca, Cb, ?, CM} (2) A spatial feature object set O with N spatial feature  objects, O = {o0, o1, ?, oN-1}, each oi?O is a vector<objectId, featureType, location, nonSpatialAttribute1, nonSpatialAttribute2, ?>, where objectId [0, n-1], featureType T, location spatial framework S, and nonSpatialAttributes are qualitative description strings.

(3) A spatial neighbourhood relation R over locations in S, (4) A minimum spatial attributes? support threshold ?s and a  minimum non-spatial attributes? support threshold ?non-s  The problem of finding qualitative spatial co-location patterns is to find correct and complete set of co-location rules with spatial attributes? support threshold ? ?s and non-spatial attributes? support value ? ?non-s. The output form of qualitative spatial co-location patterns could be multiple tuples. A double tuples qualitative spatial co-location pattern can be described like: Co-locationk (Cp.nonSpatialAttributeP1 ? Cq.nonSpatialAttributeQ1), which means feature type Cq with its non-spatial attribute value equals to Q1 has a frequently nearest relationship with feature type Cp whose non-spatial attribute value equals to P1.

The instantiation of spatial neighborhood relation R is the key point to this qualitative spatial co-location pattern. Here, we choose the k nearest neighborhood.

Based on the formal definition of qualitative spatial co- location pattern, we used Euclidean distance to evaluate the distance between spatial feature objects (p, q), denoted as dist(p, q), and gave the definition of k-nearest feature objects set and frequent k-nearest feature objects set. Finally, we introduced the quantized k-nearest features based qualitative spatial co-location pattern.

Definition 2: K-nearest feature objects set of a Feature object (short for k-NF(o)).

Let o be a feature object in dataset S, the k-NF(o) is a subset of the nearest k features objects of o, and any object in K-NF(o) has the same feature type with o is omitted. That is,  (1) |k-NF(o)|?k; (2) o?k-NF(o); (3) If o?s feature type is Ci where Ci?T, ?p?k-NF(o), then  p?s feature type is not Ci; (4) If p, q is o?s k-th and (k+1)-th nearest feature object,  then dist(o,q)?????? ??  To explain k-NF(o) and the following definitions, we draw a sample spatial dataset below, and gave some corresponding examples to demonstrate those definitions.

Fig. 1 A sample spatial dataset  Example 1: Figure 1 shows the frequent co-occurrences of some spatial feature types of points. In this spatial dataset S, four spatial feature types named by lexicographic order (A, B, C, D) and represented by different shapes. Feature objects are located in a two dimensional space, and as can be seen, instances of spatial features in sets {A, B} and {A, C} tend to be located together. Dataset S will be used as the explaining example in the following paper. We have 18 instances in S, where 5 instances of A, 5 instances of B, 6 instances of C and 2 instances of D.

Example 2:  Consider 5 instances of A in Figure 1, use k=2 as the number of nearest neighbor threshold, then: 2- NF(A1)={C3B3}; 2-NF(A2)={B4D1}; 2-NF(A3)={C6C1}; 2- NF(A4)={C5B3}; 2-NF(A5)={B2B1}.

Definition 3: k-nearest feature types set of a Feature type (short for k-NF(T)).

Let C be a feature type in T, k-NF(C) is the union of each C?s instance oi?s k-NF(oi), and then abstracted to feature type level. It can be formally represented as: k-NF(C) = {?k- NF(oi)|oi?C}  Set	C is the complementary set of C, S= { C ?	C}, then the range of k-NF(C) is the subset of all unions of each element in 	C. The maximum number of different elements of  k-NF(C) is   k i m  i C   ? ?  , where m is the number of feature types, k is the neighbourhood threshold.

Example 3: Still consider feature type A, set k=2 as the threshold, then: 2-NF(A)={2-NF(A1), 2-NF(A2), 2-NF(A3), 2- NF(A4), 2-NF(A5)}={BC, BD, C, BC, B}  We can go further that the size of k-NF(C) is equal to C?s instance number.

Definition 4: Support of k-nearest feature types set Cs in k- NF(C). (Denote as Support(C, Cs))  Given feature type C, C?T; let Cs is a subset of 	C, and Cs ?k-NF(C); we record the number of times when Cs and Cs?s super set exists in k-NF(C) as N, then the Support of Cs can be evaluated as follows: Support(C, Cs)=N/|k-NF(C)|, range from 0 to1.

Example 4: Consider feature type A which has 5 instances in Figure 1, when choose k=2 as the threshold, the maximum  number of 2-NF(A)?s elements is 1 2 3 3C C =3+3=6. Then using  the results we got from example 3, all the support of 2- NF(A)?s elements can be follows:  Support(A, B)=4/5; Support(A, C)=3/5; Support(A, D)=1/5; Support(A, BC)=2/5; Support(A, BD)=1/5; Support(A, CD)=0.

Definition 5: Qualitative support of k-nearest feature type Cq in k-NF(Cp). (Denote as Qu-Support(Cp.ai, Cq.aj)).

Given feature type Cp, Cp?T; let Cq is a subset of Cs, and Cs ?k-NF(Cp); ai is an enumerate value of Cp?s one qualitative non-spatial attribute, aj is an enumerate value of Cq?s one qualitative non-spatial attribute. When, Np is the record number of ai exists in k-NF(Cp), and Nq is the record number of aj exist in k-NF(Cp), Qu-Support(Cp.ai, Cq.aj)=Nq/Np.

The meaning of Qu-support(Cp.ai, Cq.aj) is the possibility that Cq will exists in Cp?s k-NF set, when Cq?s one qualitative non-spatial attribute equals to aj and Cp?s one qualitative non- spatial attribute equals to ai simultaneously.

Definition 6: Frequent k nearest feature types set. (Denote as Frequent(Cp, Cq))  Given a support threshold ?, Cq is a frequent k nearest feature types set in k-NF(Cp) only if: { Cq ? k-NF(Cp), and Support(Cp, Cq)??}.

Example 5: As we set the support threshold ? equals to 60%, there exist two frequent k nearest feature types sets in 2- NF(A): B ? 2-NF(A) ? Support (A, B) =4/5 ??????? Frequent (A, B) C ? 2-NF(A) ? Support (A, C) =3/5 ??????? Frequent (A, C)  Definition 7: Qualitative frequent k nearest feature type set.

(Denote as Qu-Frequent(Cp.ai, Cq.aj))  Given a support threshold ?n, Cq.aj is a qualitative frequent k nearest feature type in k-NF(Cp) only if: { Cq ? k-NF(Cp), and Qu-Support(Cp.ai, Cq.aj)??n}.

Definition 8: k nearest features based spatial co-location pattern (Denote as Co-locationk(Cp?Cq))  Feature type Cq is Cp?s Co-location features only if: { Cq ? k-NF(Cp) and Frequent (Cp, Cq) exists }.

Example 6: Consider feature type A in Figure 1, we can get two spatial co-location patterns from the result of example 5.

(1) Support (A, B) = 0.8 ??????? Frequent (A, B) ? Co- location2 (A?B)  (2) Support (A, C) = 0.6 ??????? Frequent (A, C) ? Co- location2 (A?C)  When using the same k value and ? value as threshold, we can also get those co-location patterns from Figure 1:  (3) Support (B, A) = 1 ??????? Frequent (B, A) ? Co- location2 (B?A)    (4) Support (B, AD) = 0.8 ??????? Frequent (B, AD) ? Co-location2 (B?AD)  (5) Support (B, D) = 0.8 ??????? Frequent (B, D) ? Co- location2 (B?D)  (6) Support (C, A) = 0.83 ??????? Frequent (C, A) ? Co- location2 (C?A)  (7) Support (D, C) = 1 ??????? Frequent (D, C) ? Co- location2 (D?C)  Definition 9: k nearest features based qualitative spatial co- location pattern (Denote as Qu-Co-locationk(Cp.ai?Cq.aj))  Feature type Cq is Cp?s qualitative Co-location features only if: { Cq ? k-NF(Cp) and Frequent (Cp.ai, Cq.aj) exists }.

The example of qualitative support value and qualitative spatial co-location patterns generation will be given directly in the experiments part, and the data are from ESRI?s thesis map ? ?The StreetMap of USA on 2004?.



IV. CHARACTERS OF K-NF BASED QUALITATIVE SPATIAL CO- LOCATION PATTERN  Here we well list two major characters of the k nearest features based qualitative spatial co-location pattern. Also, we make comparisons with the distance based co-location patterns.

A. The inclusion character Obviously, the qualitative spatial co-location pattern set is a  subset of traditional k nearest features based co-location pattern set when chosen the same support threshold, which means there has an inclusive relation between these two kinds of pattern. If Qu-Co-locationk(Cp.ai?Cq.aj) exists, then Co- locationk (Cp?Cq) exists too.

This character can be used to find qualitative spatial co- location patterns according to the traditional k nearest features based co-location patterns.

B. The anti-symmetry character Distance based co-location patterns[4] are bidirectional and  symmetrical, co-location(A, B) ? co-location(B, A).

However, the computation of these patterns is very effected by the instance number of A and B, especially to those rare spatial features. It?s nearly impossible to get a distance based co-location pattern contains rare spatial features. Huang[9] identify a weak monotonic property of the maximal participation ratio to mine patterns contain rare spatial feature.

We notice that the computation complexity well be increasing exponentially as the threshold low down. It is equal to the Apriori algorithm without pruning step, when chosen 0 as the support threshold.

According to our definition 4, k nearest features based co- location patterns have already considered the fact that each feature type has different instance number. Usually, co- locationk(A, B)?co-locationk(B, A). We call it anti-symmetry character. This character can handle the rare spatial feature situation, example 6 shows that feature type D only has two instances, although Support(C, D) = 1/3 (2-NF(C4) and 2-  NF(C5) contain D?s instance), we still got Co-location2 (D?C) with Support(D, C) equals to 1. Specifically, if co- locationk(Ca?Cb) and Co-locationk (Cb?Ca) both exist, then co-locationk(Ca?Cb) also exists.

Example 7: From the 7 results of example 6, as both Co- location2 (A?B) and Co-location2 (B?A) are exist, we can get a bidirectional k nearest features based co-location pattern Co-location2 (A?B), Co-location2 (A?C) exists too. Two co-location patterns? support values are 80% and 60%.



V. THE QUCOM ALGORITHM To mining qualitative spatial co-location patterns directly is  costly. For a spatial dataset which contains seven spatial feature types, each feature type contains only one classified non-spatial attributes and each non-spatial attribute has four kinds of qualitative description, when set k equals to 5, the size of each feature object?s k-NF set could be calculated as below:  1 2 3 4 5 7 7 7 7 74* 4* 4* 4* 4* 33068size C C C C C?     ?  This could be very inefficient for a large spatial datasets, even when facing multiple non-spatial attributes situation.

As mentioned in section IV, we can use the results of traditional k nearest features based co-location patterns, to mining qualitative spatial co-location patterns from them. This can avoid many computations, the size of k-NF set is diminished sharply (only those spatial feature types have co- location relations will be used to establish the k-NF set), and also the length of each candidate frequent itemset will be shorter than k. Following this idea, we developed our QuCOM (Qualitative spatial CO-location patterns Mining) algorithm.

A. QuCOM algorithm description The QuCOM algorithm can be divided into two parts: K  nearest features based co-location patterns generation; Qualitative spatial co-location patterns generation. Actually, the first part could be a ordinary k nearest features based spatial co-location patterns mining algorithm like KNFCOM- T[10]. So, we will just focus on the second part here.

The key point in generation qualitative spatial Co-location patterns is to calculate Qualitative support for each k-nearest feature types which are generated in (1), so the first and foremost introduced data structure is ArrayList<KnnSet>[] AttrSet, it is used to store all the candidate qualitative spatial co-location patterns and their support values. For each spatial feature type, set the size of this hashtable arraylise equals to the total number of its classified attributes, and each Hashtable contains the combination of other feature types? classified attributes which have k nearest features based co-location relation with it. Other three major data structures are: ArrayList<PatternsSet> [] PattSet, Hashtable <String, Integer>[] AttrType and Hashtable <String,Double>[] AttrCO.

First one is used to store all k nearest features based co- location patterns, its size is M. The second one is used to store all feature types? classified attributes values and their total numbers, for the following support calculations. The last one    is used to store final qualitative spatial co-location patterns and their support values.

B. Producode of QuCOM algorithm Inputs:  (1) A spatial feature object set O with M spatial feature types and N feature objects, O = {o0, o1, ?, oN-1}, each oi?O is a vector with at least three attributes: <objectId, featureType, location, nonSpatialAttribute1, nonSpatialAttribute2, ?>.

(2) A threshold number of nearest features k, where k?Z and k<>0.

(3) A support threshold value ? for both frequent and qualitative frequent k nearest features type set.

Outputs: All the qualitative frequent k nearest features based spatial co-location patterns exist in O.

Pseudo-code: (1) Get all the k nearest features based co-location patterns  according to [10], store them into PattSet.

(2) Scan PattSet, for each spatial feature type C, C?T (2.1) Create C?s KnnSet based on C?s co-location patterns (2.2) Create C?s AttrSet according to C?s classified attributes (3) Scan spatial feature object set O, for each feature object o,  o?Ci (3.1) Scan o?s classified attributes ai from AttrType (3.1.1) For each ai?s KnnSet A, (3.1.1.1) Scan o?s k-NF(o) (3.1.1.1.1)If A exists in k-NF(o)?s feature object?s classified  attributes, then add 1 to the corresponding KnnSet.

(4) Scan AttrSet[M] (4.1) Calculate the support values for each KnnSet?s element  according to AttrType (4.1.1) If the support value greater than ?, then store current  feature type C, C?s classified attribute value, KnnSet?s element name and support value into AttrCO  (5) Scan AttrCO, and output all the qualitative spatial co- location patterns

VI. EXPERIMENTS We implemented the algorithm by Java language, and the  experimental platform was a Pentium IV 2.66GHz-based machine with 512MB main memory. The experimental data was ?StreetMap of USA on 2004? from Environmental Systems Research Institute[11], which contains over 330 thousands spatial instance in it. We extracted one State ? California?s spatial data, which contains seven kinds of spatial feature about California?s culture theme places. The total number of places is 9085, and detailed explanation was shown in Table I. Our aim was to mine interesting qualitative spatial co-location patterns between different kinds of places in California.

TABLE I SPATIAL DATA WITHIN NON-SPATIAL INFORMATION ABOUT SEVEN KINDS OF  CULTURE PLACES IN CALIFORNIA  Places Marks Non-spatial attribute  Classified value Number  Airport A usage Public 251 Private 16  Cemetery B None Cemetery 675 Church C None Church 1383 Hospital D Organizer State 18  City 26 District Authority 46 Church 51 Corporation and Partnership   No for profit 177 Veterans 7 Other Federal 7  Park E Level National 39 State 219 Local 2483  Post office F None Post office 363 School G Level Secondary 1911  Post Secondary 1296  All title and author details must be in single-column format and must be centered.

A. Spatial co-location patterns in California?s spatial dataset Using QuCOM algorithm, when setting k equals to 5, ?  equals to 60%, we got all k nearest features based co-location patterns without non-spatial attributes list in Table II.

TABLE II SPATIAL CO-LOCATION PATTERNS IN CALIFORNIA SPATIAL DATASET  Co-location5 support Co-location5 support A? E 0.68 D ? G 0.93 A? G 0.93 D ? EG 0.63  A? EG 0.65 E ? G 0.96 B ? G 0.83 F ? G 0.76 C ? G 0.96 G ? E 0.78 D ? E 0.67 G ? E 0.78  From table II, we could draw some conclusions: The assertion that a hospital?s five nearest neighbour places (5-NF) will contain school has a 93% possibility. The assertion that all parks and schools may exist in each other?s 5-NF has a 66% possibility. The assertion that one school?s 5-NF will not contain post office has a 78% possibility. Other conclusions also can be drawn like this.

B. Qualitative spatial co-location patterns generation From the results table II, we can see that all of those co-  location patterns contain only park and school (which are marked as E and G), so the KnnSet we have to create is much shorter too. There are three classified values in park, and two classified values in school, then the maximum size for each candidate frequent qualitative spatial co-location patterns set (KnnSet) is:  1 1 1 1 3 2 3 2* 11C C C C  ?  After creating all KnnSet for each feature type, QuCOM can scan each feature object?s k-NF(o), calculate each    KnnSet?s element?s support value. In the end, we got some qualitative spatial co-location patterns shown in table III.

TABLE III QUALITATIVE CO-LOCATION PATTERNS IN CALIFORNIA SPATIAL DATASET  Park School National/  State Local Secon dary  Post Secondary  (Airport) Public 0.6 0.75 Private 0.88 0.69  Cemetery 0.73 Church 0.83  (Hospital) State 0.67 0.72 0.72 City 0.62 0.81 0.62  District Authority 0.96  Church 0.61 0.67 0.69 Corporation  and Partnership  0.75 0.77 0.73  No for profit 0.66 0.72 Veterans 1  Other Federal 0.71 1  (Park) National 0.77  State 0.83 Local 0.89 0.75  Post office 0.62 (School)  Secondary 0.66  Form table III, we can make some more detailed conclusions:  (1) Private used airports are located more close to parks than public used airport. A private used airport?s five nearest neighbour places (5-NF) will contain local park has an 88% possibility. On the contrary, public used airports are located more close to schools than private used airports. A public used airport?s 5-NF will contain Secondary school has a 75% possibility.

(2) Compared with post secondary school, secondary school will more probably exists in a state organized hospital?s 5-NF, the possibility is 62% versus 81%.

(3) There is a very high possibility that secondary school will exists in a district authority organized hospital?s 5-NF, its possibility is up to 96%.

(4) Local parks are more likely located in post secondary schools? 5-NF, compared with secondary schools, the possibility is 79% versus 66%.

Other conclusions also can be drawn like this.



VII. CONCLUSION When considering both spatial and non-spatial attributes to  do spatial data analysis, we can get more detailed and  meaningful information. In this paper, we proposed a new spatial association pattern: qualitative spatial co-location pattern. To mining this pattern from spatial datasets, we gave several definitions, and proposed the QuCOM algorithm.

Comparison analysis in the experiments part gave a clear proof that the qualitative spatial co-location mining can get more interesting results than traditional ones.

The ability to handle liner spatial features is still a challenge in the spatial association rules mining area, because the definition of its close relationship is more difficult than points and polygons. Also, the QuCOM algorithm only can handle point and polygon spatial features well. Extending it to handle all kinds of spatial features could be our ongoing work.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This study was funded by a grant (Project Number:  41001231) from National Natural Science Foundation of China, and the National High Technology Research and Development Program ("863"Program) of China (Project Number: 2011aa120304).

