Extracting Geographic Knowledge from Sensor Intervention Data Using Spatial Association Rules

Abstract?Large networks of sensors are used to detect intru- sions and provide security at the borders of the United States.

Sensor signals are used to detect possible intrusions such as illegal immigration traffic in drugs, weapons, and smuggled goods at specific targeted geographic locations. GIS systems can be used to capture, store and analyze this location based intervention data.

Using a GIS system, a spatial database can be generated from the sensor intervention data which can take into account relevant geographic information in the vicinity of the sensed interventions.

Important geographic features that are close to the intervention locations such as: plateaus, hills, valleys or roadways can be extracted and added to the analysis using ArcGIS.

GIS techniques alone cannot reveal meaningful hidden infor- mation within geographic data. We have developed an integrated approach involving data mining and GIS techniques to extract patterns and trends in geographic data that can aid and in- form analysis. Our approach uses both spatial and association data mining techniques. Spatial data mining is the process of discovering previously unknown, interesting and potentially useful patterns from spatial datasets. Applying association rule mining to the spatial data can reveal additional important spatial relationships and help determine the relevance and importance of the sensor data. Spatial association rule mining was used to discover patterns in the intervention data, such as linking a sensed intrusion with a potentially hidden location such as a canyon, to infer a high probability of illegal traffic or immigration.



I. INTRODUCTION  Sensor networks that are used for surveillance purposes in border security generate large amounts of data. The sensors are used to identify a range of potential intrusions occurring at the border. This sensor data includes some meaningful information embedded within large datasets that include background noise and potentially false alarms. Patterns can be identified within the sensor signals data that can be used to identify and reduce this noise and assist agents in identifying potentially actionable interventions occurring at targeted geographic locations. The identification of important patterns from sensor signals has been the focus of our previous study [1]. We developed  Fig. 1. Interventions added as a layer on AZ map along the border.

an off-line learning system enables us to accurately identify actionable interventions from the sensor signals. Once the location and the type of interventions are known, spatial data mining techniques can be applied to discover potentially useful knowledge from the data. Currently, there is lot of work and interest in Geographic data, as it has become a rich source of structure and pattern making it ideal for data mining research to address problems such as sensor data analysis [2][3]. The current work focuses on integrating data mining and GIS techniques to extract patterns and rules from the intervention data.

This paper discusses the method we have employed to extract patterns from the intervention data. Geographic knowl- edge of the vicinity of sensor intervention data is used to create rules to extract useful patterns and information from the data. Potentially important geographic features that are close to the intervention locations such as: plateaus, hills valleys or roadways can be extracted and added to the analysis using  ___________________________________     ArcGIS. These geographic features are extracted in the vicinity of interventions and used to inform analysis of patterns in the data.



II. METHOD  The objective of this work is to integrate the intervention data and the GIS data to simplify identification and extraction of useful patterns. Spatial association rule mining is used to extract spatial relationships between various potentially relevant features in the geographic data. Interventions are simulated at various geographic locations of potential illegal activity such as illegal immigration, drug or weapon traffic (categorized A, B, C etc.). The locations are described by geographic coordinates system, which use units of decimal degrees for coordinates. Decimal degrees are angles, and these units of measure are generally used with the GIS data. X- coordinates are longitude values and Y-coordinates are latitude values. For data in North America, the longitude values must be negative numbers between 0 and -180 and latitude values must be positive numbers from 0 and +90.

The intervention data has been added as a layer or map using a GIS system. The specific software used for this purpose is ArcGIS. Additional layers containing potentially relevant geographic features of USA that are close to the intervention locations such as: plateaus, hills valleys or roadways are added as separate layers. Structured Query Language (SQL) expres- sions can be used to select potentially relevant features in ArcGIS. Spatial join tools were used to extract the geographic features proximal to the intervention locations. A table join was created to append fields from one layer?s attribute table to another layer?s attribute table based on the relative location of features in the two layers.

All the relevant features were extracted in the vicinity of the intervention test area to create a spatial database. Some of the features were rivers within 5 miles, highways within 5 miles, elevation value at the current intervention location, elevation values within a 5-mile radius etc. The elevation values in the vicinity of the intervention were used to classify the current location as a hill or a valley. The maximum and minimum values of the elevation within 5 miles of the intervention location were recorded. The difference between the elevation value at the current location and the maximum and minimum values were used to classify the given intervention location as a plateau, hill or valley.

Once the spatial database was generated techniques related to association rule mining [4][5] were applied to extract patterns in the data. A spatial association rule [2][6][7][8] is used to describe the implication that one or a set of features may have on another set of features in a spatial database. The data is preprocessed to format similarly to a customer market database to extract spatial association rules, which is discussed in the later sections.



III. EXPERIMENTS  Sensors commonly used in surveillance applications gen- erate vast amounts of data. Border security agents use this  TABLE I INTERVENTION DATA OBTAINED FROM OFF-LINE LEARNING OF SENSOR  PATTERNS  Intervention ID X-Coordinate Y-Coordinate Type of Intervention 1 -110.92 32.23 A 2 -112.02 33.45 B 3 -111.99 33.46 D 4 -111.94 33.44 C 5 -113.18 34.57 C 6 -110.30 31.96 B  Fig. 2. Intervention data superimposed with geographic features on AZ map as separate layers.

data to identify potential interventions such as illegal im- migration, drug and weapon traffic. The large amount of data and high amount of noise and potentially false alarm information within this data makes human analysis extremely difficult and problematic. In our current work, we simulated border security sensor data, and embedded instances of specific information about the type of intervention and the geographic location of actionable events within the overall dataset. A combination of data mining and GIS techniques were applied to gain geographic knowledge and identify important patterns from the data to attempt to separate meaningful actions from background noise to identify the targets within the overall datasets. In this section, we describe the data generation using GIS techniques and analysis of the geographic data to extract useful rules and patterns used in this process.

A. Data Generation  Since actual intervention data from the sensors was not available, data was simulated for these experiments. Approxi- mately 200 interventions were simulated along a 15-mile strip of the AZ-Mexico border. The dataset consisted of the ID of the intervention, its geographic coordinates and the type of    TABLE II DATABASE CONSISTING OF GEOGRAPHICAL FEATURES IN THE VICINITY OF INTERVENTIONS.

Intervention ID Rivers in 5 miles Elev at point Elev in 2 miles radius Highways in 5 miles 1 Gila River 462 730,857,710,802,692 I-40 2 1058 875, 1041, 912, 882, 1011 I-40 3 Colorado River 280 294, 296, 304,297,287 4 406 536,541,545, 523, 519 I-10  Fig. 3. An example market basket database[9].

Fig. 4. A binary 0/1 representation of market basket data in Fig 3[9].

intervention as shown in Table I. These interventions were added as a layer on the AZ map using ArcGIS as shown in Fig 1.

GIS data of AZ containing various geographic features like plateaus, hills, valleys, roadways, and elevation raster etc. are added as separate layers as shown in Fig 2. Once all the relevant features are added to the existing map, an SQL-like query is used to extract the features in the vicinity of the interventions. A database similar to that shown in Table II is generated.

B. Extraction of features using GIS  Geographic Information Systems (GIS) are used in various fields and applications to explore large data sets to aid analysis and obtain insight. Spatial or geographic queries are performed on spatially indexed database to extract information regarding spatial relationships between the data items. The intervention data as shown in Fig 1 is superimposed with other geographic layers as shown in Fig 2 to extract useful spatial relationships such as containment, intersection, adjacency etc.

The spatial join tool in ArcGIS was used to extract geo- graphic features in the vicinity of the simulated interventions using an SQL-like query. This tool is used to find the spatial relationships between the features in various layers of a map.

For example, this tool enables identification of the nearest branch offices of a business to a particular location. The distance of search can be varied from a few feet to several miles.

Features such as plateaus, hills, valleys, roadways or el- evation values in the vicinity of the 200 interventions were  extracted. The distance for the neighborhood was chosen to be 5 miles for highways and rivers. Elevation values at the intervention locations were extracted from a raster shape file with the pixel value ranging from 26-3745 with 26 being the least elevation point and 3745 being the highest. The elevation values within 2 miles of the intervention location were also extracted. These values were used to classify the given location as a plateau, hill or a valley by comparing the maximum and minimum values with the value at the current intervention location.

C. Spatial Association Rule Mining  A spatial association rule is a rule of the form ?X ? Y ?, where X and Y are sets of predicates, with some or both being spatial ones. For example the following rules are spatial association rules  Is a(x, office) ? close to(x, downtown) ? type of business(finance)  where the consequent is non-spatial while the antecedent is spatial  Is a(house with pool) ? close to(x, downtown) where consequent is spatial.

Strong spatial association rules reveal important information in geographic data. To focus our study on strong rules, measures such as support and confidence were introduced in Agrawal et al[4][5]. Extracting association rules from a market basket database required a database transformation. As an example, consider the database of a customer transactions shown in Fig 3[9]. In order to extract association rule mining to this item database, a transformation was required in the    TABLE III DATABASE AFTER PREPROCESSING.

Intervention ID Elev at point Increase in Elev Decrease in Elev Gila River Colorado River I-10 I-40 1 462 120 22 contains ? ? crosses 2 1058 12 213 ? ? ? crosses 3 280 13 18 ? contains ? ?

4 406 120 117 ? ? crosses ?

form shown in Fig 4[9]. A similar transformation was required for our simulated sensor spatial database to implement spatial association rule mining.

Geographic data preprocessing is often time and effort consuming step in the knowledge discovery process. Pre- processing of the intervention data generated (Table 2) is required before association rule mining can occur. To apply conventional data mining algorithms, spatial data have to be described in terms of spatial predicates rather than as items.

Spatial predicates can include terms of topology, distance (like close to) and directions (to north of ). The result of the preprocessing is a table as shown in Table III, which contains spatial relationships for spatial objects and data categorization (if necessary) for non-spatial objects.

We applied supervised spatial association rule mining to the preprocessed database (similar to Table 3) to discover spatial patterns of the types of interventions occurring at various geographic locations. The software CBA (v2.1) that integrates classification and association rule mining was used for this task. We were able to successfully build accurate classifiers from the intervention data, where each record specifies the type of intervention and a fixed number of attributes used to describe them. Interesting rules such as if the intervention is occurring in a valley i.e.

Increase in Elev ? 400 ? Type of intervention = A were discovered from the dataset.



IV. CONCLUSION  In this paper we have incorporated GIS and data mining techniques to classify the interventions based on the geo- graphic locations. Spatial data was generated by considering the spatial closeness of the interventions and the geographic features from GIS data of the southern United States border between Arizona and Mexico. The spatial data is preprocessed to permit application of apply conventional data mining tech- niques. Supervised spatial association rules were discovered from the data that could provide useful information about the intervention locations, for example enabling the border agents to identify potentially meaningful intrusions within the voluminous sensor data, to analyze the potential reason for the intrusion (i.e. drug or weapon intervention, illegal immi- gration, etc.) at that location, and then to take precautionary action at those specific locations.

