The Application of Improved Apriori Algorithm in  Continuous Speech Recognition

Abstract?In continuous Speech Recognition ,for the problem of recognizing speaker's voice completely and accurately is difficult ,and could not understand the meaning even if the machine could identify the voice completely .The improved algorithm is proposed innovatively based on association logic Apriori algorithm .The algorithm divide database into correlated partitions and locate the voice condition in certain association rules specifically according to the character of input voice signal ,thus the efficiency of continuous voice identification and the humanistic of machine is improved ,the drawback of research only on acoustic model is broken.

Keywords-data mining; speech recognition;association algorithm; imprved apriori algorithm; association rules

I. INTRODUCTION In recent three decades, speech recognition technology has  significant progress, including DTW (Dynamic Time Warping), HMM (Hidden Markov Model) linear prediction residual principle, VQ (Vector Quantization) and other technical reference to the speech recognition field. The continuous speech recognition has been rapid development. a variety of algorithms for dealing with noise, voice range breakpoint detection, voice analysis parameter, extraction and matching. But this is only for the acoustic model, no link to the specific environment which include the speaker characteristics and professional knowledge, machine can not like people to divergent thinking based on the content of speech.

In the practical application of the database, data mining extract hidden information in them which people do not know but is useful. Data mining can highly automated analysis of existing data and make inductive reasoning. Data mining divided into problem definition, target description, data selection and preprocessing, model selection algorithm and interpretation of the results of assessment to strike. Data mining algorithm selection is the core of Data mining. All algorithms in data mining, association algorithm is one  , one of the role of the algorithm is to use what is known to predict other association things. Association algorithm is the most classic Apriori algorithm, the paper give the process of the classical Apriori algorithm and propose improved Apriori algorithm basing on the shortcomings of the classical algorithm. The improved algorithm used in speech recognition. Depend on data mining database in which There are common sense of people or the speaker's resume or  experience, to draw some useful things in the set, according to the input voice information, finding the set related to speaker which enhance the machine to further understanding on the speaker and to improve continuous speech recognition accuracy. These sets to help the machine to recognize continuous speech .



II. ALGORITHM  A. Association Algorithm The algorithm is a response to the relationship between  things and other things, if the relationship among things, it is known from one of the things that could predict other things, revealing the relationship among things is the core of the association algorithm. The algorithm is as follows:  1 2 3{ , , }nS s s s s=  is the complete set, 1 2 3{ , , }nK k k k k=  is the item  database.

A S? , , ,A K B S B K? ? ? , And A B? = ? .

(1) If the probability of supporting {A,B} in the item database entries is t%, then {A,B}?s support in the item database K is t , all over the set?s subset is bigger than a given set of minimum support is called frequent set.

(2) the set include all of the item A, the probability of{A B} in this set is bigger than n%, then the credibility degree of the frequent set {A,B} in item databases K is n .

Set all of the item is a subset of S Set, xw Is a subset of the item database, according to the formula (2) seek the set of meeting support degree  ( ) ( ) %  xp w t p K  >     ( ,1 )xw K x m? ? ?               (2)  yw Is frequent set, according to the formula (3) obtain the association rules of meeting credible degree  CAUC2009ZD0102. MHRD201004     ( ) ( ) %  y  x  p w n  p w >            ( , )y xw w y x? <            (3)  B. Apriori Algorithm Apriori algorithm is a classical algorithm for extracting  association rules .The way will be divided into two steps:  (1) In a item database, find all the item set whose the support is greater than t;  (2) Basing on (1) , find the association rules whose credibility degree is greater than n;  Apriori algorithm is an iterative method, first find the item that contains a set of items denoted by p1, according to p1 to find the items which contains two items denoted as p2.Calculating in accordance with this rule until no frequent sets generated. in K times cycle, do (k-2) connection between two different sets which includes frequent k-1 items and only one item is different .this operation have produced a frequent set containing k items. When n is greater than 1  a program flow chart of the extraction of frequent item is shown in Figure  Database a I=0  start  I=I+1  I k  Meet support or no  Put into a  All the data in b are calculated or  no  n-1 n>1  end  no  Delete from a  yes  no  no  yes  no  yes  yes  no  yes  B make connection  Put the data that is from a into  b  Drop data    Figure 1.  Extraction procedure of including n frequent items set .

C. The improved Apriori algorithm Base on the fault of many same project when connecting  program, making the following improvements.After getting a candidate set G1, which contains the transaction number and the total number of items, where using cross-table structure, and its structure: node header (support count, point belongs to the set of Services), node (item number, point to the next  respective item otherwise empty), and then collected count of items O2 (item contains two items) from the G1. By connecting Ok-1 and itself to generate candidate k item sets, called Gk, according to the relevant concepts to obtain the count of Gk. the improved Algorithm is showed in Figure2  start  Input database and support  Create cross-table structure  Create frequent se which contain one iterm  Create k frequent set From k-1 frequent set  K=2  K  frequent set=null  Merge all the frequent set  end  yes  no  K+1   Figure 2. The flow chart of improved Apriori Algorithm  Compared with Apriori algorithm, the improved Apriori algorithm improve the processing speed, shorten the time of the algorithm and mine more association rules .For mining database which contains large amounts of data and in a wide variety ways providing favorable conditions. This is helpful for speech recognition.



III. THE APPLICATION OF DATA MINING IN SPEECH RECOGNITION  Continuous speech recognizing  purely rely on grammatical structure or recklessly understanding several words combinations, that is Only a blunt mechanical understanding.

In the natural community, how to understand each other's meaning by the exchange of people? Not only voice heard by the ears, but relationship between the contents of hear and their environment, or their knowledge or their experiences together.

For example, a dialogue among professionals, because not understanding of their area of expertise and not knowing the work of them, an outsider is difficult to understand what they mean. Therefore only under related background with the content of speech to understand the speaker to express content.

A.  Association rules derived in speech recognition There is a database, the database is to address people's  lives that may be a specific aspect of emotional, may be sports and so on. And the elements of this database should be specific to a particular thing or something, and contains the full side of things as much as possible. Depending on the application to set support degree, using improved Apriori     algorithm to generate frequent sets. According to the voice input signal and the credibility to found the association rules to meet the requirements. May sometimes get a lot of association rules , how to do?

Because people in a specific period of time during which the content what people say is a fixed thing or fixed events.

Therefore, according to the input signal and the next set of credibility, found the association rules match the first request, and then find the intersection of this association Rules and association rules obtained last time to get association rules which close to the speaking environment. If the association rule can be sure, we can determine what the speaker say or discussed within the association rule in quite long time,. If the association rule can not be fixed, then still need the next set of voice signals and credibility. The process is shown in Figure 3    Figure 3.  The process of speech recognition derived association rules  B. Application examples Once finding the association rules, in quite long time, a  large probability of content of speech is within the rules of the association rules, even it is out of association rules. Association rules will be in the vicinity of the association rules.

For example, the first input voice signal is Jordan, Apriori algorithm based on association rules derived that there are the association rules O {Jordan, Adidas, Nike, ...} (the rule is concerned with the sports brand) and the association rules C {Bulls, NBA , basketball, Michael Jordan ...} (the rules relate sport) ,C and O meet set credibility degree, and the second voice signal derive association rules C {Basketball Bulls, NBA, basketball, Michael Jordan ...}, etc. But does not include O association rules ,.Intersected association rules which derived from the two input speech signal ,the result of this is removing the association rule O, left both contain the C association rules. when If the input speech signal properties is a bull, then the machine will look for rules in the relationship,  you will find with the Bulls in the C rules. The machine will know that this bull is basketball association, the thing is about the NBA , rather than grass, or food-association things.



IV. CONCLUSION  In this paper, the classical Apriori algorithm and its improved Apriori algorithm is elaborated, and using this algorithm to calculate association rules association to the specific environment, to same extent, simulate the natural communication between people in society environment. Help machines to understand the speaker, helps to improve the efficiency and continuous speech recognition accuracy.

However, the database based on association rule extraction is directly association to the comprehensiveness and effectiveness of the establishment of data warehouse will be the next focus of the study.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT Thanks to the support from Foundation item (Research  highlight in Civil Aviation University of China (CAUC2009ZD0102); CAAC science and technology foundation (MHRD201004)).

