Research on Application of Data Mining Based on   FP-Growth Algorithm for Digital Library

Abstract?In the field of the library, there is a huge amount of data from readers? borrowing records every day. We can find an interesting network from the relationship of books by doing data mining works on these records, especially on the analysis of association rules, which can help us to find the needs of readers more clearly. FP-growth (frequent pattern growth) uses an extended prefix-tree (FP-tree) structure to store the database in a compressed form. FP-growth adopts a divide-and-conquer approach to decompose both the mining tasks and the databases.

In this paper, we use FP-growth algorithm to analyze the association rule of library circulation records. The results can make great sense to help to improve the quality of library collections.

Keywords-Data mining; FP-growth; Digital library; Algorithm;

I. INTRODUCTION With the development of office automation technology,  now almost all the libraries have adopted the library management systems to direct the library and have achieved automation management of acquisition, cataloging, circulation and other process. With the library work, the system will produce huge amounts of data every day, such as book order history, records of readers into the library, operation records from the staff, etc. in which the most important and the maximum amount of data is the record of the book circulation of borrowing and returning. We can find useful information as follows with the analysis on the degree of association of the borrowing record:  Books which are easily be borrowed by many readers at the same time.

Groups of readers who prefer to borrow certain groups of books.

Ratio between the number of books borrowed by readers at the same time.

Features of the book contents in different groups of readers.

Characteristics of the borrowing cycle in different groups of readers.

We can find out the relationships between books and readers which is an important premise to establish the  purchasing system for the library with data mining on the association rules of the borrowing records.



II. ABOUT DATA MINING Data mining (sometimes called data or knowledge  discovery) is the process of analyzing data from different perspectives and summarizing it into useful information - information that can be used to increase revenue, cuts costs, or both[1]. Data mining software is one of a number of analytical tools for analyzing data. It allows users to analyze data from many different dimensions or angles, categorize it, and summarize the relationships identified. Technically, data mining is the process of finding correlations or patterns among dozens of fields in large relational databases.

?Diapers and beer? is the most classic cases in the field of data mining, which can help us understand the concept of data mining. Wal-Mart uses its data warehouse system to analyze the customers? shopping behavior and find the unexpected results that along with the diapers, beer was actually the goods purchased up! After a survey analysis, they found out the reason for this phenomenon is: U.S. wives often told their husbands to buy diapers for the kids after work, and the husbands always brought their favorite beer after buying the diapers. So the Wal-Mart stores set the counter of diapers and beer side by side, brought the results that both diapers and beer sales growth.

A. Common Methods of Data Mining There are two types of knowledge discovery of data  mining: ?Verification-driven? and ?Discovery-driven?.

?Verification-driven? refers to that users make their own assumptions first, and then use various tools to verify or deny them through repeated, recursive search queries.

?Discovery-driven? means to discover new hypotheses through the techniques of Machine-Learning, statistics and data visualization and so on which play a very important and positive role in discovering new knowledge. But this process is not entirely automatic that it still need analysts involved.. It also includes descriptive and predictive two categories.

Descriptive data mining involves visualization, aggregation,     correlation, statistical and other techniques. Predictive data mining mainly refers to decision trees, rule induction, neural network techniques and etc. And such descriptive and predictive type of discovery-driven data mining is that we generally mentioned technology of data mining.[2]  1  Classification. Classification is to identify the common characteristics of a set of data objects in the database and to divide them into different classes follow the classification model with the purpose to map the data in the database to a given category. It can be applied to analyze the readers? classification, properties, characteristics, satisfaction and forecast the trend of readers? loan, such as to divide the readers into different groups according to their reading hobbies.

2  Regression Analysis. Regression analysis method reflects the features of property values in the transaction database in time. The main research issues include the trend characteristics of data series, the forecast of data series and the relationship between data and so on. It can be applied to all aspects of library management, such as to catch the readers? dynamic needs of books, analyze the book?s life cycle, forecast the trend of demand on books and make training activities targeted.

3  Association Rules. Association rules are the discipline to describe the relationship that exists between data items in the database, which is also the mutual relations hidden in the data. In the management of readers? relationship, we can find out a large number of interesting relationship and identify the key factors that affect books borrowing which can supply a foundation for us to purchase new books, train the readers and promote the service through data mining on the great quantity of data stored in the library management system.

