

Abstract  With the development of the technology and scale  of network, information security has been become the  important problem of people , the real-time module of  intrusion detection basing on data mining found a effective  mechanism for intrusion detection according to the  algorithm of data mining, it is effective for intrusion  detection, and it can protect user?s information security.

Keyword Data  Mining   Intrusion Detection  Information Security    Network  Real-time  Introduction With the development of the technology and scale of  network, network has been carrying more and more business and function. The problem of information security has become the important problem for users.

Along with the risk of network intrusion is more and more big; there is more and more the opportunity for intrusion. Network security facilities such as firewall already can not meet the existing demand for network security. Network security has become an unavoidable issue. Therefore, in order to protect more and more important and sensitive information, intrusion detection technology is also increasingly become a very important network security technology, has been more and more Internet users of all ages and attention.

The methods of intrusion detection based on data mining  Database technology and artificial intelligence technology to promote the organic integration of knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) technology generation. Knowledge discovery in databases, also known as data mining, is from a large database or data warehouse extraction of implicit, unknown, a potential value of the information or model approach. Data mining has the advantage of the ability to handle large amounts of data associated with data analysis capabilities.

Intrusion Detection (ID, Intrusion Detection) is through the collection of the operating system, system  programs, applications, network packets and other information found in violation of system security policy, or compromise a system of non-normal behavior.

Intrusion detection system equipment as intrusion detection systems. Intrusion detection technology is divided into two categories: abnormal-detection and misuse-detection. Abnormal-detection is the use of quantitative methods to describe the characteristics of acceptable behavior in order to distinguish and contrary to normal behavior, abnormal behavior characteristics to detect the invasion of normal habits of the user behavior characteristics is stored in the feature database, and then by the current user behavior characteristics and characteristic features of the database comparison, if the deviation between the two is large enough, then the anomaly occurred. Advantage of this approach is the ability to detect unknown types of attacks; the disadvantage is the false detection rate is relatively high.

Misuse-detection is the use of the known weaknesses in systems and application software to detect intrusion attack mode, attack will be known in some form is stored in the Knowledge Base, and then in the knowledge base to determine whether there is to detect intrusion patterns , If there is, then the invasion happened. This method has the advantage of higher detection accuracy, the disadvantage is only known attack types and known system vulnerabilities were detected, while new attacks and vulnerabilities could do nothing.

Most existing intrusion detection system using expert systems or methods based on statistical, which need more experience, and data mining method has the advantage that it extracts data from a large number of people interested, not known in advance Knowledge and law, rather than rely on experience. Network intrusion detection system based on data mining technology, the key is to choose the appropriate data mining algorithms to process audit data collected, are able to effectively       reflect the normal and abnormal network behavior detection of differences between the rules. According to the actual role model, the data mining algorithms currently used in the intrusion detection are classification, clustering, association rules and sequence, neural networks and decision tree methods.

Network database using this technology to achieve security at home and abroad is a new attempt. Data mining technology used in intrusion detection system based on a database, you can audit the data from a lot of knowledge that can help detect and rules, so as to effectively prevent the intrusion of emerging.

Classification algorithm used to construct the invasion of the main features, and by association rules from frequent episodes of the series of the extracted pattern mining properties in an easy people to understand the characteristics of heuristic rules to describe the attack and build the corresponding classifier, and finally classified using the trained To execute the corresponding function of misuse detection. Purposes of classification is to use the database features of the data item attributes, generate the classification model or classification function, the model can put the items in the database map to a given category in a classification. Clustering the physical or abstract objects into a collection of groups of similar objects from the multiple classes of processes.

Clusters generated by the cluster is a set of data with a common collection of objects, these objects with the same object in a cluster similar to each other, and other objects in different clusters. Unsupervised clustering-based anomaly intrusion detection method based on two assumptions. The first assumption is that normal behavior is far greater than the number of the number of intrusions. The second assumption is that the invasion of the behavior and normal behavior are very different. The basic idea of this method is due to intrusions and normal behavior of the number of different and relatively small, so they can be detected in the data showing a comparison of some special features. The purpose of association rule mining is to find items in large data item set the relationship between the meaningful or relevant links. The purpose of association rules discovered identify credible and representative of some of the rules, so give the set a minimum support  threshold and a minimum confidence threshold.

Sequential pattern mining is the relative time mining or other mode of higher frequency modes. Sequential pattern mining has several important parameters such as time series, the duration of the event window and overlapping patterns found in the time interval between the time and so on. We can also specify sequential pattern mining constraints is to provide a "template mode", the form of serial printing is ode, parallel segments, or regular expressions. Neural network is simply a group of connected input / output unit, where each connection associated with a weight. In the learning phase, by adjusting the neural network weights, makes it possible to predict the correct class label input samples to study.

Decision Tree is a tree structure similar to the flow chart, where each internal node, an attribute marked on the test, each branch represents a test output, and each leaf node represents a class or class distribution. Topmost node of the tree is the root node. The basic decision tree algorithm is a greedy algorithm. These are based on data mining based intrusion detection methods, these algorithms can be designed based on a reasonable and viable intrusion detection system.

The real-time network intrusion detection system design based on data mining model  Real-time data mining-based network intrusion detection model need to create a network database, the database user to operate the database in the long process will reflect a certain pattern of behavior, and for example, users often access the database or database object, which the session is the user under normal conditions Pattern of behavior and so on. The model structure, including data acquisition, detector, event analyzer, network database, real-time response centers and other real-time model generator unit. Design model as shown.

Data Collector  Detector  Event Analyzer  Real-time Response Center  Real-time Analog Generator  Network Database  Alarm   Figure 1 The model of real-time network intrusion detection     system base on data mining  Data acquisition system to capture audit data in the database, a session connection including a number of audit records, you need to belong to the same session multiple merge audit records in connection to the same session, A session connection record contains the following attributes: timestamp, session connection ID, Subject: user, object: database,: source host, the database or database object manipulation, session consumes CPU time and number of related reading and writing, conversation duration. Detector is sent to deal with data collection from real-time data, and using a test model to evaluate the data to determine whether this is an attack; detector, the results of another task is reserved for the database to the network after analysis and reporting.

Event analyzer is the detection of audit data to be captured into a session connection records, treatment records of testing session connection and generate the association rule mining association rules, and pre-established set of rules to compare cluster and calculate the degree of abnormal. If the anomaly is greater than a threshold, then the connection is abnormal connections, real-time response center will report the results and will also set aside the results to the network database after the analysis and reporting.

Real-Time Analyzer Response Center is the result of the event processing, when the test result is abnormal, an alarm to the security administrator, And the alarm information to a file for later analysis purpose, the alarm information includes: name of the invaders, invasion time, invasion route, intrusion analysis, detection time and detection range, while taking phase close ports, such as the appropriate disconnect Measures to deal with intrusions.

Real-time model generator is to produce and distribute new (or updated) intrusion detection model, the use of the normal from the network database and intrusion data sets to be able to automatically generate intrusion detection models of new and will be distributed to it detector.    Conclusion  As already have an existing data mining algorithms can be used, based on data mining intrusion detection technology has been rapid development. In this paper, based on data mining theory, real-time network intrusion  detection model can handle large amounts of data quickly extract the rules, but it also has some problems to be further experiments and improvements.

