

Abstract?Market-Basket Analysis is a process to analyze the habits of buyers to find the relationship between different items in their market basket. The discovery of these relationships can help the merchant to develop a sales strategy by considering the items frequently purchased together by customers. In this research, the data mining with market basket analysis method is implemented, where it can analyze the buying habit of the customers. The testing is conducted in Minimarket X. Searching for frequent itemsets performed by Apriori algorithm to get the items that often appear in the database and the pair of items in one transaction. Pair of items that exceed the minimum support will be included into the frequent itemsets are selected. Frequent itemsets that exceed the minimum support will generate association rules after decoding. One frequent itemsets can generate association rules and find the confidence, which is uses a hybrid-dimension association rules. The test results show, the application can generate the information what kind of products are frequently bought in the same time by the customers according to Hybrid- dimension Association Rules criteria. Results from the mining process show a correlation between the data (association rules) including the support and confidence that can be analyzed.

This information will give additional consideration for owners of Minimarket X to make the further decision.

Keywords-Data Mining; Market Basket Analysis; Apriori, Hybrid-Dimension Association Rules.



I.  INTRODUCTION Minimarket X wants to analyze the shopping habits of  customers to find associations and correlations among the items in their shopping basket. Specifically, this market basket analysis aims to determine what items are frequently purchased together by customers.

The application is designed to perform multi-dimensional data mining, where each variable represents on one particular dimension. The dimension involved is the items purchased and time. The information generated is the rules and the correlation between the items involved in the decision making.

The goal of this research is to develop an application to find out what products are often purchased together by customers with the attributes that influence it, such as  product and the time of purchase, using the case study in Minimarket X, using Hybrid-Dimension Association Rules criteria.



II. DATA MINING   In general, the function of the process of data mining can be classified into two categories: descriptive and predictive.

Predictive function provides global rules can be applied to the database. The descriptive function aims to provide a description of the available data sources. Descriptions are provided in summary form dense clusters that provide information, linkage, association or other forms [3].

A. Market Basket Analysis This is a process which analyzes the habits of the buyer  to find a relationship between different items on their shopping cart (market basket). The discovery of these relationships can help the seller to develop a sales strategy to consider items frequently purchased together by customers.

For example, if a buyer buys flour, how likely they will buy sugar on the same transaction [5].

For more details can be viewed at the following example: suppose that at an electronics store, to answer the question "What are items that may be purchased at the same visit?" To answer this question, market basket analysis can be done on the purchase transaction data in the store. The result can be applied to sales planning such items frequently purchased together are placed close together. The most basic algorithm to find frequent itemset that appears is the Apriori algorithm.

B. Association Rules Association rule is a procedure which is looking for a  relationship among an item with other items. Association rule is usually used "if" and "then" such as "if A then B and C", this shows if A then B and C. To determine the Association's rules, it needs to be specified the support and confidence to restrict whether the rule is interesting or not [4].

? Support: A measure that indicates how much the level of  dominance of an item or itemset of the overall transaction       ? Confidence: A measure that shows the relationship between items in a conditional (e.g. how frequently purchased item B if the person buying the item A).

Example: buy (x, "Eggs") ? buy (x, "Noodle") [support = 50%, confidence = 80%] Eggs and noodles are purchased simultaneously by 50% of all transactions and 80% of all consumers who buy eggs also buy noodles.

C. Multi-dimensional Association rules This method allows extracting information in terms of  some attributes or dimensions, compared to single- dimensional [4]   ? Single-dimensional rules: Buy (X, "milk")  buy (X, "bread") Meaning: If you buy milk then going to buy bread. This rule involves a single attribute which is an attribute of the product.

? Multi-dimensional rules: ? 2 dimensions o Inter-dimension association rules (no repeated  predicates) Age (x, "13-18") work ^ (x, "student") ? buy (x, "Magazine") [support = 3%, confidence = 71%].  The relationship shows that as the sample of buyers, 3% are on aged 13 to 18 years, work as a student, and buy a magazine.

There is a 71% chance that the buyer at this age, working as student and this group will buy a magazine.

o Hybrid-dimension association rules (repeated predicates)  Age (x, "13-18") buy ^ (x, "magazine") ? buy (x, "Newspaper") [support = 2%, confidence = 60%] These relationships show that the visitors of the store, 2% are aged 13 to 18 years, there is a 60% chance of a buyer at this age if they buy a magazine also buys a newspaper.

D. Apriori Algorithm Apriori is an iteration approach known as level-wise  search, where k-itemset is used to explore (k +1)-itemset.

First, a collection of 1-itemset is found by checking the database to accumulate counts for each item, and records of the items. The result is denoted by L1. Furthermore, L1 is used to find L2, a collection of 2-itemset that is used to search for L3, and so on until there are no k-itemset to be found. Lk invention requires inspector?s entire database [1].

To increase the efficiency of frequent itemset search, it is used Apriori rule which says "All parts not empty from the frequent itemset are also frequent". When written in the form of pseudo code, Apriori algorithm is as follows [4]:                While the pseudo code of the formation of joint candidate itemset is given below [4]:    For more details, one example of the application of  Apriori algorithm can be seen in Figure 1:    Figure 1. llustration of Apriori Algorithm [4]  After the results obtained, just made a strong association rule from these results (where a strong association rule satisfy both minimum support threshold and minimum confidence threshold). This can be obtained from the Equation (1):   (1)     Where support_count (A U B) is the number of transactions that contain itemset A U B, and support_count (A) is the number of transactions that contain itemset A.

Based on (1), the association rule can be defined as follows:     ? For each frequent itemset l, find all subsets of l ? for each non-empty subset s of l, the resulting regulations "s => (ls)? if support_count (l) divided support_count (s)> = min_conf where min_conf is the minimum threshold of confidence.

Example: Suppose the data that is shaped like the previous example, and it is a frequent itemset l = {I2, I3, I5}. So the subset that can be obtained from the association rule l is {I2, I3}, {I2, I5}, {I3, I5}, {I2}, {I3}, and {I5}. The association rules with the confidence can be seen in Table I.

TABLE I. LIST OF CONFIDENCE VALUE  Rules Confidence I3?I5?I2 confidence = 2/2 = 100% I2?I5?I3 confidence=2/3=66,6% I2?I3?I5 confidence=2/2=100%  I5?I2?I3 confidence=2/3=66,6% I3?I2?I5 confidence=2/3=66,6%  I2?I3?I5 confidence =2/3=66,6%   If the minimum confidence threshold specified is 60% then all the rules obtained become the output.



III. CONCEPTUAL DESIGN The criterion of the system that is needed by Minimarket  X is: ? The data mining based system, which can bring more  information to decision-makers by using daily transaction data in the Minimarket X.

? The system that uses multi-dimensional concept, where the factor or variable of this decision is: what items are sold simultaneously (product), when a transaction takes place (time).

There are several steps in the development of the application of data mining, starting from the preprocessing, generating frequent itemsets, generating association rules.

1. The encoding performed on sales data tables, detailed  sales and items at a particular time specified by the user.

Encoded data is data sales number, date of sale on the sales table, data item code in the table of items.

2. Searching frequent itemsets or pair of items that often appear simultaneously. Searching is done by algorithm Apriori by scanning the database to get the items that often appear in the database and the pair of items in one transaction. Pair of items that exceed the minimum support will be incorporated into the frequent itemsets are selected.

3. Search for association rules (generate association rules).

Frequent itemsets that exceed the minimum support will generate association rules through a process of information after decoding. One frequent itemsets can generate several association rules and count the  confidence which is using hybrid-dimension association rules.

Design of Data Flow Diagram Level 1 according to the  design of the application can be seen in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Data Flow Diagram Level 1

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT  A. Testing of Form Generate Frequent Itemsets The process of generating frequent itemsets can be seen  in the image on the table 'demo_11' where the minimum support is entered with a minimum of 1%. The process of generating frequent itemsets can be seen in Figure 3.

Figure 3. Form to Generate Frequent Itemsets  B. Testing of  Form Generate Association Rules Form to generated association rules is an advanced form  after the process of search frequent itemsets in which     itemsets will be processed to become information that can be read by the user. The process of generating association rules can be seen in Figure 4, the minimum confidence was 0%.

Figure 4. Form to Generate Association Rules  C. Report Form On the report form in Figure 5 can be seen that on the  Rule 148 customers who shop on Monday to buy Aqua isi Ulang and Club Isi Ulang, where it meets the criteria Hybrid-dimension Association Rules  D. Testing of Kebenaran Proses Aplikasi To prove the truth of the result of the of data mining  application, the testing is done using data from Table I. The results from the testing show that the equal results obtained in the form of association rules. In Figure 6, there are results of 3-itemsets and in Table I obtained the association rules from the 3-itemsets. Results from the rules and confidence equal as they appear in the application in Figure 7.

Figure 5. Report Form     Figure 6. L3 from Generated Frequent Itemsets   Figure 7. Confidence and Rules Result from L3 in Apllication

V. CONCLUSIONS ? If the specified minimum support is decreasing, then the  frequent itemsets generated will increasing.

? If the specified minimum confidence is decreasing, then  the rules generated will increase.

? The application can process the sales transaction data on  Minimarket X to find frequent itemsets that meet the minimum support, and produce Hybrid-dimension Association Rules.

? Results from the mining process are able to show a correlation between the data (association rules) and information support and the confidence that can be analyzed. This information will give additional consideration for the user to make further decision making.

