MINING ERROR PATTERNS OF ENGINEERING STUDETNS? ENGLISH  READING COMPREHENSION

Abstract: Reading in English is a very import skill in the learning  process for engineering students. In order to enhance students? reading comprehension ability, it is necessary to evaluate reading difficulties in an efficient way. Due to a lack of resources and accurate assessment tools, it remains a challenge for many instructors to identify students? errors during their English reading process. In order to cope with this problem, this paper applies a data mining technique to identify the students? error patterns. From the database of students? errors, students? error patterns and their association rules were discovered through generalized association rules. By using the techniques proposed in this paper, instructors will be able to acquire important and useful information about students? English reading comprehension problems in a more efficient way.

Keywords: Data mining; Generalized association rules, Cumulative  sentence analysis (CSA); English reading comprehension; Engineering students  1. Introduction  1.1. Background  For engineering students, English reading comprehension ability is crucial in academic settings and their future career. In order to absorb fundamental knowledge in textbooks and deepen professional knowledge in their workplace, it is essential for engineering students to read in English fluently. Several researchers have emphasized the importance of English in engineering education [1], [2]. For example, it was pointed out that English is the major international language of science community which enables the students to acquire professional knowledge through reading texts in English [1]. Some authors also stressed that engineering students should be equipped with specific English skills which will become valuable resources in their career [3].

However, there are still a considerable number of  engineering students struggling with reading in English in Taiwan. Some authors have attributed engineering students? reading difficulty to vocabulary knowledge and proposed lexical instruction [4], [5]. In L2 research, Alderson states that the knowledge of syntactic structure plays a significant role in second language reading [6]. Shiotsu and Weir also demonstrated the relative contribution of syntactic knowledge to L2 reading comprehension performance [7]. Hence, if teachers can identify students? sentence analysis problems, it would be easier to help students to cope with their reading comprehension difficulty. Nevertheless, the evaluation of students? syntactic knowledge during reading process remains a challenge in classrooms due to a lack of resources, time or assessment tools.

In order to enhance students? reading comprehension ability, numerous e-learning systems have been developed.

Recently more and more researchers are aware of the potential of data mining technique in e-learning. Data mining (DM) or Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) is a technique for discovering new and potential useful information from a large volume of data [8]. In general, the application of data mining in e-learning can be classified into four main categories: clustering, classification, visualization and association analysis [9], [10]. Through specific classification rules and association analysis, teachers can identify and address students? problems and weaknesses in the English learning process more effectively. For instance, Hsu proposed content-based analysis, collaborative filtering, and data mining techniques to analyze students? reading data and recommend appropriate learning materials for the students [11]. Wang, Tseng, & Liao employed a decision tree algorithm, based on students? profiles, including gender, personality type, cognitive style, learning style and grades to explore the most adaptive learning sequences for a particular teaching content, in order to optimize learning outcomes [12].

Furthermore, Wang & Liao proposed an adaptive learning system through a data mining technique, an artificial neural network (ANN), to discover suitable teaching materials by          identifying students? different levels of vocabulary, grammar, and reading ability [13].

1.2    Purpose of the study   The results of previous studies indicate that the data  mining technique is an attractive approach to provide a solution for identifying engineering students? reading comprehension difficulties. Hence, this paper presents a Cumulative Sentence Analysis (CSA) reading e-learning system in which each student?s correct reactions and errors during their reading process can be recorded [14]. Then the paper adopts a core data mining technique, association rule, to identify the patterns of students? reading comprehension errors. The system development and data mining processes are described below.

2. CSA reading approach   In the framework of CSA, reading comprehension is  regarded as a problem, which belongs to a hierarchy of units and sections. The resolution to each problem, i.e. the comprehension of a sentence consists of six steps. For example, the analysis of the example sentence ?C++ comes with libraries of predefined functions that you can use in your programs? can be described in the following steps:   Step 1. Identify finite verbs. A finite verb is a verb base  form which may be combined with ?s for 3rd person or past tense form. In the example sentence the finite verbs are comes and use.

Step 2. Find key words. Key words mean conjunctions  or relative pronouns that separate dependent and independent clauses. In the example sentence the key word is that.

Step 3. Separate clauses. In this step, the goal is to  identify each clause in the sentence. There are two clauses in the example sentence.

Step 4. Identify the subject and main verb pairs. This  step is to find out the subject and main verb for each clause.

In the example sentence, the subject and main verb pairs are ?C++ comes? and ?you can use?.

Step 5. Add words stepwise. The analysis in this step can  be illustrated as follows, where newly-added words are in bold typeface:    Clause 1: C++ comes with libraries of predefined functions  Clause 2: that(=functions) you can use in your programs.

Analysis: Clause 1: C++ comes with libraries of predefined  functions S+V: C++ comes E: C++ comes with libraries E: C++ comes with libraries of predefined functions Clause 2: that(=functions) you can use in your programs.

S+V: you can use E: that(=functions) you can use E: that(=functions) you can use in your programs.

Step 6. Translate the sentence into Chinese. The  translation of the example sentence is ?C++    In the CSA system, students only need to click buttons  to process each step except step 6. The clicked words will turn into different colors. Students can check the correct answers provided in the system. The reading materials were adapted from ?Absolute C++? [15]. The students have received explicit CSA on-line reading instruction.

3. Experimental design   A total of 184 freshmen of information engineering  department at a university in southern Taiwan were selected as the experimental sample. These students had studies English for at least 6 years since junior high school. The age of the students ranged from 18 to 20. The CSA on-line English instruction lasted for 12 weeks, 2 hours a week. After 12 weeks of instruction, an assessment was administered to register the students? responses during their reading process.

Figure 1 presents the flow chart of the research method.

The material for the assessment was compiled from 7 general sentence patterns identified in the course textbooks: (1) simple sentences; (2) compound sentences; (3) complex sentences; (4) compound-complex sentences, (5) sentences with relative clause modifying subject, (6) sentences with relative clause modifying object and (7) sentences with a dependent clause serving as a noun. A pool of 109 sentences was constructed for the assessment, from which the system randomly selected 3 sentences for each pattern of sentence.

Therefore the students were required to answer 21 multiple-choice questions by using CSA approach. From reviewing the errors produced by the students in the previous semester, frequent error types were found in each step. These frequent error types were randomly selected as distracters in each item. For each item, the students had to choose one correct answer among 4 or 5 choices. Table 1 shows the error type-item mapping.

4.  Analysis and results  The major purpose of this paper is to find out the error patterns of reading comprehension among the subjects, i.e.

the frequency of error occurrence at each step in CSA and possible associations among the error patterns. These combinations can be identified through association rule mining. From the frequent item set of the database, further combinations of association rules can be identified. In this study, Generalized Association Rule [16], was used to mine the data in order to obtain the confidence for the rules at different levels. In brief, an association rule can be expressed in the following construct:   IF error pattern X, THEN error pattern Y, confidence value = Z%  The expression means whenever an item set contains X,  then the item set probably contains Y also. The rule confidence is defined as the percentage of items containing Y in addition to X with regard to the overall number of items containing X. Formula for calculating the confidence values is shown in formula (1).

(1) 100% item Xrrence forTotal occu  d Y item X anrrence forTotal occuconfidence ?=     To achieve the purpose of this study, this study used a free software, WEKA, which is developed at the University of Waikato, New Zealand. WEKA was selected as the mining tool, because it offers functions to implement algorithms for classification, clustering, and association rule mining, as well  Table 1. Error type-item mapping  Sentence Item  S1-1 S1-2 S1-3 - S7-1 S7-2 S7-3 Sn Step1 a 1-4* 0 ? ? ? ? 0 0 b 1-2 1-1 ? ? ? ? 1-6 1-6 c 1-3 1-5 ? ? ? ? 1-4 1-4 d 0**  1-4 ? ? ? ? 1-5 1-5 e 1-1  1-2 ? ? ? ? 1-3 1-3 ????... ??. ? ?? ? ? ? ? ....... .......

Step 6 a 0 0 ? ? ? ? 0 0 b 6-5 6-4 ? ? ? ? 6-2 6-2 c 6-4 6-5 ? ? ? ? 6-5 6-5 d 6-2 6-2 ? ? ? ? 6-1 6-1 e 6-1 6-1 ? ? ? ? 6-4 6-4  * Error type; ** correct answer  CSA system construction - Course design - Teaching material preparation  CSA experimental e-course - Course implementation - Data collection  CSA-based reading test design - Sentence patterns classification - Sentences selection - Error types identification - Database construction - Programming  CSA system test  CSA-based reading test  Data preprocessing  Mining error patterns and association rules  Figure 1. The flow chart of research method.

as graphical user interfaces and visualization utilities [17].

For exploratory purpose, the mining of association rules  was executed until level 4. Table 2 depicts the results of large itemsets of each step of CSA at level 1. Minimum metric of confidence was set at 50%. The number of cycles performed was 90.

Table 2. Large itemsets at level 1  Occurrences Step 1 844 Step 2 783 Step 3 1452 Step 4 1271 Step 5 1551 Step 6 1811   The results indicated that the students made most errors  in step 6, which is to select a Chinese translation of the target sentence, followed by step 5, adding words to each clause step by step. Both steps were considered most confusing for the learners of this study. Table 3 shows the top 10 rule structures with the highest confidence.

As indicated in Table 3, rule 1 has the highest confidence (78%), i.e., if students produce errors in step 1, 4 and 5 they will have the highest probability to make mistakes in step 6. Errors in step 1 had the highest confidence to induce errors in other steps, such as in rules 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9 and 10. It implies that if the students produce errors in step 1, identifying the finite verb, then they most likely to produce errors in other step as well. However, error production is not sequential, i.e. errors in one step won?t possibly induce errors in the subsequent step. Furthermore, the order of the steps might be reversed. For example, in rule 8, error produced in step 2, 4 and 6 may lead to error production in step 3. The relationship between the steps was not as close as expected. It was predicted that if step 3 is wrong, then step 5 would be wrong as well, because if the student can not separate the  boundary of clauses correctly in step 3, he might make the same mistake in step 5, which requires adding words in each clause of the sentence. Nevertheless, the confidence of the rule If step 3, then step 5 was not higher than 50%.

Upon the observation of the data collected, several findings can be induced as follows: 1. If a student can not identify the finite verb, the subject,  and add words to correct position in each clause, then he would not understand the sentence correctly.

2. If a student can not identify the finite verb, and the key words, then he would not understand the sentence correctly.

3. If a student can not separate the clauses correctly, identify the subject and verb, and add word in correct position, then he would not understand the sentence correctly.

4. If a student can not identify the finite verb, separate the clauses, and adding words to each clause correctly, then he would not understand the sentence correctly.

5. If a student can not identify the finite verb, and the subject, he would not understand the sentence correctly.

5.  Conclusions  The major goal of this study was to identify error patterns of engineering students in reading English textbooks through data mining. This study proposes a new approach to use data mining to identify error patterns produced by engineering students during English reading process. We have successfully used generalized association rules to mine possible rules of association among students? errors produced at each step of CSA. The results indicate that it is convincing to use data mining to discover error patterns during students? reading comprehension process, which therefore ensures the applicability of data mining in English reading instruction.

Traditional assessment of reading comprehension often utilizes tests in pencil-paper version, which only provides  Table 3. Rule structures with the highest confidences   Rules  Level Occurrences Confidence 1 Step 1, Step 4, Step 5 ? Step 6 4 (286/369) 78% 2 Step 1, Step 2 ? Step 3 3 (275/356) 77% 3 Step 1, Step 2 ? Step 6  3 (275/356) 77% 4 Step 1, Step 3, Step 4 ? Step 6  4 (285/371) 77% 5 Step 3, Step 4, Step 5 ? Step 6  4 (387/509) 76% 6 Step 1, Step 3, Step 5 ? Step 6 4 (300/396) 76% 7 Step 2, Step 4, Step 5 ? Step 3  4 (264/352) 75% 8 Step 2, Step 4, Step 6 ? Step 3 4 (264/352) 75% 9 Step 1, Step 4, Step 6 ? Step 5  4 (286/383) 75% 10 Step 1, Step 4 ? Step 6  3 (383/513) 75%           information about students? learning outcome. In the CSA system proposed in this study, we can not only register every mistake made by the students during each step of sentence analysis, but also find out the combination of their error patterns through data mining, which offers more useful information for English reading instruction.

Suggestions for future research include further development of the CSA system to allow users to take advantage of personalized feedback of their error patterns, as well as a recommendation system which provides exercises of each step in CSA. These implementations should facilitate engineering students? ability to read materials of their professional field written in English. Furthermore, the system may also be applied to other e-learning courses, such as remedial reading courses or continuing education.

Acknowledgements  This paper is supported by the National Science Council, Taiwan under contract numbers NSC 99-2410-H-214-024.

