The Study of Personalized Recommendation Based on Web Data Mining

Abstract-The coordination filtration technology is one of most successful recommendation technologies at present, but along  with the stand structure, the content order of complexity and user population's increase, coordination filtration technology existence data sparse, extendibility, cold start questions and so  on , causes the recommendation effect to reduce greatly, This article proposed the improvement coordination filter algorithm: Based on Web data mmmg coordination filtration recommendation algorithm, Mainly carries on the recommendation using the connection rule algorithm and the cluster algorithm, focusing on the clustering algorithm as a pre-processing association rules algorithm, Makes a cluster analysis to the data to divide into multiple classes , seeks for the similar user in the kind using the connection rule algorithm,  may enhance the recommendation the rate of accuracy, and has carried on the confirmation through the experiment.

Keywords- coordination recommendation; connection algorithm ; MAE.

filtration; personalization rule algorithm;c/ustering

I. INTRODUCTION Along with the electronic commerce, on-line transaction's  vigorous development, the traditional popularity information service pattern has not been able to satisfY the Web user complicated and diversified information need, urgent needs to aim at the different Web user to provide the personalization information service. The personalized recommendation service takes one kind of brand-new intelligent system to arise at the historic moment. If past ten years were the search technique big line of its road's ten years, then the personalized recommendation technology will become next one in ten year most important innovations.

The personalized recommendation system may use the user enjoys "one to one" the information and the service, will be the future on-line service development tendency, has the widespread practical application prospect.



II. WEB DATA MINING  The Web data mining is uses data mining and so on information processing technologies, The Web data mining is uses data mining and so on information processing technologies, According to the Web excavation object's difference, the Web data mining may divide into: The Web content data, the Web structure data, the Web use data three kind of [I], as shown in Figure I.

i / Web "'I,' Web Multimedia text data data  Figure 1.

Web  Classification of web data mining

III. PERSONALIZATION RECOMMEND  A. Personalization Recommendation Outline  Personal use  tracking "  The personalized recommendation is according to user's interest characteristic and the purchase behavior, is interested to the user recommendation user the information and the commodity. Along with the electronic commerce scale's unceasing expansion, the commodity integer and the type swift growth, the customer needs to spend the commodity which the massive time could find itself to want to buy, this kind of browsing massive irrelevant information and the product process will cause the submergence to drain unceasingly without doubt in the information overload question consumer, the personalized recommendation system might help the customer to require the few time to recommend to the user need commodity.

B. Personalized Recommendation Model The personalized recommendation system, mainly  involves to three key technologies: To primary data's pretreatment, the pattern excavation process, carries on the recommendation using the data mining algorithm, at present personalized recommendation system's main step as shown in Figure 2, First step gains the user information first, mainly gains the way mainly to have the server diary, the stand database, the user registration information and so on, carries on the statistics and the analysis to these information; Second step is the system rests on the first step result to carry on the recommendation; Third step likes for the user regarding the recommendation project or not, the feedback gives the system, renews the user information [2,3].

I gain user information carries on the analysis, and constructs the user database  feedback  Gives the user appraisal feedback  system  according to the K user information recommendation '---------__ 1 '----------  Update user information  Figure 2. Personalized recommends steps  A complete personalized recommendation system by three parts of constitutions: The gain user information behavior record module, the analysis user like the degree the  model analysis module and the recommendation module. As shown in Figure 3.

I Session file ? Association rules Browse, buy goods  Q & A, Evaluation I  Behavior recording  module  Model analysis  module Recommended  Modules  Figure 3. Personalized recommendation system structure

IV. PERSONALIZED RECOMMENDATION BASED ON WEB DATA MINING  In view of the coordination filtration the question which existed in the personalized recommendation, this article proposed the improvement based on the Web data mining recommendation algorithm, mainly used the cluster algorithm and the connection rule algorithm unifies, and took the cluster the connection rule the pretreatment, to graded in the data to make a cluster analysis first, will have the similar interest hobby user to assign to the same classification.

Carries on the connection rule analysis again in each cluster, real-time carries on the recommendation to the user, this algorithm process may the off-line carry on, but does not need the real-time computation, like this greatly reduced the real-time recommendation pressure.

A. Personalized Recommendation Flow Based on Web Data Mining The personalized recommendation realizes needs to be  produces take the Web user interest model as the foundation face the specific Web user's information recommendation collection. Obviously, one of Web data mining's functions is discovers looked massively resembles between the irrelevant   information the relation and the rule, thus constructs the Web user interest model. Personalized information recommendation process based on web data mining shown in Figure 4 [4].

r---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------.. io.m;,prn / =? Web Web data -  -----"'W":"- e'b--  --?""'F?-- -;;;_:;;- -""?r-?-i Web usage data'"", I structure data ? Web content 1  Data preprocess." '. preprocess '  data preprocess; preprocessing '; . ......?........ .. i ; Server Server ;  l-----------------???-????--?-----------------------------------------?:????-?-:-------j i rSiortg-- - - i< - "I d - - - Pati?rn --I i i Pattern i e ."'" I nowe ge"", discover! i i ; analysis? Media , Rules . ---y--- . i  I : --------------?=-:-=-:--::----=-:-=-:--::--.:r-:-:-=-:--::---?-=-:-=-:--::----=-.----- i  Online recommended  Recommendatio ?'" n engine ' ' ?  User's current commended session  ?  Content ....

Servers :"", ? Client  Figure 4. Personalized infonnation recommendation based on web excavation  Offline!

Log file  Site files  tlser registration information  Online  \..---.- Data <I preprocess  Pre-processing module  " 'iii I/) Q) I/) E ? ::I  ()  "  ? E " ..:: ? .? E.!2' o It!

U Q)  0::  B. Personalized Recommendations Realize the Model personalized recommendation system based on the Web  data mining's mainly includes the collection and the analysis user information pattern , carries on the recommendation and so on several steps, these steps divide into the off-line and the online two parts generally, The off-line part by carries on the data pretreatment and to the data feeds carries on the customer purchase pattern using the data mining algorithm to the Web data to carry on the analysis_ The online part mainly the pattern which provides using the off? line part carries on the recommendation to the online user. Its architecture as shown in Figure 5_  I/) E Q)  I/) C> ::< " Q) It!

'$ E :; 0.

User Transa 0:: 'iii ction 1/)..:: " ? :J ."!::::: 0 .. session file . ? u 0 ----. '75 J!l file 'U.2l 'u .!: Q) It! 0 ui 'e- I/) I/) I/) Q) 0.. ? u ?  Pattern mining module  Q)  E C> It!

c." " 0 c: 'oW Q) U E.!!! Eo o U U Q) 0::  online recommended modules  Figure 5. The personalized recommendation realizes the process  C. Collaborative Filtering Recommendation Algorithm Based Clustering and Association Rules This article proposes personalized recommendation flow  based on Web data mining, this article is mainly connection   rule recommendation algorithm and the cluster recommendation algorithm both union use recommendation method, improves the recommendation quality. In carries on the pattern excavation process, first carries on the pretreatment after the data conversation document and transaction file, uses first based on the project K-Means    cluster algorithm makes a cluster analysis discovery similar user set, will have the similar interest hobby user to assign to the same classification. After the cluster produces, then aims at each subclass to carry on the connection rule excavation, discovered that the user is interested the subclass, obtains the different cluster connection rule, Uses the project the K? Means cluster algorithm to trade the transaction file and the conversation document carries on the cluster, obtains k kind, regarding k kind which obtains, the cluster result records is SFC SFC = {SC,CP} which SC=<spcj >(i=1,2, ... m;j=1,2, ... ,k) , Expressed  that each session Si (i = 1, 2, ... m) and cluster obtains between relations, namely session record s; by cluster to which kind, CP=<C;,{pppz,???p,} >(i= 1,2, ... ,k,l is Page Views ) , Expressed that each class c/(i = 1,2, ... k) , with the website page's between relations, which pages and the kind  of cj correspondence's all conversation record does contain,  Constituted by the set of all c/(i = 1,2, ... k) , to construct C = {cpc2, ? ? ?  ,Ck} \lc) E C,  If the current user sessIon to access the Pi' so Sj is weight(pi' c) , or is 0, see as formula 3, so that the session S and C matching clustering measure  IW%.Sk matchC S, c) = ---r=====k ========= I W?.(Sk )2 X I(W?)2 k k  (4)  When matchCS,c) reaches given threshold p , we can cluster c in the remaining pages recommended to the current page. after use cluster algorithm obtains the different subclass, carries on the connection rule analysis to each kind, first application type 4 computation current visit conversation with each subclass's match value, determined that which cluster the conversation does belong to, again applies this cluster correspondence the connection rule to carry on the recommendation.

v. EXPERIMENTAL ANAL YSIS AND RESULTS  A. Selection of Data Set In this experiment tests, used the data set which Book?  Crossing Dataset stand provided to contain 278,858 users for Constituted a page  . 271,379 books 1,149,780 grading. This experiment chooses clus?enn? f . .

> 1 .

_ 20000 data from the database to take the experiment data set, pCj ? pCj - t< urI" wezght(p"c) >1 urI, E U, wezght(p"c) - f.lJ(z- 1,2, . . . ,/) in the data set contains has 900 users to carry on grading to uri; is Pi URL addresses, U is the website all URL set,  weight(p;, c) are Pi in 4 weights, by the following formula:  weight(Pi'Cj) = -I-?I W(Pi'S) . I cj I SECj (1) Among them, W(Pi' s) is Pi in the sessIon s the  weight..

In order to measure the current access patterns and  between each cluster matching degree, first page cluster pc  of weight(p, c) constitutes a right in the extracted class reunion W, be represented as a vector, such as formula 2:  W - f C C C } - l WI , W2,? .. , WI  we = {weighf(p;,C)  I 0 if P; E c;  other  (2)  (3)  The current session S also said as a vector,   1800 books, and requested each user to carry on the appraisal at least to 10 books, grading has divided into (0-10) the grading rank, the value is higher, indicated that the user was partial to the degree to this books to be higher.

B. Measure Standard This article main use statistics precision measure method  mean absolute error MAE parameter for personalized recommendation  1) Mean absolute error MAE In order to appraise the algorithm which this article uses  in the personalized recommendation system recommendation quality fit and unfit quality, in the experiment uses mean absolute error MAE to take the weight the standard. MAE weighs the forecast through between computation forecast's user grading and the actual user grading deviation the accuracy. The supposition in the test centralism to X project forecast's value vector representation by chance is  {PI' P2' ... , P x} , the actual user appraisal value set is {Q I ,q2, ... ,qJ, then MAE formula following -like shows [5]:  Ilpi-Qil MAE=---'--'----  x (5)  And, 1 is between 2 and 3 absolute magnitudes of error; The MAE smaller showing recommendation quality is higher.

C. Experimental Result Comparison This article takes the comparison by the traditional  coordination filtration recommendation algorithm, confirmed    based on the connection rule recommendation algorithm and the recommendation algorithm and efficiency which unifies based on the cluster recommendation algorithm as well as the connection rule and the cluster two algorithms, May see from under chart, coordination filtration recommendation algorithm based on connection rule and based on cluster recommendation quality good in traditional coordination filtration recommendation algorithm, But this article proposes with emphasis unifies based on the connection rule and the cluster coordination filter algorithm, and cluster as  connection rule algorithm pretreatment the recommendation algorithm compares other coordination filtration recommendation algorithm the recommendation quality to be friends with, Figure 6and Figure7 is the same data degree of rarefaction, the same neighbor number and in the different neighbor number situation recommendation quality comparison, may see from the chart based on the connection rule and the cluster algorithm surpasses traditional the coordination filter algorithm.

Figure 6. Four algorithm recommendation quality comparison (same neighbor number)  Figure 7. Four algorithm recommendation quality comparison (di?Ierent neighbor number)

VI. SUMMSRY  Through the experiment, indicated that this article proposes personalized recommendation system based on the Web mining, the use connection rule and the cluster algorithm unifies, does with the cluster for the connection rule pretreatment, first carries on data message class then again to the the connection analysis, might quick seeking for the similar user, and has compared the traditional coordination filtration, based on the connection rule recommendation, based on the cluster recommendation, indicated that made the cluster for the connection rule pretreatment recommendation is effective.

