

Abstract?With the flourishing of the world wide web, the online customer review process is becoming more and more useful and important as an information resource for people. As a result, opinion mining research for analysis of opinion data on the web has recently become a popular topic. Most previous studies have used Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI) to predict the opinion (positive or negative). This study first proposes a method which combines the associative classification methodology with the overall rating to discover the relation of the features. By the way, a framework is also proposed to discover those changes of opinion that can identify the users? opinion of a product. Experimental results, in mining ipad review information, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. The data set used contains actual WOM information from which to study the dynamic patterns of users' changing opinions. The summarized results can help consumers and marketing managers to make decision.

Keywords- data mining; change mining, pairwise comparisons; group decision making; maximum consensus sequence

I.  INTRODUCTION In recent years, electronic commerce (e-commerce) has  developed rapidly. Consumers not only purchase commodities they need through websites, but also look for information about commodities they intend to purchase through official websites, forums, blogs, and discussion boards. Online customer reviews are useful both to potential customers and product manufacturers. Such information provides consumers with an objective and abundant source of information.

Therefore, there has been an increase in the number of product review websites, and both the quality and quantity of the review contents are greater than in the past. Such an abundance of information satisfies consumers? need for information collection when purchasing commodities, and is also a very important information source to other manufacturers. Both positive and negative word of mouth are very important to product design for manufacturers. The consumer provides credible and reliable information, more suitable for currently popular web services, such as review sites and discussion boards. The most direct way to obtain consumer opinions through website reviews is by opinion mining.

Recently, opinion mining has become a popular research topic. Many scholars have obtained significant research results in this regard [1-7]. The purpose of opinion mining is to find out the opinions and directions included in the review.

Previous studies have divided the opinions into positive, negative, and neutral categories.

Many well-known and reputable websites, such as Amazon (http://www.amazon.com/) and IMDB  (http://www.imdb.com/), also provide an overall rating score.

The overall rating makes it easier for manufacturers to understand consumers? comments about their product. The overall rating score and the comments enable manufacturers to understand consumers? preferences for product features. There is a relationship between the overall rating and the free text.

However, there is a lack of integration between overall rating and the customer reviews. This study proposes a method to detect features which the user cares for by the discovering the relation between the rating and the reviews.

In this method, each comment is transferred into a feature-opinion pair and mining is then performed on the formatted comments utilizing the algorithm of association classification. The purpose is to centralize comments and summarize public opinions. The feature-opinion pair for the product is the Conditional part. The overall rating score provided by the consumer is the Consequent part. The overall rating score will be discretized in advance and classified as positive, negative, or neutral. An example of an output result would be (BATTERY LIFE, short), (SOFTWARE, easy)-> positive. The method is different from past opinion mining strategies, because the overall rating score is provided by actual consumers. Real comments from consumers make for more accurate predictions as opposed to that by dictionary websites.

In the arena of new product development, WOM may play a particularly important role, because awareness must be built, and consumers need information when deciding whether to purchase a product they may not be familiar with [8]. This study makes use of a data set containing actual WOM information from which we discover dynamic patterns of product WOM using a change mining methodology.

With the rapid development of the network, the speed of information sharing among people has increase, and the influence of personal opinion is becoming more and more important [9]. Change mining has been developed in order to understand such changes. Changes in consumer opinions about a product can be uncovered by comparing opinions at two different periods of time, and such information can be provided to product decision-makers. We find four types of change patterns: emerging patterns, gentle unexpected change, intense unexpected change, and opinion change.

This study mainly makes two contributions. First, the use of association rule mining to find out opinions about products.

This differs from past website-based opinions. The overall evaluation is provided by consumers and their opinions on features obtained based on association rules, which is a more direct type of opinion mining. The results will be closer to the     users? actual thinking process. Furthermore, the relations of the discovered features, whether positive or negative, represent what customers really care about. Second, we provide product decision makers with more explicit information that will enable them to rapidly understand changes in consumer opinion as demonstrated by the discovered changed patterns.

This rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, we review related work in Section 2. Next, we formally define the problem and propose the algorithms in Section 3. Then, we use an illustrated example to demonstrate the proposed methods in Section 4. Finally, conclusions and a discussion of its value are given in Section 5.



II. RELATED WORK  A. Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis The basic idea behind opinion mining is that it can be used  to identify product features and to determine the polarity of public opinion. Most studies contain three steps: (1) extracting customer comments on product features and opinions: (2) identifying the opinion sentence in each review and deciding whether each opinion sentence is positive or negative; (3) summarizing the results.[10]  Some approaches utilize linguistic methods to discover the semantic orientations of words and sentences, in order to  classify the sentiment. Other approaches extract the explicit product features based on the a priori algorithm. In 2004, Hu [11] created the pioneering work on feature-based opinion summarization.

B. Associative Classification For years, classification problems have been directly  solved by association rule mining for find high support and high confidence rules in the form of ?Condition?X?, where the conditions include a set of terms (attribute-value pairs) and X is a class label. Several methods have been proposed and applied in classification problems such as Classification Based on Associations (CBA), Classification based on Multiple Association Rules (CMAR), and so on.[12]  C. Change Mining The objective of change mining is to detect changes in  patterns between two datasets from different time periods. Liu [13] developed a method to predict changes in the decision tree context. Song [14] proposed a method to determine the change patterns by comparing the association rules mined from two datasets. There have been several approaches developed based on the concept of discovering different change patterns in patents [15], news [16] and consumer purchase data [14].

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed framework

III. MINING CHANGES OF OPTNION FROM CUSTOMER REVIEWS  A. Overall Architecture As shown in Figure1, the proposed framework contains  three phases: pre-processing, sentiment mining and opinion change mining module.

1) Pre-processing module The preprocessing module contains four steps which are:  parser, parts-of-speech, product feature candidate extraction, product feature-opinion candidate extraction.

Parts-of-speech (POS) tagging is the process of assigning a part-of speech like noun, verb, pronoun, adverb, adjective or other lexical class marker to each word in a sentence. We parse the review sentences by using the Stanford Parser.

In general, most product features indicating words are nouns or noun phrases. After parsing the sentence, the next step is to identify noun phrases that are product feature candidate.

We also check on product specifications from the company web site. All possible features are complied into the product feature candidate set.

The purpose of this process is to extract the feature-opinion candidates from the parsed reviews. A feature is an attribute of the product that has been commented on in the reviews. First, we identify the product feature on which many customers have expressed their opinion. If such a product feature appears, we will then extract related opinions and product features. The opinion on a feature as expressed in the reviews is a phrase that expresses an opinion on that feature. Some adjectives and verbs may be used in both favorable and unfavorable phrases. Thus, adjectives and verbs are used as opinion words. From this we will find the feature-opinion pair candidates.

Definition: Feature-opinion pairs A feature-opinion pair consists of a feature and a relevant  opinion. When a feature and its opinion occur in one sentence, they are called a feature-opinion pair.

Since each review consists of a set of sentences, several feature-opinion pairs may be extracted from this review. There is a relationship between the overall rating and the freely written text. A review rating of 4 or 5 is considered to indicate that the product is liked by the users. The semantics of this review will be classified as positive. If the review rating is 1 or 2, the semantic of this review is considered negative. Otherwise is neutral.

Each review will be transformed into a product transaction.

The scheme for a transaction T is defined as follows:    T = (product, [feature1, opinion1],? , [featuren, opinionn], rating)  rating: positive, negative, mutual  For example:  (P1, (BATTERY LIFE, short), (SOFTWARE, easy), P)  (P2, (SOFTWARE, easy)), M)  (P1, (VALUE, low), (AUTOFOCUS, slow), N)  2) Sentiment Mining by Associative Classification The sentiment mining module will discover rules in the  transaction data with which to determine opinions about product. Rules are found using associative classification based on the a priori principle. Rules whose confidence and support meet or exceed a threshold will be discovered.

In this study, rule r takes the form below:  Condition ? C  Where the condition part is a set of feature-opinion pairs and each feature is a conjunction. We denote this as the R.condition. The right hand side of the rule is its consequent part which contains a single class label; we denote this as the R.class.

Two types of association rules are extracted from the product reviews.

Type 1:  Product, [feature, opinion] ?rating  Type 2:  Product, [feature] ? rating  The Type 1 rule is used to determine whether the feature is advantageous or disadvantageous. For example:  P1, (BATTERY LIFE, long), (AUTOFOCUS, quickly) ? P  Then R.condition = { P1 , (BATTERY LIFE, long), (AUTOFOCUS, quickly)} and R.class={P}.

From this rule, we can find that BATTERY LIFE and AUTOFOCUS are two important advantageous features.

From those filtered rules, Type 2 rules can be summarized.

These rules can then provide information about what kind of product features will have a significant influence on the final purchase decision. These rules demonstrate features that appear frequently in product reviews. Frequently appearing features offer important information about the product. For example,  P1, BATTERY LIFE, AUTOFOCUS? P.

This means that BATTERY LIFE and AUTOFOCUS are the two most important features preferred by most users.

Suppose that we have another rule r2:  P1, (Weight, heavy) ? N.

Most users do care about the weight of camera. If the camera is too heavy, this has a negative impact, however, those users still like the product.

3) Opinion Change Mining Module a) Change Detection       After the process of associative classification, there are a  large number of rules which need be filtered to find the most interesting change rules. This study mainly proposes three categories of change patterns including emerging patterns, gentle change and unexpected change. Before describing the opinion change mining module, the three kinds of opinion change patterns are described.

Emerging changes in opinion  An emerging event pattern is a rule pattern whose support increases significantly from one dataset to another.

Unexpected changes in opinion  Unexpected changes can be found in newly discovered opinion rules where the conditional parts of the rule patterns are the same, but their consequent parts are different from those of the previous opinion rule.

Gentle changes in opinion  Gentle changes in opinion rules can be found in newly discovered rules, whose conditional parts are partially similar to previous rules, but whose consequent parts are the same.

The change mining module is composed of the following three steps:   1. Calculate the degree of similarity in the conditional  parts of two rules for different time periods.

2. For each rule at time t find the most similar rule for time t + k .

3. Classify the type of change for the rules using the maximum similarity value and the difference measures for the conditional part.

There are two important measurements, SC and SD, which are the similarity measure of the conditional part of SC and the match value of the R.class.

The degree of feature matching of the conditional feature and the value matching are considered in the similarity measure of the conditional part of SC. If the R.calls of two rules are the same, SD =1; otherwise SD=0. Table 1 illustrates the measures used to determine each type of opinion change.

b) Change Analysis All the change rules must be ranked by the degree of  change. The formulations illustrated in Table 1 are adopted from previous studies. After filtering the most important changes in opinion, the results will be report to the experts for analysis of their marketing implications. Not only consumers but also manufacturers can benefit from information about users? preference changes.

TABLE I. MEASUREMENT AND DEGREE FOR EACH TYPE OF CHANGE

IV. EXPERIMENT EVALUATION To evaluate the performance of the proposed model, we  collected 200 reviews of product from Amazon.com. Each review was written by one reviewer and accompanied with an overall rating. The dataset contain 100 positive reviews about iPad is divided into two periods. The first period is from April 2010 to September 2010 and the second period is from October 2010 to April 2011. The sentences in the dataset have manually generated tags indicating product features and opinions.

1) Emerging change opinion  a) The rule in the first period: Display  P, support = 27%.

The rule in the second period: Display  P, support = 31%.

b) The rule in the first period: Other competitors P, support = 31%.

The rule in the second year:  Other competitors P, support = 24%.

Users evidently pay more attention about the Display function. However, users do not care the performance about the other competitors at the second time period.

2) Gentle change opinion a) The rule in the first period:  Software  p The rule in the second period:  Software, iPad  P We observed that users only concerned about the software  of iPad during the time period from April 2010 to September 2010. Since more customers buy iPad, users satisfied the design and function about iPad. Many users like iPad, just because use PadiPad.?

V. CONCLUSION In this paper, an opinion change mining approach is  proposed for review mining and analysis. The objective is to automatically discover the trends of WOM for arbitrary online  Type of Change Measure Degree of Change( )  Emerging change opinion SC =1 and SD=1 Sup r Sup rMin Sup r , Sup r Unexpected change opinion SC ? 1 and SD = 0 Sup r2 Sup r Sup r  Gentle change opinion SC < 1 and SD = 1     reviews. We use associative classification method for analyzing transaction data, and then use the proposed method for summarizing discovered rules. WOM analysis discovery changes in opinion trends by comparing two opinion analysis rules belonging to different periods. Experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed approach. In our future work, we will make an experiment on our purposed method for improving accuracy.

