Review of Association Rule Mining Algorithm in Data Mining

Abstract-With the database technology, artificial intelligence and mathematical statistics the development of technology,  database data mining technology arises at the historic moment.

This paper presented related formal definitions of association  rules and the basic algorithm for association rules mining in  data streams. Based on systematic investigation of association  rules mining researches on streams data, analyzed issues and  how they were resolved in current literatures. Also discussed  the future directions in association rules mining.

Keywords- data mining; association rules; frequent itemsets; frequent patterns;  1. BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE  Mining of association rules is an important research direction of data mining, focus on found database or data warehouse records the relevance between interesting mutual relationships[l], according to this or connections can from a recording attribute information to infer the other records attribute information. Relevance is a statistical sense relations and to support degree and confidence as a measure of correlation degree[2] Usually must set minimum support degrees and minimum confidence as threshold, meet the mimmum support degrees and minimum confidence threshold rule called strong association rules or interesting rules. Association rules in business of successful application, make it become the most mature in data mining, the most important and the most active research content.

Association rules and its definition association rules are defined as follows: Association rules is shaped like A =>containing type of B. Association rules is A =>B formed containing type, induding A E I, BE I, and AnB =<D. Support degrees (A=>B) is AU B trading said in the transaction of proportion of the repository. Credibility (A=>B) expressed support A U B trading in support A deal, the proportion of the affairs database of mining association rules in which the task is to find out all meet user specified minimum support degree and minimum confidence strong association rules.



II. FREQUENT ITEM SETS MINING ALGORITHM  Association rule mining is divided into two key steps: Mining data set of frequent itemsets ;Based on the frequent itemsets produced association rule. This paper will respecti? vely according to the two steps research data flow on the algorithm for mining association rules.

ZHANG Wen Fang2  Architecture and Urban Planning School,Hunan City University Hunan City University   Definition  Yiyang, P.R .China Zwfgood6@yahoo.com.cm  Frequent itemsets. Definition D= bl ... bi Bbn B al ' , B  ai' ? ?? , an' IS gIven a transaction data  flow, the infinite affairs blocks constitute the sequence.

Figure 1 is a time window of the transaction data block. One block of each tuple is associated with a time window [ak'  bk J .Make B;: is the latest affairs piece. Each transaction  block is composed of a set of affairs constitute set, B;; = [T],T2,"??,TmJ , Number of transactions where each block  is not necessarily equal. make I={i],i2' ... , in} is business data stream single item sets, Transaction data flow in the single item set, each affairs of itemsets Ti contains subset of 1. Induding more than a collection of item called itemsets, if a set contains k a items, says it for k - itemsets. Affairs is the width of affairs appeared in the number of Ti, if itemsets X is affairs Ti subsets, says affairs Ti induding itemsets X.

Affairs on B;; block of support for intergrates X counts:  0" (X)=I{ti IXEti, tiE B!: }I Data flow in the time domain [ai' bi J the length is  Length (DS)=I B;: 1+1 B;::; 1+??? +1 B;: 1 Among :1 B;; 1 mean the base of collection B;;. Given  minimal support, a itemsets X in time window [a;., bJ is frequent itemsets , if and only if ? bit= ai a (X)?: s X  1 B;: I, SO given a minimum support degrees, data flow frequent itemset mining problems to use as few statute of space and time consumption to find certain time domain all the frequent itemsets.

A. Data processing model Data flow processing model is for frequent itemset  mining problems must be solved firstly, it is unlimiteds. Data data flow solution which part of the need to be selection of frequent itemset mining. One can see from the definition, data flow induding a project the orderly sequence.

Collection of every project called affair processing model problem is to find a way from the data flow draw-out affairs for frequent itemset mining. Because the data flow is continuous and without boundary arrive, extraction affairs also as time constant change.

According to the research literature [3], there are three types of streaming data processing model:    a) Landmarks model. It is in the history of the whole data flow in time domain is a call to the current position of landmarks in all the time span of frequent itemsets dig. Many literature the algorithm is based on this model, But in many applications, the people of data flow history only interested in recent data, such as stock monitoring system of real-time information and analysis the current results for end users more meaningful.

b) Attenuation model. It refers to the streaming data in mining, each affairs have a weights, and the right value over time will decrease. Older affairs frequent degrees of itemsets smaller weights contribution[4] This model to the old affairs consider different weights, suitable for old affairs has influence on mining results, but the impact over time reduce application fields.

c) Sliding window model. It found on the sliding window and maintain frequent itemsets. When data inflows, only part of the sliding window data flow is storage and processing.

Sliding window size according to application and system resource constraints decision. Mining results relies on data flow within the sliding window span data generated recently.

In all the affairs of sliding window, and in its need maintenance beyond the scope of sliding window to eliminate them after the mining results in the current on impact.

These three data processing model have their application fields and characteristics, and the particular one data processing model according to the need of main application.

Meanwhile they can convert between based on landmarks, such as the algorithm can through to model the forthcoming data flow increases attenuation function conversion to attenuation model, also can pass in a particular sliding window tracking and processing data conversion to sliding window model.

B. Summary data structure In data flow processing, due to the volume of data flow  of system memory than available in memory, the system can't save all traversal data, and the paradoxically, data stream query and mining often will require read such data. In order to avoid costly disk access, data flow processing system must in memory to maintain a summary data structures to keep traversal of information. At present, generating summary data flow of data structure sampling, the main technique including diagram, fall load, wavelet transform, etc.

The existing many data flow frequent itemset rrnnmg algorithm design various efficient tree structure to maintain data stream of data and information, and through summary of memory in a data structure according to the number of nearly like control system according to the original reason to choose to abandon department cast choose sex. The data points [5] in memory dynamic structure and maintenance FP tree, update stream structure to finish mining - process; Zhangxin proposed an improved FP tree structure, can effectively mining has long frequent mode of data flow; proposes used for mining data flow frequent itemsets dictionary tree data structure. Borgelt[6] proved affairs linked list of data structure of FP - than have to obtain tree structure used in higher   spatial efficiency; Maddouri[7] is proposed based on concept lattice data structure to excavate a set of data, but frequent itemsets can't apply streaming data mining. Ra ssi etc[8] FIDS algorithm proposed using a special case data structure to dynamically update and maintain data flow of frequent itemsets.

C. Approximation algorithm Alon who earlier [9] to approximate frequent count space  complexity problem is studied, the data flow approximate algorithm is important to study significance. Data flow in frequent itemset mining is usually in certain error control values to approximate rapid output frequent itemsets, but at the same time sacrifice accuracy of frequent itemsets.

Approximate algorithm can be divided into misstatement or omission algorithm two kinds. Many algorithms mining results often belong to misstatement algorithm, namely mining results, there are a lot of the frequent itemsets, which caused the algorithm's space sharp increase consumption.

In view of the above question consideration, Literature[ 10] design data flow frequent itemset mining method through the omission in a given parameters Chernoff bound to effectively control by the number of frequent itemsets, saves storage space and reduce the space complexity. This kind of algorithm is obvious characteristics of weakness is its omission, namely the data stream part dig rather than all the frequent itemsets. Figure 2 shows the omission of material misstatement and diagram, misstatement and omission can also be respectively called pseudo and refuse, really.

Misstatement algorithm exist not frequent itemsets output, and omission algorithm missing part of frequent itemsets.

BI TI acd  0 T2 bcd  B2 I  T3 bd  B3 T4 acde  2 T5 de ...... ...... ......

Figure l. Time window affairs data block  D. Frequent closed itemsets mining Frequent itemsets tightening says include frequent closed  itemsets and frequent categories set, however, frequent closed itemsets not lose support degree provides the information of frequent itemsets premise of minimum compact said. Therefore, carries on the frequent closed itemsets mining can from the time complexity and space complexity improve the efficiency of the frequent itemset mining. Definition 2 are given in the frequent closed itemsets partition.formal definition.

Definition 2 frequent closed itemsets. Itemsets X is closed, if it is not the direct superset with it the same support for the count. That is, if there are at least a X direct superset, its support for the same, with X X count is not closed.

A itemsets X is closed, when and only when f (g (X)) =

X. A itemsets X is frequent closed itemsets, if it's closed, and its support degree is equal to or greater than the minimum support degree threshold.

Literature [11] in view of the traditional static dataset gives the frequent closed itemsets, however these algorithms algorithm for mining adopted a multiple scanning data set way to produce frequent closed itemsets cannot satisfy the data flow, fast mining requirements. Chi who is proposed based on sliding window mechanism of algorithm for mining data flow on bill of frequent closed itemsets. The main problems of bill algorithm is that it USES a precise algorithm model, the update brings new and old affairs of frequent updates and frequent mode maintenance, reduce the time efficiency. And, the transaction to join and leave addition and deletion by two operation, easy to cause the memory data structure greatly updates. Jiang[12] who proposed an improved algorithm based on Moment algorithm CFI and commission cases - stream. This algorithm provides a kind of on-line inspection and maintenance frequent closed itemsets mechanism, and frequent closed itemsets can real-time output. However, this algorithm and the Moment algorithm same, not using affairs batch mode, cannot be solved when the old affairs exchange brought a drastic change problem memory space.

E. Data processing mechanism improvement At present, based on sliding window mechanism for  streaming data processing has become a popular method.

Literature [5] full tilt with a time window and FP-growth characteristics, design a time window based on the natural inclination to improve from the time window for maintenance of the number of frequent pattern inclination to solve the data limitation problem. FP-stream algorithm uses logarithmic time instead of tilting the window tilt window of time to study the natural landmark multi-model time granularity data streams mining frequent itemsets. For the  year, logarithmic time for tilt Windows need to 10g2 (365 X  24 X 60+1)about 19 storage units, And the natural for the  unit in minutes time tilt Windows need 365 X 24 X 60 = 525 600 storage unit. For data flow mining application, using the logarithmic time cost less inclined window algorithm space.

Literature tree data structure based on the dictionary, will tilt time window with heuristic method and combining with the thoughts, and proposes an improved tilt Windows strategy, detailed the window size, make more accurate mining results.

Zhu etc in sliding window the data using the mechanism of granular computing method of data stream of theory of association rule mining and decision-making rules on the concepts of modeling, dig accurately explains data flow on the concepts of association rules migration problem.



III. DATA FLOW ASSOCIATION RULES  A. Association rnle generation algorithms Get frequent itemsets in the next work is a given  threshold level of confidence is created and maintain   expected association rules. Most current algorithm focus on the data flow frequent itemsets of digging, but this is not data flow association rules mining the last steps and purpose, data flow of association rule generation problem also faced the challenge of resources, need devoted more attention. Based on the data flow slide on time window of association rules algorithm can describe produced the input is as follows: algorithm by frequent itemset mining algorithm are frequent itemsets; Algorithm in association rule generation invoked output association rules set in the process.

Algorithm Data flow time window [ai. bi ] association rules algorithm on produced  input: frequent k- itemset, Ri IIRi set of association rules  initialization Ri = cD  for each k- itemset fk? k::::2 do  HI= {iliEfd  genAssociationRules( fk? HI) II Call the process of generating association rules  end for  genAssociationRules( fk? Hm)  { k = I fk I II The size of frequent itemsets m= I Hm I II Pieces the size of the rules  if( k > m+ 1) then  Hm+1 = candidate-gene Hm)  for each Hm+1 EHm+1 do  c= o( fk) io(fk-Hm+l) II Rules of probability calculation  if( c :::: minconf) then Ri = Ri U { (fk -Hm + I) ? Hm + I} I I Generate association  rule sets  }  else delete Hm + I endif endfor genAssociationRules(fk? Hm + I) end if output Ri  B. Update of association rules Association rules mining contains a large amount of  memory and CPU expenses, while this in data flow, especially a problem, because the processing time required to a online scanning, so, when updating association rules is real-time or in times of need is another basic problem.

Cheung [13] who first put forward the association rule to maintain found. The article puts forward a called the FUP incremental updating technology, it added to database in new affairs when the incremental updating found association rule.

Literature[14] put forward a more general algorithm, called FUP2, can from the database in new affairs add or be deleted and revision of association rules update the discovery. But, in data flow environment, streaming data constantly added.

Therefore, if too frequent updates association rules, the cost will be calculated dramatic increase. Literature [15] proposes a metric distance as between different measure the sequential patterns, and puts forward a kind of TPD method,    decide when to update streaming data sequence mode. The author puts forward some preliminary experiments to find a suitable growth, then the growth rate than can be used to decide when to better update sequence mode. But only suitable for TPD method with small concept transfer of data flow, that is to say, the data distribution of change is relatively minor.

C. Assessment of association rules In data flow at home and abroad in frequent itemset  mining is put forward, they all many algorithms for traditional data mining technology improvement or multiple scanning data put forward new ideas. However, these algorithms produced a great deal of frequent itemsets, if further formation of association rules is hard to imagine. This is because, data flow the number of association rules, and very big to be a massive redundancy and of no value to the association rules. Therefore, establishing the widely accepted standards of quality evaluation association rules is very necessary.

From the definition 2 can see, association rules need two measures: support and confidence. In fact, only the two indicators and cannot objectively evaluate the association rules. Support for the fault is that many potentially valuable because the rules are deleted little support degree; Confidence of the weakness is ignored rules one in itemsets after the support degree, easy to cause the negative correlation . Many in the literature association rules the limitations of two indicators proposed many new evaluation standards, such as Brin who proposed using interest factor for interest measure of thought, literature degree of credibility .Literature [16] put forward the measurement method.



IV. THE FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTION  From the data flow association rules mining research progress, the author puts forward four deserves further study and solve problems: a) How to solve the data flow time? varying characteristic; b) How to from a large number of association rules further gains in more valuable knowledge; c) How will acquire presented to users association rules; d) Data security issues.

Current data flow characteristics of mining algorithm is to pay attention to fast real-time, but mostly ignore real data flow "change" feature. Data flow "change" characteristics reflected in data flow to arrive rate is not fixed, the same historical period of tuples, not necessarily the same number even differs huge. For example, research of celestial bodies movement or the law of crustal movement, needs in particular interval maintain a sliding window calculation the number of these events, but it is difficult to predict the size, high-energy particles interval outbreak may last a few seconds, also may be a few hours or a few days. In addition, people often only in recent historical period of the data stream of interest greater than the present moment, from the historical period far less data generated interest. So, many of the current data flow based on sliding window algorithm for mining the data flow in artificial input have good properties,   but in the real data are often very efficiently. ZhuXiaoDong who is proposed based on variable-dimension sliding window of data flow, frequent itemset mining algorithm in dealing with real data flow time-varying has better efficiency.

The existing frequent itemset mining algorithm has the ability to generate a lot frequent mode. Ignore the first thing is empty or the consequent is empty rules, each frequent itemsets k can produce as much as 2k -2 association rules. If the data is only six items, but concentrated in specific support degree and confidence threshold, it can produce hundreds of association rules. But the real business affairs data stream data quantity and dimension is very large, produce for thousands of association rules, even millions, of which a large part of may is redundant and has no value. Chu who studied more time domain of association rules changes, the association rule changes, and puts forward an object based on fuzzy sets yuan rule mining method; Liu through as a support degree and confidence vector method gives much time domain of association rules on change. These methods can pass on current and historical time domain of association rules are changing the change rule of association rules, and the predicting future association rule. But for the massive high-speed data flow character, function appears limited and difficult to adapt.

In some data flow applications, especially in the surveillance applications, very need will association rules visualization to promote data analysis. A visual graphic interactive use can help users to better understand the relationship between related association rules, and visualization result can be further from select and browsing special rule sets. In Literature [15], the authors developed a series of tools that can used for continuous query and mining results showed that when some abnormal events in the data flow in coming to be detected, they will trigger the alarm.

Literature gives association rules in the visualization strategies, overview of association rule results and further research users to choose special association rules. However, a large number of high-speed data stream of association rules in what way presents users also needs further study.

The university of Hong Kong people Wong[18] etc of association rules mining safety problems do more work, the goal is in association rule mining process to the data encryption outsourcing. This method is suitable for many data confidential degree is higher application fields. Yet for large-scale high-speed real-time data flow confidential for association rules mining data security issues for further study.



V. CONCLUSION  Data flow association rules mining in engineering field makes it a wide application in the world. This paper data flow association rules mining the data flow partition.formal definition and gives the basic algorithm for mining association rules, from the Angle of association rule produce process described the characteristics of data flow and bring the challenge of mining association rules, systematically analyzed in data flow in domestic and foreign scholars association rule mining problem solving thinking and approaches presented, and based on this, put forward and discussed the development of the future research direction.

Further work for streaming data including the efficiency of the algorithm for mining association rules algorithm of comparative research and data flow environment adaptable research.

