Finding Scientific Experts of ACM Categories  Based On Temporal Association Rule Mining

Abstract- Data mining is the process of analyzing the data from ditJerent perception and abridgment it into useful information. Association rule mining dig out some valuable relationships among ditJerent items in the dataset. Temporal association rule is introduced to find the valuable relationship between the different item set. In scientific literature the data is growing dramaticaBy. Finding experts in academics as weB as in enterprises is an important practical problem. Both automated and manually approaches are developed for fmding the experts. Manual approaches need extensive human efforts. Mostly developed Automated approaches consider the only one factor and also not cattier the temporal information. Incorporating temporal information for fmding the experts in the domain of science and technology is most serious aspect. To solve these problems we proposed the Temporal Expertise mining (rEM) algorithm. TEM algorithm is solving the existing problems. By using TEM algorithm we find the categories based experts. TEM algorithm carter the ditJerent factors to solve the problem. These facts are author publications, author category publications and co-author network. The publications are considered in the particular time period.

Working of the proposed algorithm is elaborated with case study. Experimental results show the significance of the proposed algorithm.

Kqwords-Experts, temporal, database, association rule.



I. INTRODUCTION  Data mining is the process of analyzing data from different perspectives and summarizing it into useful information [1]. Association rule problem is first introduced by R.Agrawal [2]. Association rule is used to find the frequent patterns, associations, correlations, or causal structures among sets of items or objects in transaction databases, relational databases, and other information repositories. Association relationship is useful in the selective marketing, decision analysis and market basket analysis fields.

Temporal association rule are introduce first by Wang, Yang and Muntz in 1999-2001 together with the introduction of the TAR (Temporal Association Rule) algorithm [3]. Temporal association rule has been introduced in order to solve the problem on handling time series by including time expression into association rule. Temporal association help to find the valuable relationship among the different item set, in temporal database.

Scientific literature is growing dramatically increased the need of temporal content analysis. In literature most of existing techniques are introduce based on temporal content analysis [4][5][6]. New TAR algorithms have   been presented for general temporal association rule in database are PPCI algorithm [11], SPF [9], ITRAM [4].

Temporal association rule have various kinds Calendric Association rule [12], Cyclic Association rule [13], Association rule based on partition [14], progressive weighted miner [10], incremental temporal association rule [4] and periodic temporal association rule [15].

Experts finding is most important and critical factor in the academic and business domains. Both manual and automated approaches are exists to solve the problem of expertise finding. These approaches have their pro and cons.

Manual approaches need extensive work and most of the automated approaches use ooly one factor to define the experts. Existing approaches also not consider the temporal facts. Fast growing of scientific literature increased the need of temporal cootent analysis. Time based expertise finding is critical aspect in scientific. We try to overcome this problem by using temporal association rule. In our technique find the experts based on the two factors, one is the number of publication in a certain time period and another factor is co? author network. And then based on these results associatioo rules are generated.

We perform the experiments on the dataset of journal of universal of computer science (JUCS). We perform experiments on the more than 3000 of author's records and 6090 records of papers. Proposed technique gives results which helpful to solve the existing problems of finding the experts of different categories. Proposed technique identified the different cluster of experts which helpful in different prospectus of user.

The rest of the organized as follows: Section II gives the detail overview of different technique of temporal association rule. Section III gives the details of proposed framework. Section IV gives the details of the proposed system and proposed algorithm. Section V gives the case study. Section VI gives the experimental results. Section VII is the conclusion of the paper.



II. RELATED WORK  Several algorithms have been proposed for mining the temporal association rule in temporal database. We use these approaches as a base line to solve the problem of temporal mining expertise.

Among these algorithms, Tarek et al proposed the ITARM algorithm to discover the temporal frequent item set after the temporal transaction database has been updated. [4] The basic idea of ITARM algorithm is depends on previously generated 2 candidate item set     with their supports. ITRAM work as it checks first the extension of the pervious partition. If not then find 2 candidate item set on newer partition and if yes it merges it with pervious partition and find the 2 candidate item set.

This approach is basically introduced to solve the problem of incremental mining techniques.

Another approach is proposed by C.H.Lee et al, is progressive partition miner (PPM) [6]. In PPM first partition the database according to time granularity. The PPM algorithm is applying the filtering threshold mechanism on each partition of the database to prune out those cumulatively infrequent 2-itemsets. PPM also employs the scan reduction technique. In this technique can not deal with the problem of incremental mining problem.

Cheng. Y Chang et al proposed the algorithm segmented progressive filter (SPF) algorithm [9]. The basic idea of SPF is, first divide the database based on their common starting and ending time. Then for each database find the 2-candidate item set with cumulative filtering threshold.

SPF also applies scan reduction technique for generating candidate K-item set.

Moreover JMAle et al expand the notion of association rule incorporation the time to their frequent item sets [7]. The basic idea of this paper is to extension of non temporal model. It introduces the concept of temporal support.

M Chen et al temporal association rule on video database for video event detection[5]. In this approach capture the characteristics of temporal patterns with respect to the event of interest. MChen et al proposed framework is based on feature extraction, hierarchical temporal association mining and multimodal data mining.

Byon et al proposed the ES filter with temporal association rule [8]. ES filter is based on the two things on is partition the database and PWM. PWM is weight function gives larger weights to recent data than older data. divide by equal period[lO].

Ru Miao et al present the idea of MPTAR [15]. In previous techniques of TAR not consider the individual item exhibition period. MPT AR solve this problem, it consider the exhibition period of individual item.

MPT AR is periodic temporal association rule mining technique. MPTAR is two step periodic rule mining perform. First step is mining the trend of continues attribute through cycle curve and the second step is, calculate the period of the attribute. MPT AR not define the cumulative threshold and also not perform the comparison of existing techniques.

Edi Winarko et al present the new algorithm, ARMADA [16]. In this technique generate richer interval-based temporal association rules. ARMADA finds the frequent patterns in three steps. First, reads the database into memory.

While reading the database, it counts the support of each state and generates frequent I-patterns. Constructs an index set for each frequent I-pattern and finds frequent patterns.

And finally, using a recursive find-then-index strategy, the algorithm discovers all temporal patterns from the in? memory database.



III. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK The proposed framework of temporal association rule  is shown in the figure 1. The process of temporal experts mining is start with the extracting the extract the authors papers in the database. The next step is to find the papers of extracted authors. After finding the authors papers the next step is extract the categories of papers and then find the co-authors of extracted author. Based on these extracted information find the category based experts.

The next module is cluster group, in which assign the labels of the extracted experts. These labels are based on the categories labels.

Temporal association rule mining  y N  Extract  I Category Author I Extract Papers  Ex tract papers Category  I Extract Co-  I Author  rI uster "roun  Fig.) Frame work of Categories Based Expertise Finding

IV. TEMPORAL EXPERTISE MINING ASSOCIATION RULE  Since we are target to confine the temporal patterns in the scientific literature. We define the event of finding expertise in scientific literature through temporal association rules. As discuss earlier, due to dramatically growing the scientific literature number of new ideas are generated on daily bases. And temporal content analysis is important in the field of the scientific literature. Our proposed algorithm TEM (Temporal Expertise Mining) is applied to find the temporal association rules.

Temporal Expertise Mining (TEM) algorithm is inspired by M Chen et al temporal association rule on video database for video event detection [5]. M.chen et al proposed the feature extraction in the video database. To solve the problem of experts mining in the scientific database we develop the TEM. TEM algorithm mine the experts of the ACM define category in the database. The proposed algorithm is worked as: find the list of each category authors based on the particular time period.

Then the 2nd step of the algorithms is to find the each extracted author's papers. The next phase is to find the category of the extracted papers. Then check the category of papers if it is targeting category then it store otherwise discard. The 4th step is finding the co-authors for each category. And the final step is defined the rules based experts.

Support and C01ifidence:  Support is defined as: Support = BN>T  An item set BN is the combination of total number of publication by an author. If BN is exceeds the given threshold t is said to be frequent.

Confidence is defined as:  Confidence = Count (BN+ BP)/Max (BP+ BN)  4.1 Frequent patterns:  First step of the algorithm is to find the frequent in the database. Foc that purpose proposed algorithm lliM is worked as first find all authors of the particular category.

lliM is worked in three steps for finding the frequent patterns. First of all it finds all authors papers and secondly find the categories of these papers. Third and final step of the algorithms is finding the co-authors. After perfocming these three steps lliM is gives the results in the focm of three tables BP, BN, BK Bp is the total publications of authors, BN is the total papers of authoc in given category and BP is the co-authoc network count.

Now three cumulative thresholds are defined for BP, BN and BP.

BP = Total papers by authors/ total number o/papers.

BN=Total number 0/ paper by author in this category/  total number 0/ papers in category BK = Total Co-author 0/ particular author Imaximum co?  authors.

Input: Document database Dd, Time, Event, Min_support, category Output: Authors network, Publication, Papers with Category Cluster (Dd, Time, Event, Category, Min_support)  Bp= 0, Bn= 0, Bk= 0; Step# I Get the category authors and papers.

Step#2 For each author Ai?Dd{  2.1 Get papers of authors Ai in a given time period;  2.2 Store these into Bp= BP U Ai} Step#3 For each paper (BP (i)){  3.1 Get Category(Bp(i)); 3.2 If ( category is target category i.e. Ci is  Yes ) 3.3 BN=BN U i 3.4 Else 3.5 Remove form Bp;}  Step#4 For each author of category { 4.1 Get co-authors A(i); 4.2 Store co-authors into BkG); }  Step#5Defined Rules based experts.

Step#6Group similar category Experts.

Fig. 2 Proposed TEM Algorithm  And last step of the algorithm is grouping the category experts into a single cluster. After calculating these weights, association rule are defined.

4.2. Temporal Rules:  We obtain the frequent and strong patterns, we build the temporal rules to facilities the event of experts finding.

The principles are defined as follows:  1. {Support ? BP& BN) > T & BK=l)} = Expert 2. {Support ? BP& BN) = T & BK=l)}= Expert 3. {Support ? BN) > T & BK=l)}= Expert  4.3. Grouping:  Final step of the algorithms is to group the all extracted Experts. Label these cluster with the category name.



V. CASE STUDY  In the following case study illustrate the working of the proposed algorithm. In the following case study we find the experts of the ACM category ill.l. For that purpose first of all find the authors of the multimedia information system and Papers of the authors and co-authors.

Table 1 illustrate the step no one results of the proposed algorithm. Following table shows the list author's of the ACM category H5.1 Multimedia Information System.

TABLE I LIST OF EXTRACTED AUlHORS  Authorid Name 149 Alireza  543 Y. Avrithis  544 G. Stamou  558 Leena IImola  766 Mathias  1219 Dick Schefstroem  1283 Janusz R. Getta  1598 Jun Pang  1801 MarizaA S.

1802 Eduardo S.

1804 Vladimir 0.

Table 2 illustrate the results of the step2. In the following table shows the author's papers in the different categories according to given time period. In this table give the author id and their count of papers, other than category of H.5.1. By using this table value we find the experts according to defined rules.

TABLE II BP: OVERAlL PAPER  Authorid 8p 149 12  543 3  544 3  558 1  766 1  1219 2  1283 2  1598 3  1801 2  1802 2  1804 2     In the following table3 shows the results of the step3.

Table 2 papers category find if they belong to the given category then it store into the Bn. Following table shows the author's papers in the h.5.1 ACM category [17]. In this table provide the information about author id and their count of papers in the category of H.5.1. By using this table value we find the experts according to defined rules.

TABLE III BN: CATEGORY PAPERS  Authorid Bn 149 4 543 3 544 3 558 2 766 2  1219 2 1283 2 1598 2 1801 2 1802 2 1804 2  Table 3 illustrate the results of algorithm step4. In which find the author's network. In this table give the author id and their count of Co-Authors. By using this table value we find the experts according to defined rules.

TABLE IV BK: Co-AUlHORNElWORK  Authorid Bk 149 17 543 3 544 3 558 2 766 1  1219 2 1283 5 1598 7 1801 4 1802 4 1804 4  After apply the rules we extract the experts are AlirezaBagheri, Y.Avrithis, G.Stamou, Janusz R.Getta, JunPang.



VI. EXPERIMENTS RESULTS To assess the performance of our algorithm, we use the  Journal of Universal of Computers database (JUCS).

Perform experiments on 6090 publications records, and 3000 author's records. Proposed TEM is implemented in the with C# in visualstudi02008 and it performed on a Intel PC with 1 GB of main memory and 3 GHz processor.

Give the proposed algorithms inputs of database, time period = 5  year, Event= expert of category h.5.1, min_support= 2, category = H.5.1. After perform processing on 3000 authors recodes, proposed algorithm give following these 3 tables in results BN, BP, and BK.

Experts of the system are performing the desire task in the well-organized way. Experts finding is most important and critical issue in the different domain of the life. The performed experimental results show the  significance of the proposed techniques. The results show that different authors contribution in the different field and as well in the desire field. By using this characteristic we are able to stumble on the new fields or growing field's experts easily. The proposed algorithm depend on the category author extraction module, extracted authors are given to the TEM algorithm and find the authors papers and their co-authors. Proposed algorithm is overcome the existing problems for example peer review setting finding the appropriate person for papers review difficult find the past, but using TEM we can find the competent person for paper reviews. Experimental Results show that proposed algorithm TEM gives not only one person; but it give the group experts of category.

So editor general easily find the competent person.

Performed results shows that proposed algorithm ( TEM) is used for different perspective only a few modifications perform on the algorithm for example we can find the authors relation by using the co-author network step of the algorithm.



VII. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK  Temporal association rule mining is introduced in order to solve the problem of time series by using the time expression into the association rules. We have present the algorithm for solving the cumulative threshold problem of each set of data and find the experts based on the categories in a certain time frame. The experiments show the significant improvement over the traditional approaches. Experiments also show it is saleable for different domain.

