Neuralised Intrusion Detection System

Abstract- Internet brings in marvelous turning point to business in terms of new finders. But it also brings in lot of loop  hole to the business. Best known risk is intrusion, also referred  as hacking or cracking. Intrusion detection method are anomaly  detection and misuse detection. Our interest here is in anomaly  detection and we have proposed a scalable solution for detecting  network based anomalies. Application of a dynamic clustering  method with enhanced support vector machine improves the  performance of existing intrusion detection system. This work  reviewed the existing SVM and presents a study for further  enhancement of SVM and have noted the next research direction.

Keywords- intrusion detection, Anomaly detection, Dynamic clustering, support vector machine, Association rule mining

I. INTRODUCTION  The uses of computers are universal. Computers are used in applications ranging from running a farm, diagnosing a disease, and designing to constructing and launching a space vehicle. Because the development of computers has been largely the work of scientists, it is natural that a large body of computer applications serves the scientist. A computer with internet is used in vast application. Its capability gained concentration from vast fields. It has changed world electronically. Internet highly reduced the gap between users.

But it hurdle the advancement by an issue called hacking. The recent security technologies are encryption, id, and firewall and access control. Expected recovery is not achieved. A method called intrusion detection can do a little bit. The important thing of IDS is to identify intrusions with accuracy.

Intrusions are located by the patterns of user activities and by examining audit records.

Computer attacks are classified as host based attacks and network based attacks. If attacks are target towards a host machine, which gains access to restricted services or resources, then it is classified as Host based attack This method uses subroutines to trace out system call data from an audit process, by which user system calls are tracked. Whereas the other one blocks genuine users from using network services by knowingly accommodating or crowding network resources and services. Usually it is done by sending large amount unnecessary data that leads to network traffic, identifying well known faults in network services, crowding   Dr. J . Jaya Kumari  Electronics and Communication Engineering Noorul Islam University Kumaracoil, Thuckalay jkumaribharat@yahoo.com  network hosts, etc. Network profit data is used to trace the traffic destinated the monitored machines, in Network-based attack. Intrusion detection systems [1] are rip into two groups: anomaly detection model and misused detection model.

Misused detection model are otherwise called signature detection. Pattern matching resembles this model. First the model has been modeled on the knowledge of identified attack fragments, then test samples is used to check its ability. It was very effective in fmding attacks and it gave exact results, and it highly reduced the false alarms. The disadvantage here is it is unable to find newly occurring attacks. This paved to the need of updating the database with new types of attacks frequently. Drawback of misuse detection can be overcome by having a knowledge base system in which regular updates need to be made in order to add new intrusion behaviors.

The second method is anomaly detection: Here it takes the concept of analyzing the difference from normal behavior of users or machines. It works on the consideration that hacking will be different from genuine action and so it can be identified by machines which is monitoring. By this it can detect abnormal pattern and so it identifies without having any knowledge of abnormal pattern and this action is specifically is used to frame samples for that method. But it may result in a large number of false alarms due to the unpredictable behaviors of users and networks[2]. Based on neural character Anomaly detection is categorized as geometric, analytic patterns or neural network based anomaly detection.



II. RELATIVE WORK  Finding intruder is not an easy task, there are data mining methods which resolve this problem by having automatic working. Techniques like association rule mining, frequent pattern, classification, clustering, nearest neighbor (KNN), outlier mining etc. Association rule mining is an important method but now clustering , classification has over crossed its benefits. The main draw back in association rule mining is that it is dead slow. Support Vector Machine, when analyzed it is a new classification technique with a higher performance than other previous learning solutions. It has been used in many      applications such as medical bioinformatics and pattern recognitions in scientific areas. In network security area SVM is widely used and it is one of the key method in IDS. By use of SVM in IDS it greatly improved its performance in measures of speed , identifying time and hit rates, but it is not complete in its work.

Latifur Khan, et al. [3] proposed - "A new intrusion detection system using support vector machines and hierarchical clustering" a method which has scalable solutions for detecting network based anomalies by support vector machine for classification. It has high generalization accuracy but takes long time for training.

To avoid time consumption in training Clustering is used.

Database used here is tough multidimensional. Some of the techniques for IDS have been designed on the basis of k? means or k-monoids clustering technique of data mining but it has disadvantages such as sensitiveness to outliers and it completes with less finishing. Also it has to have advance knowledge like number K of clusters. This result in ambiguous report. Changes in clusters highly effect results obtained in that. Up to now there is no system that continuously learns, if it continuously learns new intrusions, it is able to detect all types of intrusions at instant. And we can name such system as instant IDS. [4].The new IDS that we have proposed has the function that continuously learning besides it's working function. Thus it highly reduces false alarms. New intrusion will be detected because continuous updating in behavior learning is automated. We are considering audit data that are more specific to authenticate audit patterns.

To have continous learning we used an Artificial Neural Network approach "Self Organizing Approach (SOM)". SOM is a type of neural network that is trained using unsupervised learning. SOM uses neighborhood functions which makes it different from other artificial neural networks.



III. PRINCIPLES OF SUPPORT VECTOR MACHINE  SVM solves problems such as Binary classification. [5]. An SVM uses a mapping method in which linear algorithms are mapped to non-linear space. A feature named kernel function used for this mapping. Kernel functions like polynomial, radial basis function are used to divide the feature space by constructing a hyper plane. Support vectors along the surface of the function is used at training time of classifiers. SVM catalog data by using these support vectors that outline the hyper plane in the feature space.

The above said task involve a quadratic programming problem, which may result in total best possible solution.

Suppose we have M training data points {(Sl' ta, (S2,t2),  (S3, t3), ... , (SM , tM )}, where si ? Pd and tj ?{+l,-l}.

Consider a hyper-plane defined by (u, a), where u is a weight vector and a is a bias. The classification of a new object s is done with   f(s)=sign( u.s + a )=sign(Ij?ltoM Uj tj (sj.s)+a) (1)  The training vectors Sj occur only in the form of a dot  product. For each training point, there is a Lagrangian multiplier Uj. The Lagrangian multiplier values (Xj reflect the  importance of each data point. When the maximal margin hyper-plane is found, only points that lie closest to the hyper? plane will have (Xj > 0 and these points are called support  vectors. All other points will have (Xj = O. That means only  Those points that lie closest to the hyper-plane are only given the representation of the hypothesis/classifier. These data points serve as support vectors. Their values can be used to give an independent boundary with regard to the reliability of the hypothesis/classifier.



IV. WORKING MODEL OF PROPOSED WORK  The proposed model look after the user's behavior and The system monitors the user's activity and groups audit logs matching to each experience. After the creation of logs machine can have signature of current user who have just logged in to it. The received signature is then given as input in to two units. First unit performs comparison between current signature and stored known signature. Comparison is done using pattern matching. On hit of comparison it causes alarm for un authorized access.

Second unit is a learning unit where it uses signatures of users to learn their current behavior. This learning updates the database constantly by which false alarm rate is highly reduced. Here Neuralised learning is applied. The neural network used here is Self Organizing Map. A self-organizing map (SOM) or self-organizing feature map (SOFM) is a type of artificial neural network that is trained using unsupervised learning to produce a low-dimensional (typically two? dimensional), discretized representation of the input space of the training samples, called a map. Self-organizing maps are different from other artificial neural networks in the sense that they use a neighborhood function to preserve the topological properties of the input space. It provide a way to represent multidimensional data to lower dimensional spaces like ID or 2D. Above process which reduces dimension of vectors is a data compression method known as vector quantization.

SOM works in two modes: training and mapping.

We are using SOM during the behavior learning because it is unsupervised learning. Here we have taken some parameters from audit logs and a low weightage is assigned to each parameter taken. Weightage is needed because we cannot decide with one or two parameters as an intruder or genuine user. Each parameter is given different value as weightage.

Above map is feed ahead map which helps us to know about the prospect learning because here each time the database is reviewed and changed.

In SOM we will be using V matrix. The V matrix value of a particular parameter is the average distance between the parameter and its neighborhood parameters. Euclidian      distance is calculated to find the value of V matrix. Whenever a new data is given as input to the network, that is whenever behavior learning is in process, Euclidian distance to all the weight factors is computed. The parameter with weight factor most related to the input is called Best identical Unit (BID).

The magnitude of change that is the magnitude of learning new behavior decreases with time. Because already many new cases would have arrived and may have been learned that is updated. Hence change of magnitude decreases with time and with distance from BID. Figure 1. shows the best identical unit. [6]  Figure 1. Updating the Best Identical Unit  The formula for updation of data set is given as follows:  G(t+1) = G(t)+x(v, t) yet) (D(t)-G(t)) (2)  Where: yet) is monotonically decreasing learning coefficient  A function is said to be monotonically decreasing  whenever x:S y then f(x) ?f(y).

t is current iteration y is limit on time iteration G is present weight vector x(t) is restraint due to distance from BID usually called neighborhood function yet) is learning restraint due to time  D(t) is the input vector xCv, t) is neighborhood function  It depends on the distance between the BID and parameter p.

The V matrix is formed with the help of Euclidian distance.

Euclidian distance between point's c and d is the length of the line segment cd  Weight factor is assigned for each parameter. The size of the neighborhood function decreases with time. This process is repeated for each input vector, for a certain numberof cycles in order to decrease the false alarm rate. [7, 8,9]  Algorithm:  1. pick the parameters.

2. Randomize the parameters with weight factors.

3.Train the behavior.

4. Calculate the Euclidian distance for each parameter.

5. Track the parameter with the smallest distance. This gives the BID of the parameter.

6. Update the parameter learning:  G(t+ 1) = G(t)+x(v,t) yet) (D(t)-G(t)) 7. Increment t and repeat from step 2 while t< y

V. CONCLUSION  The use of above two techniques yields an automated intrusion detection system. It provides security with the help of network packet monitoring, credit logs and signature matching. This will also reduce false alarm rate. Use of SOM slows the process, for better speed, other techniques like adaptive resonance theory may be used.

