17-19 July 2011, Bandung, Indonesia

Abstract? With the growth of computer networks, the number of attacks posing serious security risks for networks has grown extensively. Many organizations are faced with the problem of detecting whether or not  they have an anomaly in their network transactions. The Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) is one of the popular tools used to secure and protect networks. In order to secure a network the signature rules in NIDS should be updated with the latest signature detection rule.  Therefore, this research aims to develop a network anomaly detection tool which focuses on association rule data mining techniques to detect anomalies and also produce anomaly detection rules.  The tool, named as NASSR, consists of the following functions: pre- processing of the raw data network transaction that is captured using Wireshark and transforming the data into three types of data sets (2, 5 and 10 seconds), normalization (min., max.) and mining (Appriori, Fuzzy Appriori, and FP-Growth). The anomaly detection is calculated by comparing it with a normal network data set, which is validated by CACE tools. The data set is determined as having no intrusion, if the similarity results are higher than the user threshold, and vice versa. This paper also presents the interface tools used to analyse the 7GB real network data set obtained from Pusat Teknologi Maklumat (PTM), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), which consists of three days? accumulation of network traffic data, and presents the data sets that have anomalies and their rules.   The best result shows that the best technique for pre-processing is in the form of two seconds. Fuzzy Appriori  presents the most accurate result while FP-growth has been shown as a faster mining technique. The tools can be easily used to detect anomalies for any network traffic.

Keywords? network intrusion detection system (NIDS), Data Mining, Association Rules Techniques.



I. INTRODUCTION  Nowadays the number of computer networks keeps growing in parallel with transactions, especially on the Internet while streaming, video conferencing, chatting, searching, etc. These various types of transactions introduce many intrusions and anomalies into the network.

Network traffic is often seen to display sudden deviations from normal behaviour. Some of these aberrations are caused by malicious network attacks such as Denial-Of-Service or viruses, whereas others are the result of equipment failures and accidental outages [1]. Many methods have been developed by organizations and play very important roles to secure network infrastructure and communications via the  Internet such as through the use of firewalls, anti-virus software packages and intrusion detection systems. Current firewalls cannot defend against every category of intrusion, whereby some intrusions take advantages of computer system vulnerabilities [2]. An intrusion detection system (IDS) provides around-the-clock network observation and is an additional wall to secure the network.

The intrusion detection system is a process of determining an intrusion into a system through the observation of available information concerning the state of the system, monitoring user activities and reporting to a management station.

Intrusion detection refers to the detection of cruel activity (break-ins, penetrations, and other forms of computer abuse) in a computer-related system [3]. Therefore, the ID techniques are classified into host-based and network-based depending on the type and source of information used to identify security breaches [4][5][6]. Depending on the method of intrusion detection, IDS are classified into two main categories; signature-based intrusion detection and anomaly-based intrusion detection. The signature detection system approach assumes that an intrusion can be detected by matching the current activity with a set of intrusions using patterns considered as misuse. Anomaly detection systems assume that an intrusion should deviate from the normal pattern of system behaviour [7]. Signature detection has a major drawback with the failure to detect novel attacks and requires constant updating and modification for new attack signatures by domain experts.

Currently there are many data mining tools available in the market, either on a commercial basis or for free. Most data mining tools support a data mining task such as classification, association rules and clustering. Data mining tools are developed for the expert. The existing data mining is not designed for the novice user especially when network engineers detect an anomaly in their network. Therefore, this paper aims to present association anomaly detection tools that can be used by a network engineer to detect anomalies in their network easily.  The tools read the network traffic data, preprocessing it and then presenting the result, showing which data set has high intrusion, and its rules.  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: section two discusses related work concerning association rules, association rules for NIDS, current data mining tools and the association rule techniques that were used in this research. Section three describes the experiment setup, which includes data collection,  H16 - 4     pre-processing and mining. Section four shows some snapshots of user interface of the system, while section five shows an analytical result of intrusion detection using PTM network traffic data set. Finally, the conclusions are presented.



II. RELATED WORKS  One of the popular methods used for mining data in KDD (Knowledge Discovery in Database) to discover patterns is association rule mining. It has attracted the attention of many current data-mining researchers because of its capability to discover useful and interesting patterns from large, noisy, fuzzy, stochastic data [8]. The related work is organized as follows:  A. Basic Concept Of Association Rules:  Association rule mining discovers frequent patterns, associations, correlations, or causal structures among huge groups of items or objects in transaction databases, relational databases, and other information repositories [8]. It has been developed by Agrawal [9] in order to study customers? purchasing behavior in supermarkets where goods are often purchased together by customers. The brief of the basic concept of association rules in transactional and relational databases is presented as follows:  I= {i1,i2,i3,?,in} is a set of items; let DB be a set of database transactions where every transaction T is a set of items such that T?I. Each transaction is associated with a unique, transaction identifier (TID).

Let X, Y be a set of items, an association rule is an inference of the form X Y, where X?I, Y?I, and X?Y=?. X is called the antecedent of the rule, and Y is called the consequent of the rule. An itemset containing i items is called an i-itemset.

The rule X Y holds in the transaction set D with Support S, which is the percentage of transactions that contain both an itemset X and Y appearing in the same transaction. For an itemset to be interesting, its support must be higher than a user-specified minimum. Such itemsets are said to be frequent.

We have the Support of the rule X Y as in Equation (1)  Support(X Y)=P(X?Y).                                      (1)  There is another measure called Confidence C, where C is the ratio of the number of transactions in D that contains X and Y to the number of transactions that contain only X as in Equation (2)  Confidence(X Y)=P(Y/X)=Support(X?Y)/ Support(X).  (2)  Association rule mining is the process of finding all the association rules that pass the condition of min. support and min. confidence. In order to mine these rules, first the support and confidence values have to be computed for all of the rules and then compare them with the threshold values to prune the rules with low values of either support or confidence.

B. Association Rule For Network Intrusion Detection  Association rules based on the IDS attempt to classify all the traffic as either normal or malicious. There are many  association rule techniques which are available and some are shown in Table 1. Wang [10] has found that Apriori, fuzzy Apriori and FP-growth presented the best association rule mining techniques.  Besides, these techniques have been proved as the best association rules for IDS [8,9,16].

TABLE1 THE LIST OF TECHNIQUES IN THE ASSOCIATION RULE METHOD FOR NIDS.

C. Existing Data Mining Tools  Data mining tools  are those used to discover knowledge from a large data set. Current data mining tools are general- purpose. It requires the user to have certain knowledge of data mining in order for him/her to be able to use the tools.

Domain experts with less data mining knowledge face difficulty in using the tools. More than 50 data mining tools are available either commercially or for free.  Table 2 shows some current data mining tools, which can be differentiated by various criteria [25], such as Platforms Supported, Algorithms such as Decision Trees, Neural Networks and Others, Data Input and Model Output Options, Usability Ratings,  Author DM algorithms Type of data Finding  [5] Apriori,  Fuzzy Apriori DARAP? 99  Association rule can be for intrusion detection, combines association with a complementary decision tree scheme that helps to identify attributes of relevance.

[10] Apriori,  FP-growth  wired and wireless  network data  Reviews the new development of association rule mining technologies for ID in wired and wireless networks.

[11] Apriori,  Fuzzy Apriori Real-life database  They present the FARM algorithm which employs linguistic terms. FARM has unique features that are able to find positive and negative associations.

[12]  Apriori,  Fuzzy Apriori,  Classification algorithm  KDD 99  dataset  New classification approach that uses fuzzy association rulesets as descriptive models of different classes.

[13]  Apriori, Fuzzy Association  Rule based on prefix trees.

DARAP? 99  They improved a genetic algorithm to optimize the fuzzy association rules.

[14]  Apriori,  Fuzzy Apriori, Genetic  Algorithms  Network traffic data  Fuzzy association rules can be mined to find the abstract correlation among different security features.

[15]  Apriori,  Fuzzy Association  Rule  Network traffic data  Detecting intrusion is effective by using Fuzzy Association Rule and the accuracy has improved.

Visualization Capabilities, and Modelling Automation Methods.

Not all the data mining tools provide association rule algorithms such as Rosetta and Neural Connection. Among them Weka, Tanagra and Keel do provide comprehensive free supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms and data pre- processing. Most of the steps are similar when pre-processing the network data to handle the intrusion based on association rules mining but the difference with these tools is that the user should do most of the steps manually, which means that these tools are tedious and time-consuming and that the user should know the data mining process well.

TABLE 2 . SOME OF DATA MINING TOOLS    Some of the pre-processing steps are not included in the data mining tools when the data mining has to be done manually, such as to Select the packets of network traffic data based on the time period (split data into several groups); the user can do this step manually using Excel or other programmes, which is very tedious and time-consuming especially when the data is large in size.  Besides, analysis of the rules that are obtained form association rule algorithms by measuring the similarity between the rules based on the user threshold is also tedious.

In order to get the best association rules, the data needs to be mined using several association rule techniques. Therefore several experiments are conducted using several association rules to get best result, which also renders this task tedious.



III. PROPOSED TOOLS  The proposed anomaly association rules anomaly detection tool model consists of four components: Pre-processing network data, Setting Options, Association Rules techniques, and Analysis phase as shown in figure. 1.

Each phase has several functions. The description of each function of each component is as follows:                                           Fixed Set Setting  Analysis  Experiments  Mining Results Database  Comparison result in Graph  style  Fuzzy Appriori  Appriori FP-Growth  Normalize Database  Category Setting Fuzzy Set Setting  Normalization  categories  fixed set  fuzzy set  Database (Network data)  Transformation data Generate Data   raw data network   plain text data  network  Analysis Phase  Association rules techniques Phase  Setting Option Phase  Preprocessing Phase    Figure 1. Network Anomaly Association Rules Tools (NASSR) Architecture  - The Preprocessing component consists of two functions: the  Transformation Data function and the Generation Data function:  ? For the Transformation Data Component, after the data is captured, the data must be transformed from binary data into plain text data. Statistical calculation is performed.

? For the Generation Data Component, this firstly extracts the data based on 6 most popular network features for anomaly detection such as SYN, FIN and RST type of TCP flags, source IP addresses, destination IP addresses, and total packets [5][14][23].  The second function is pre- processing the data into three types of data set: 2, 5 and 10- second window slices. In each data type will be calculated: the total number of different source IP addresses performing transactions within the range, the total number of different destination IP addresses within the range and the total of packet sizes within the range. Three types of data sets are generated.

- The Setting Option component provides the function of offering setup preferences before mining the data. Three setting options are provided for the normalization process.

The first setting option is to set the category of data based on time slots when data is captured. The second setting sets the range of values for the Appriori and FP-Growth approaches which will be covered later under visualization tools. The last setting is to set the range of values for the Fuzzy Appriori as low, medium or high.

- The Mining component consists of the three unsupervised association rules techniques, namely: Appriori, Fuzzy Appriori, and FP-Growth [10]. Each normalized data set is from mining using all the three association rules techniques.

- The Analysis component provides the function of performing the comparison between the normal results against tested results based on the similarity measurement.

This component also provides a comparison of results shown in simple graphical style.



IV. IMPLEMENTATION 0F PTM?S NETWORK TRAFFIC DATA  This section shows a snapshot of the intrusion detection  process using the proposed tools for Pusat Teknologi Maklumat (PTM), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM).

The real network traffic dataset for 3 days of network traffic, starting from July, 13th 2009 at 17:30:39 until July, 15th 2009 at 13:29:59, with 27,918,524 records in 348 files. The data was captured using Wireshark tools. The data is then converted into plain text data which can use Windump tools [24] to display the TCP/IP packets. Figure. 2 shows the main menu of the NASSR tools.

Data Preparation:  Data preparation is conducted manually.  The data is divided into n number of data sets. For PTMs the data set is divided into four data sets (Test-1 to Test-4) and one data set is the normal data set which has been proved by experts or by using the CACE Pilot tools. This tool is the latest commercial visualization, charting, reporting, and "drill-down" tool used to analyze networks [22].  Table 2 shows the distribution of data for the PTM data set.

Figure 2. NASSR main menu.

Preprocessing:  Each of the Test data sets is then converted into three forms of preprocessing data. Figure. 3 shows the user interface of preprocessing the data set into 2 seconds, 5 seconds and 10 seconds.  Each range of time slot will calculate the size of the packet.

TABLE 3 THE SPECIFICATION OF NORMAL AND TESTED DATA SETS.

Normalisation Process:  The normalisation process just needs the setting of the normalisation option. The process  converts the continuous data to categorical data using the maximum-minimum normalization approach for Apriori and FP-growth, while for Fuzzy Apriori the process uses fuzzy set to describe the linguistics for all variables with domains [0,1]; a standard membership function for the fuzzy variable is used [5][20].

Figure. 4 shows an example of a setting option for fuzzy set.

The Mining phase: Each dataset (eg. Test-1 with 2 second slice window) is then mined using three association rule algorithms to establish the association rules pattern Figure 5.

Category Time slots when data sets  are collected 13/07 14/07 15/07  Normal 00:00:00 ? 06:00:00  20:00:01 ? 24:00:00  -  ? ?  ?  ?  -  Tested-1 06:00:01 ? 09:00:00 - ? ?  Tested-2 09:00:01 ? 13:00:00 - ? ?  Tested-3 13:00:01 ? 17:00:00 - ? ?  Tested-4 17:00:01 ? 20:00:00 ? ? -    The Anomaly is detected by comparing the rules of a normal category dataset with the rules of tested category datasets based on similarity measurements.

Figure 3. Preprocessing the data set into 3 type data sets.

Figure 4.  Example of Setting Options for Fuzzy Set.

Analysis: The experiment results of the ID for the PTM?s data evaluation were based on similarity between the rules using the three techniques in Figure 6. These rules were acquired by applying association rule techniques for network traffic data called anomaly association rules that were used to determine whether there was an intrusion or not in the data, through a similarity measurement based on user threshold [21].

There are three types of results presented in this paper; showing which association rules techniques and pre-processing techniques produce the best model, which PTM datasets have anomalies, and Comparison results from our tool with existing DM tools.

The results are displayed in Table 4 and Figure 7 for 2- second datasets; three approaches in association rules were performed to obtain the similarity measurement between normal category dataset and the four tested datasets.

Figure 5. Appriori Mining User Interface   Figure 6.  Analysis Visualized  User Interface    Table 4 displays the fact that that Fuzzy Appriori obtained lower accuracy detection than Appriori and FP-Growth for Tested-1 and Tested-2. The values are lower than the predefined user threshold value (0.5). Thus, Tested-1 and Tested-2 considered has intrusion. Subsequently, for Tested-3 and Tested-4, the Fuzzy Appriori displays results higher than Appriori and FP-Growth. Since the values for Tested-3 and Tested-4 are higher than the predefined user threshold value, that dataset is considered to have no intrusion.

TABLE 4 RESULTS FOR 2-SECOND WINDOWING DA  Approaches Tested-1 Tested-2 T Appriori 0.156 0.421 Fuzzy Appriori 0.000 0.366 FP-Growth 0.172 0.404  From three comparison results of 2, 5 a results from Fuzzy Appriori always regist than Appriori and FP-Growth for the non-in vice versa. Thus, the Fuzzy Appriori appro to differentiate between intrusion datasets datasets better than the Appriori and FP-G The experiment result shows that the data s time slot has better results compared with th data set. Figure 7 shows the comparison res sets (2- second time slot) compare wit Appriori and FP-Growth.

Figure 7  Comparison  for 2-second window  The NASSR tools also show the computa in each experiment. Figure 8 shows the m times of association rules techniques versus  Figure 8 Comparison results in computati   The figure has shown that FP-Growth p time to complete the mining, while Fuzzy the slowest. This is because the FP-Growt create candidate generations, while Fuzzy more complex computation than the Apprio  In order to measure the quality of t performance, the tool is evaluated by co comparison between results obtained from results obtained from manual process using  The Table 5 shows that the number of r the proposed tools is quite similar to th obtained from Weka tools. The small d between the proposed tools and Weka?s resu technical problem in precision capability  ATASETS.

Tested-3 Tested-4  0.856 0.863 0.903 0.895 0.853 0.862  and 10 seconds, the tered higher values  ntrusion dataset, and oach has the ability s and non-intrusion Growth approaches.

set for the 2-second he 5 and 10- second sult of the best data th Appriori, Fuzzy   wing datasets  ation times perform mining computation  type of data set.

ional times.

performs the fastest y Appriori performs th does not need to y Appriory requires ori Fixed set.

the NASSR tool?s omparing the result  proposed tools and Weka tools.

rules obtained from he number of rules difference in result ult is because of the of variables in the  tool?s internal process. For lim proposed tools only use a sing precision; instead Weka which has 64-bit precision. The simil results from both of the tools sh There are some datasets which Tested-2 in the Appriori approa and Tested-4 in Fuzzy Apprio the FP-Growth approach. The lowest similarity values, 0.95 proposed tool?s results are alm Weka tools.

TAB COMPARISON RESULT FR  Approach Dataset in 2 sec  P  Appriori Normal Tested-1 Tested-2 Tested-3 Tested-4  Fuzzy Appriori  Normal Tested-1 Tested-2 Tested-3 Tested-4  FP- Growth  Normal Tested-1 Tested-2 Tested-3 Tested-4

V. CONCLUSIO  This paper presents the ne using unsupervised association Apriori and FP-growth. This to between the differences in n traffic datasets, based on the s rules. The performance of the t experiments using the UKM also show how easily the netw to observe any anomaly detecti    REFER [1] A. Lakhina, M. Crovella, & C.

Feature Distributions. In proce. S  [2]  C. Lui, T. Fu Chung, & T. Ch System Using Data Mining Appr Vol.1, pp131-136. 2005.

[3] V. V. Phoha, The Springer Intern 2002.

mitation of memory usage, the gle data type, which has 32-bit  h uses a double data type, which larity measurement between the hows that the value is very high.

have similarity value 1, such as  ach, Normal, Tested-1, Tested-2, ori, and Normal and Tested-4 in e Tested-3 in Appriori has the 0 of all the performances, the  most the same as the results from    BLE 5 ROM BOTH OF THE TOOLS.

No. of Rules from  roposed Tools  No.

of  Rules from Weka Tools  Similarity Measure  201 205 0.974 170 171 0.992 186 186 1.000 186 185 0.950 252 250 0.978 129 129 1.000 90 90 1.000  411 411 1.000 91 90 0.992  153 153 1.000 147 147 1.000 170 171 0.991 162 161 0.985 33 32 0.993  244 244 1.000   ONS  etwork anomaly detection tools n rule techniques: Apriori, Fuzzy ool has the ability to discriminate normal and abnormal network similarity measurement of their tools is evaluated by conducting network traffic data. The tools ork engineer can use these tools ion in network traffic.

RENCES Diot, Mining Anomalies Using Traffic  SIGCOM, Philadelphia,PA. 2005  heung. Agent-based Network Intrusion roaches. In Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE formation Technology and Applications,  net Security Dictionary. Springer-Verlag.

[4] C. Varun, B. Arindam, & K. Vipin, Anomaly Detection: A Survey, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota. 2007.

[5] A. El-Semary, J. Edmonds, J. Gonzales-Pino, & M. Papa, Applying Data Mining of Fuzzy Association Rules to Network Intrusion Detection. in Proceeding on Information Assurance United States Military Academy, West Point, NY. 2006.

[6] A. K. Jones, & R. S. Sielken, Computer System Intrusion Detection: A survey. Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia. 2000.

[7] J. Allen, A. Christie, W. Fithen, J. Mchugh, J. Pickel, & E. Stoner, State of  the Practice of Intrusion Detection Technologies. CMU/SEI-99-TR- 028, Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute. 2000  [8] J. Han, & M. Kamber, Data Mining Concepts and Techniques. Second Edition. The Morgan Kaufmann Series in Data Management Systems.

2006.

[9] R. Agrawal, & R. Srikant, Fast Algorithms for Mining Association Rules. Proceeding of the 20th VLDB Conference Santiago, Chile. 1994.

[10] H. Wang, G. Zhang, H. Chan, & X. Jiang, Mining Association Rules for Science and Technology. 2009.

[11] W-H. Au, & K.C.C. Chan, FARM: A Data Mining System for Discovering Fuzzy Association Rules. IEEE International Fuzzy System Conference , Proceedings August 22-25, Seoul, Korea. 1999.

[12] A. Tajbakhsh, M. Rahmati, & A. Mirzaei, Intrusion Detection using Fuzzy Association Rules. Applied Soft Computing , Volume 9, pp462- 469. 2009.

[13] G. Florez, S.M. Bridges, & R.B. Vaughn, An Improved Algorithm for Fuzzy Data Mining for Intrusion Detection. in North American Fuzzy Information Processing Society Conference (NAFIPS, 2002), New Orleans, Lousiana. 2002.

[14]  Y. Dhanalakshmi. &  I. R. Babu,  Intrusion Detection Using Data Mining Along Fuzzy Logic and Genetic Algorithms, IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, Vol. 8 (2). 2008.

[15] Y. Changguo, W. Nianzhong, W. Tailei,  Z. Qin, & Z. Xiaorong, The Research on the Application of Association Rules Mining Algorithm in Network Intrusion Detection.  First international Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science. 2009.

[16] R. Srikant, & R. Agrawal, Mining quantitative association rules in large relational tables. Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin, Madison. SIGMOD?96 Montreal, Canada. 1996  [17] C. M. Kuok, A. Fu, & M. H. Wong, Mining Fuzzy Assocaition Rules in Databases. Department of Computer Science and Engineering. The Chinese University of Hong Kong. 1998.

[18] S.M. Bridges & R.B. Vaughn Fuzzy data mining and genetic algorithms applied to intrusion detection. In: Proceedings of the National Information Systems Security Conference, Baltimore, MD. 2000.

[19] M. Kaya & R. Alhajj A clustering algorithm with genetically optimized membership functions for fuzzy association rules mining. In: The Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Fuzzy Systems. 2003.

[20] G.V.S.N.R.V. Prasad, Y. Dhanalakshmi, V. Vijaya, & B.R. Kumar, Modeling An Intrusion Detection System Using Data Mining And Genetic Algorithms Based On Fuzzy Logic. IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.8 No.7. 2008.

[21] W. Wang, Genetic Algorithm Optimization of Membership Functions for Mining Fuzzy Association Rules, International Joint Conference on Information System, Fuzzy Theory and Technology, Atlantic City, NJ.

2000.

[22] Wireshire + Cace Pilot, http://www.cacetech.

com/products/cace_pilot.html, 27th Jan 2011.

[23] J. Gonzales-Pino, J. Edmonds, & M. Papa, Attribute selection using information gain for a fuzzy logic intrusion detection system. University of Tulsa, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6241, 62410D-1. 2006.

[24] A. Orebaugh, G. Ramirez & J. Beale. 2007. Wireshark & Ethereal  Network Protocol Analyzer Toolkit, Syngress Publishing, Rockland, MA.

[25] F. John, IV. Elder & W. Dean. A Comparison of Leading Data Mining Data Mining, New York. Abbott, 1998.

