

Abstract - The recommendation service is an important part of E-commerce. After analyzing the feasibility to combine CBR (Case-based Reasoning) and web log mining with recommendation system in E-commerce, we integrate the two techniques into E-commerce recommendation system effectively, and propose a framework for the recommendation system adopting B/S structure and design thought of multi-layer. The key technologies of the proposed framework are also given.

Keywords - E-commerce, Recommendation System, CBR, Web Log Mining

I.  INTRODUCTION   With the popularization of Internet, E-commerce is developing rapidly and purchasing products from the Internet has become a social mainstream. While merchants and customers can enjoy the convenience brought by the network the phenomenon of information/product overload becomes increasingly serious. It is not easy for customers to find what they need, even though they are submerged in huge amounts of information. The merchants also face the problem of losing customers. In this case, the E-commerce recommendation system comes into being.

E-commerce recommendation system[1], by simulating the behavior of sales staff, provides product information and advice for clients through e-commerce websites to help clients to decide what to buy and complete the purchase process. The common recommendation techniques include[2] content-based filtering, based on collaborative filtering, based on knowledge discovery, based on utility and so on. Content- based and collaborative filtering techniques are most widely used. But content-based recommendation system, relying on the extraction of characteristics of the project, can only discover the information similar to interests users already have, but not the new resources users may be interested in. Collaborative filtering recommendation system also has some problems such as cold start, sparse evaluation and so on.

This paper combines case-based reasoning with web log mining effectively and applies them in the E- commerce recommendation system, thereby solving the above problems and improving the performance of E- commerce recommendation system.



II.  THE E-COMMERCE RECOMMENDATION TECHNOLOGIES  A.    CASE-BASED REASONING   Case-based Reasoning (CBR)[3] is a paradigm of taking advantage of specific knowledge of past experience and the state of specific problems. It solves new problems by searching for past similar cases and reusing those solutions in the state of the new problems. CBR is a recyclable and integrated process of solving problems and learns by experience. With the further research on CBR, CBR Technology has been widely used in many fields such as information service, planning, designing, prognosis, classification, decision support, medical, legal, debate and intelligent tutoring.

In the field of recommendation system in E- commerce, because its relationship is too complicated to grasp and information has characteristic of randomness, fuzziness, so it is difficult to express knowledge.

Meanwhile, E-commerce has accumulated rich experience and data. There are a lot of practical cases. Therefore, it is feasible to introduce CBR into E-commerce recommendation systems. Many studies have showed that CBR can solve the problems of data sparseness, cold start that the general recommendation technologies have, and it also has pretty good adaptability.

The basic work flow of a recommendation system based CBR is shown in Fig.1. The user submits to the system the information about the products that he/she wants to buy, which the recommendation system takes as a target case. Then the recommendation system retrieves similar cases in the case database and presents the matched products to him. Meanwhile, the case database is updated according to the feedback from the user.

Fig.1 the flow chart of E-commerce recommendation system based on CBR However, the E-commerce recommendation system  based singly on CBR has shortcomings as follows: firstly, the results of recommendation have poor explanations.

Secondly, without considering users? interests, it cannot give users a deeper product recommendation according to the users? interests.

B.  WEB LOG MINING   E-commerce Recommendation System Based on CBR and Web Log Mining    Ya-min WANG, Xue-ling HAN, Xiao-wei LIU School of Economy and Management, Xidian University, Xi?an,  China  (yamwang@xidian.edu.cn  hxlaza@sina.com  wxl920@126.com)   ___________________________________       To make up for the lack of CBR and understand users? behavior in a deeper level, we introduce web log mining technology into the recommendation system to provide better service for customers.

Web Log Mining, also known as web usage mining, acts by the means of comparing the similarity between users? behavior recorded in web log files, and finding users? action patterns automatically and quickly such as sequential patterns, association rules, user cluster and page cluster to provide recommendation services for users automatically.

The process of web log mining is generally divided into three stages[4]: data preprocessing, pattern mining, pattern analysis and application. It is shown in Fig.2.

Data Preprocessing  Pattern Mining  Pattern Analysis and Application  Raw Log Files  User Session Files  Rules and Modes of User  Rules and Modes User Interested   Fig.2  Steps of web log mining  Generally, the structure of E-commerce recommendation system based on web log mining is divided into two parts, including online and offline.

Offline module includes data preprocessing and acquisition of use feature. These knowledge or rules, stored in a media, provide support for online module.

Therefore, Offline module is a support part for online module. Online module is the dominating operation of recommendation engine, which is a dynamic process.

And recommendation engine adds dynamically those frequent items to the offline module, as a part of a module offline [5, 6].

Through the above analysis, integrating the characteristics of CBR and web log mining, we can form a more feasible solution: the easy formal part is handled by the web log mining; Case-based reasoning is used to deal with the description of visualization and those problems difficult to describe structured. Forming causal model by using web log mining makes the reasoning results more transparent and understandable. Combining web log mining with CBR can make full use of multi- level knowledge and improve the performance of the electronic commerce recommendation system.



III.  THE E-COMMERCE RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM BASED ON CBR AND WEB LOG MINING   A.    THE SYSTEM FRAMEWORK   The framework for the E-commerce recommendation  system based on CBR and web log mining applies B/S structure and the design thought of multi-layer, illustrated in Fig.3, including application layer, business logic layer and data storage layer.

(1) Application layer  The application layer is the user interface, with responsibility for the interaction between users and the system, and its realization form is the browser. By means of operating this layer, users indicate their needs and preferences. Correspondingly, recommendation results are also showed here.

M odule of C  B R  M odule of W  eb Log M ining  results interpreter  A pplication Layer  B usiness Logic  Layer D  ata Storage Layer     Fig.3 Framework for E-commerce recommendation system based on CBR and web log mining  (2) Business logic layer The business logic layer, the core of the whole system, consists of the web log mining module, the case reasoning module and the recommendation results interpreter. Through analyzing user log files, web log mining module completes user cluster and association rules mining. The case-based reasoning module takes charge of the recommendation process respectively based on user cluster and association rules. Recommendation results interpreter is responsible for converting the reasoning process into understandable state charts, which helps users understand the reasoning process, thus obtaining results with modified constraints.

(3) Data storage layer This layer stores all kinds of data and knowledge for  the recommendation system, including concretely:  the underlying database such as user information database, users  web log database and commodity database; user cluster database and association rule database, formed by web log mining;  case database.

B.    SYSTEM PROCESS   The operation process of the E-commerce  recommendation system based on CBR and web log mining, shown in Fig.4, is divided into online part and offline part. The online module finishes recommendation and the other part finishes web log mining.

(1) Offline module Step1: By means of analyzing the existing users? log  files, obtain users' behavior rules and user cluster, which are all related to commodity kinds, and can be visualized as ?commodity kind ?  association rules?, ?commodity kind ? user cluster?.

Step2: Commit the obtained user cluster and association rules to relevant databases.

Step3: According to the information such as commodity purchase, visitation frequency and so on, quantize the interest degree of users to each commodity kind, and range the list of the recommendation results grouped by commodity kinds.

Step4: Give a description of cases respectively on the basis of association rules or user cluster, and then store them in the case database. The cases can be realized as (commodity kind ? association rules, recommendation results) and (commodity kind ? user cluster, recommendation results).

U ser Log Files  M odule of W  eb Log M ining  O ffline  R ecom  m endation M  odule O  nline     Fig.4  flow chart of the system (2) Online module  Step1: User logs in to the system, if he/she submits recommendation request, turn to Step2 and begin to retrieval recommend, or turn to Step3 to browsing recommend.

Step2: Describe the user?s request as a target case, and find out the most appropriate source case by matching commodity attribute information. The recommendation results, included in the best similar source case, can be showed for the user.

Step3: In accordance with the historical browse and the transaction information of the user, retrieve the case database to find the source case taking the association rules as basis. And then illustrate the recommendation list according to the most similar source case.

Step4: Adding the web log files which are associated with the login behavior to web log database, update the relevant data and improve recommendation quality in the offline module.

The E-commerce recommendation system based on CBR and web log mining has the following advantages:  (1) Improve the efficiency of the system. On the one hand, combine the CBR with web log mining effectively, and divide the process into online part and offline part to finish recommendation and web log mining respectively.

On the other hand, the lists of the commodities, included in source cases, have been ranged and optimized corresponding with commodity kinds. Once the most similar source case has been found, the recommendation results can be showed to user directly. That is to say, the traditional method, ?target?cases match source cases?multiple similar cases?range the commodity list?recommendation results?, can be converted to  ?target cases match source cases?a single most appropriate case?recommendation results?.

(2) Improve the recommendation quality. In the system, the recommendation results, which are the reasoning results based on association rules and user cluster, are formed by the means of analyzing the existing web log files. Therefore it is closer to human thinking mode than general recommendation systems which form the results by matching attributes of commodity.



IV.  THE KEY TECHNOLOGIES  A.    USER CLUSTERING   Users are grouped by clustering according to users? access behavior. By clustering, the user object has the greatest similarity within the classes and the minimum similarity among classes. From the previous sectors, we know that user cluster in this paper correspond with the commodity category, so user clustering adopts the following approaches.

Firstly, we use ST, cluster to represent product category and user cluster. So a user can be described as   Hereinto, usesr_Basic denotes users? basic information such as name, password, contact; user_Altribute denotes interest feature such as commodity purchase, visitation frequency and duration; and   denotes the commodity users browse or retrieve.

Then describe use cluster as cluster=(cluster_ID, ST), where, cluster_ID denotes the user cluster corresponding to commodity ST .

In this paper, we represent the commodity ST, contained both in user and cluster, as  . Here ki denotes the properties of commodity, wi denotes the weight of ki, and n denotes the number of attributes of the commodity, and          .

The similarity between useri and       can be expressed as the following formula.

? ? ??  ? ? ? ??  ?    ?   ?    ?  ? ??  n it  n iw  n itiw  jclusteriusersim    1cos),(    ?  In the formula,       denotes the weight of the kth attribute of the commodities to represent if the commodity attributes which useri have browsed or bought match with           , and       equals 1 or 0.

B. THE ASSOCIATION RULE MINING   The association rule mining can be divided into the following two steps [7].

Firstly, the discovery of frequent item sets. That is, find the collection of items in which all the supports meet the minimum support degree. Secondly, produce rules from the frequent items, which means to determine  ? ? ??  ? ? mthjthithAltributeuserBasiceuserIDuseruser ,,,,_,_,_ ?  th  ? ?nwnkwkwkST ,;;2,2;1,1 ??   ?  ? n  i iw    jcluster  it  jcluster i t      whether the rule A?B is effective.

Making                                       , If and only if r>min_conf, the rule is valid. Hereinto, r denotes the confidence of A?B, support denotes support degree, min_conf denotes smallest confidence.

Mining association rules in this article uses Apriori algorithm [8], an influential algorithm for mining frequent item sets for Boolean association rules. Apriori is designed to operate on databases containing transactions using breadth-first search and a tree structure to count candidate item sets efficiently. It generates candidate item sets of length k from item sets of length k ? 1, and prunes the candidates which have an infrequent sub pattern.

According to the downward closure lemma, the candidate set contains all frequent k-length item sets.

C. CASE EXPRESSION   Case representation is the basis of case-based reasoning and has effect on the efficiency and quality of reasoning. We can make a perfect simulation of reasoning process with human thinking only after determining the appropriate form of case.

In this paper, cases are represented as a quintuple depiction of                                              , where CNO, CID, CA, R, ? denote respectively the case number, case type, case properties, recommended commodities results and threshold. CA, the characteristic attributes of case, is an important basis for case-based reasoning and its elements are mainly constituted by the following three aspects:  The characteristic attribute of commodity categories, such as commodity kind, manufacturers, specifications, quality, price, etc.

The information to identify the case reasoning based on user cluster or association rules;  Information of associative rules or characteristics of user cluster, such as the content of the rules, the characteristic of user cluster, the members of user cluster and the personal information of the members, etc. In a specific reasoning process, a reasonable choice about the elements of CA is needed.

D. CASE ORGANIZATION   The case organization is an important factor of case- based reasoning. In this system, cases are divided into two categories, one for reasoning based on user cluster, and the other based on rules. By above knowable, both of the two kind cases are represented by a unified form, and they correspond with the commodity category, so the case organization will use the map approach with the commodity category.

In order to optimize the organization of cases and improve the efficiency of case-based reasoning, commodities are organized in this article, different from the traditional methods forming an index tree, by establishing an n-layer tree hierarchical model based on  the theory of Fuzzy Quotient Space [9]. In this way the cases along with it form a tree-like structure shown in Figure 5.

Fig.5 visual representation of case index structure organization The following illustrates the process. A triple  depiction                 used to describe commodity, where, X represents commodity category, which is the set of all the products under the category. And       denotes the property function of class fields. For any commodity x?X in the class fields, a corresponding f(x) denotes a property of commodity x. ? denotes the structure of the class field, which is the relationship between commodities in the class field. In order to classify goods into different size thickness of the world, it is necessary to take the goods that have the similar property equivalent as one group. In this way the overall can be seen as a new element, that is, the clustering of X, thus forming a larger class size domain [X], so the original problem            is transformed into a new level of                . So we can solve the problem of the space structure from low-level to high- level and constitutes a hierarchical structure depending on the relationship in different sizes.

E. CASE RETRIEVAL   In accordance with the way how cases are organized mentioned above, we use the following search strategy: when case is retrieved, from top to bottom and from rough to fine, firstly find the coarse granularity of space which has more probability of containing the target, and preclude those with low probability. And then search further in the fine-grained corresponding space. If the target case research has neither solution in the coarse- grained world, nor has in the fine-grained space. This approach greatly improves the efficiency of retrieval by avoiding comparing all cases and narrowing the scope of retrieval.



V.  CONCLUSION  The emergence of the E-commerce recommendation system availably solves customers and merchants? predicament caused by the phenomenon of information overload. This paper effectively combines the CBR with web log mining, and makes the recommendation process closer to human thinking mode. Thus the efficiency and quality of recommendation can be improved.

