Overestimation and underestimation in learning and transfer

Abstract?Prediction and evaluation errors of self-performance (overestimation and underestimation) sometimes bring serious consequences. The present study examined possible causes for over- and under-estimations by using a newly devised task- transfer paradigm. The experiment consisted of two sessions.

In the first learning session, participants learned rules for button presses in response to particular combinations of digits.

In the second test session, they performed a similar task with the same rules but in response to English alphabets. In addition, the participants were randomly assigned to one of three tasks with different button configurations: Unchanged, Reversed, and Flipped. They predicted/evaluated their performance before/after the sessions. The task performance tended to be underestimated for the Reversed task and was overestimated in the Flipped task. These results suggest that differential changes in stimulus-response association lead to underestimation or overestimation.

Keywords-Metacognition; Overestimation; Underestimation;

I. INTRODUCTION Since ISO13407 was instituted in 1999, human  centeredness has been encouraged and implemented in designing industrial products. In particular, consideration for users' mental models is thought to be essential to properly understand system behaviors. Kieras and Bovair showed the role of mental model in learning operation of an unfamiliar device [1]. They revealed that having a mental model for the device improved performance on learning and retaining the operating procedures. Several works also reported that having appropriate mental models was one of the most important factors in problem solving [2],[3].

Singley and Anderson showed that proper transfers of mental models between different text editors could bring reduction in total performance time, keystrokes, and planning time [4],[5]. It follows from those studies that people can improve performance by constructing and transferring mental models. However, we often make mistakes in spite of having appropriate mental models. Why does this type of failure happen? One possible source of human errors is metacognitive overestimation or underestimation.

Metacognition, the ability to monitor and control one?s knowledge, is a basic feature of human cognitive processes [6],[7]. Metacognitive monitoring has often been studied in experiments in which participants are asked to state some facts and then to evaluate the accuracy of their answers (confidence rating). Then, if differences between evaluation or prediction and actual performance (i.e., overconfidence or underconfidence) occur, these differences could cause inappropriate actions or consequences. Researchers have offered overconfidence as an explanation for war initiations, entrepreneurial failures, and stock market bubbles [8]-[11].

The definition of overconfidence is the overestimation of one?s actual ability, performance, level of control, or chance of success. As a familiar example, overconfidence was associated with accidental injuries [12],[13]. These studies focus on children's overconfidence of physical abilities and its relation accident proneness. Due to its importance, research on overconfidence has been influential [14]-[16]. A previous study investigated the features of configural response learning requiring simultaneous keypresses with 2 or 3 fingers, similar to the production of chords on the piano.

As a result, practiced chords were performed faster than reconfigured chords [17]. This simply indicated that reconfigured stimulus-response could lead to different results compared to practiced chords. Few works of metacognition for configural-response learning have done, especially for specific reconfigured stimuli. Then it deserves to be investigated whether differences of specific reconfigured stimuli causes various performance and metacognition.

It is obvious that making better products and operational systems requires considering actual performance of tasks as well as how people think about their own performance and interaction. For instance, even if users improve their performance, they might make mistakes and/or do not perform optimally if they overestimate or underestimate their own performance. In the present study, we examined which tasks would bring overestimation or underestimation by using a newly devised task-transfer paradigm. In particular, we were interested in how differential changes in stimulus-response association between learned and new operations lead to underestimation or overestimation.

DOI 10.1109/ICBAKE.2011.24    DOI 10.1109/ICBAKE.2011.24

II. METHOD  A. Participants Fifty-eight people participated in the experiment (35  males and 23 females; mean age = 22.4 years, standard deviation = 4.45). All the participants had normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity and normal motor functions, and were na?ve as to the purpose of this study. All had given their informed consent prior to participation.

B. Procedure The experiment was comprised of two sessions and  questionnaires. The participants were asked to predict and evaluate their own performance in the sessions before and after conducting them (Fig. 1). In the questionnaires, they reported their predicted and evaluated performances in percentage (e.g., ?I think I would be (was) able to score 85% in this session.?).

Before the experiment, the participants answered questionnaire in terms of self-efficacy. The self-efficacy theory proposes that many behavioral changes operate through a common mechanism: the alternation of the individual?s expectations of personal mastery and success [18],[19]. This theory states two types of expectancies exerting powerful influences on behavior. One is outcome expectancy, the belief that certain behaviors will lead to certain outcomes. The other is self-efficacy expectancy, the belief that one can successfully perform current tasks [20].

According to Bandura [18], self-efficacy expectancy is the most powerful determinant of behavioral changes because it motivates the initial decision to perform a task, the error expended, and persistence in the face of adversity. For instance, some previous works showed correlations between average grade point and academic self-efficacy. That is, the higher students have academic self-efficacy, the better they can get [21]. Shere proposed a "Self-efficacy Scale" composed of 23 items (including such as ?When I make plans, I am certain I can make them work?, ?Failure just makes me try harder?, etc) [20]. We employed this Self- efficacy Scale in the present experiment.

Before the learning session, the experimenter explained how to perform the task. The rules were as follows: (1) Two digits are randomly selected from ?1?, ?2?, and ?3?, and shown at the screen center. (2) If two digits are the same, press the button corresponding with the digit. For instance, if ?11? are shown, press ?1?. (3) If the two digits differ, press the remaining button. For example, if ?12? are shown, press ?3?.

Figure1. The structure of the experiment.

Figure 2. (a) A block of Learning session. (b) The configurations of response buttons in the learning session.

One block consisted of 5 consecutive trials following a 1000-ms fixation point (Fig. 2a). The participants were instructed to respond as quickly and accurately as possible and told that responses over 1 sec would be regarded as wrong responses. The block was repeated 40 times, resulting in 200 trials. The response buttons were arranged in ascending order from the left side (Fig. 2b). The participants performed 10 habituation trials before the main session.

In the test session, the participants performed a similar task with English alphabets (Fig. 3a). The rules were: (1) Two alphabets are randomly selected from ?A?, ?B?, ?and C?. (2) If two alphabets are the same, press the button corresponding with the alphabet. For instance, if ?AA? are shown, press ?A?. (3) If the two alphabets differ, press the remaining button. For example, if ?AB? are shown, press ?C?.

Figure 3. (a) A block of Test session. (b) The configurations of response buttons in the test session.

For the test session, the participants were randomly assigned into one of three tasks that differed the configurations of the response buttons (Fig. 3b). The Unchanged configuration was ?A?, ?B?, ?C? from the left side. The Reversed configuration was ?C?, ?B?, ?A? from the left side. The Flipped configuration was ?B?, ?A?, ?C? from the left side.



III. RESULT  A. Self-efficacy scale The overall self-efficacy score was calculated by  summing up individual scores in 5-point scale (i.e., 23*5 = 115 points as full score; mean score= 82.2, standard deviation = 12.29). Higher scores indicate that participants are more confident with what they do. In order to confirm whether prediction or evaluation in the present experiment would be related with personality trait of self-efficacy, we conducted a correlation analysis. The sum of self-efficacy scale and the average of prediction or evaluation for the test session showed no significant correlation (t (41) = 0.83, p = 0.41, r = 0.13). Hence, the prediction and evaluation of performance in the present study seemed to be independent of participants' self-efficacy.

B. Learning session We excluded participants who did not reach 70%  performance in the learning session and participants who showed more than 20% differences between actual score and evaluations because of the lack of ordinary performance and/or metacognition in terms of performance estimation. In total, 15 participants were excluded.

Fig. 4 shows the results of the learning session. The tasks in the test session were assigned after the learning session; therefore, at the time of the learning session, there must be no difference among the three task groups. A two- way analysis of variance (ANOVA) confirmed this; the main effect among three task groups was not significant (F (2, 40) = 0.82, p = 0.45). On the other hand, the main effect of assessment was significant (F (2, 80) = 9.28, p < 0.001; post hoc Shaffer's method, Score = Evaluation > Prediction, p < 0.005).

Next, we calculated differences between prediction and score (hereafter referred to as prediction error; prediction? score), and evaluation and score (hereafter referred to as evaluation error; evaluation?score) separately for the three task groups.

Figure 4. Predicted, evaluated and actual performances in the learning session. Errorbar shows one standard error of mean.

The main effect of task group was not significant (F (2, 40) = 0.64, p = 0.53) whereas the difference between prediction error and evaluation error reached significance (F (1, 40) = 10.9, p < 0.005, evaluation error (mean = -0.92, standard deviation = 6.59) > prediction error (mean = -5.15, standard deviation = 9.86)). Thus, there was no difference among the three task groups in terms of actual performance, performance prediction, and performance evaluation in the learning session. However, there was a general tendency of underestimation of performance prediction.

C. Test session Fig. 5 shows the results of the test session. A two-way  ANOVA revealed the significant main effect among the three task groups (F (2, 40) = 4.40, p < 0.05; post hoc Shaffer?s method, Unchanged > Fliped = Reversed, p < 0.01) while the main effect of assessment was not significant (F (2, 80) = 0.50, p = 0.61). A significant interaction between task group and assessment was found (F (4, 80) = 6.48, p < 0.001). Analyses of simple main effects for the interaction indicated that the actual scores were significantly different among the three task groups (F (2, 40) = 10.65, p < 0.001; post hoc Shaffer?s method, Unchanged = Reversed > Flipped, p < 0.01). In the Flipped task, the prediction and evaluation were significantly higher than the actual scores (F (2, 26) = 6.79, p < 0.01; post hoc Shaffer?s method, Prediction = Evaluation > Score, p = 0.05).

An additional two-way ANOVA on prediction and evaluation errors revealed the significant main effect of task group (F (2, 40) = 9.667, p < 0.001; post hoc Shaffer's method, Flipped > Reversed = Unchanged, p < 0.001) but there was no significant effect between prediction and evaluation errors (F (1, 40) = 1.17, p = 0.29).

Figure 5. Predicted, evaluated and actual performances of the test session.

Errorbars show standard error of mean.

There was a significant transfer from the learning session to the test session (Fig. 6). Paired t-tests revealed marginally significant differences bewteen actual scores of the learning session and those of the test session for the Unchanged task group (t (16) = -1.98, p = 0.06, test > learning).

Figure 6. Scores in the test session as a function of scores in the learning seesion. The dashed diagonal line indicates the identity function (y = x). Dots above the dashed diagonal line indicate that transfers occur in the test session from the learning session. The other three lines show regreesion lines accounting for scores on the three task groups.

In order to verify whether the participants in the Unchanged task group realized the learning effect, we examined differences in actual score (i.e., transfer) and differences in evaluation (i.e., realization of tansfer) between the learning and test sessions (Fig. 7). The degree of transfer did not significantly correlated with the degree of realization of transfer (t (15) = -1.56, p = 0.14, r = -0.37).

Figure 7. Difference between prediction in the test session and evaluation in the learning session as a function od difference between actual scores in the test session and those in the learning session. The diagonal line indicates the identity function (y = x).



IV. DISUCUSSION  In the present study, we examined what types of changes in tasks could lead to overestimation or underestimation of performance. The results can be summarized as follows: (1) The Flipped task in the test session was the most difficult in terms of actual performance. (2) The Flipped configuration led to overestimation in both prediction and evaluation. (3) The participants in the Unchanged group did not correctly evaluate the learning effect from the learning session (underconfidence with practice; UWP).

In terms of difficulty in the test session, the Flipped task was the most difficult. Practiced configurations of buttons are generally performed better than reconfigured buttons [17]. Although we expected to see a reduced performance with the Reversed configuration, we did not find significant reduction. This might be due to that the present task was relatively easy to perform. Regarding the result that the Flipped task was more difficult than the Unchanged and Reversed task, it is notable that previous studies showed the partial reversal was more difficult to learn than the full reversal [22],[23]. For example, Sanders trained second- grade children to discriminate "winner" cards (a green T and a black outline square) from "loser" cards (a yellow T and a black outline triangle) [22]. In the full reversal condition, the winner and loser cards were swapped. In the partial reversal condition, one of the components was reversed whereas the other remained the same. The participants found the full reversal easier to acquire than the partial reversal. These findings are consistent with the idea that people develop categorical representations for stimulus- response association and suggest that full reversal shifts were easy to learn because the association between the stimuli and representation could be done at a categorical level.

Next, we discuss the differences between prediction or evaluation and actual performance. The participants who     performed the Flip task overestimated their performance both in prediction and evaluation compared to those who performed the Unchanged and Reversed tasks. Generally, when actual performance is high, people tend to underestimate their own performances. When actual performance is low, people would overestimate themselves [24], particularly in performance of general knowledge questions [25], [26]. Overestimation of performance is most likely to occur on difficult tasks, on difficult items, or when success is less likely [26]-[29]. The present results fit well with the previous study as the Flipped task was the most difficult task of three and made participants have overestimation. In other words, this finding indicates that performance of not only general knowledge question but also motor learning could lead to overestimation or underestimation in the specific condition. Although the Reversed task group showed a tendency toward underestimation, it did not reach significance. It remains to be investigated whether an easier cognitive task would lead to underestimation.

The participants in the Unchanged group did not evaluate the learning effect correctly. This UWP effect was found robustly across several experimental manipulations; it occurs irrespective of feedback, self-paced versus fixed-rate presentation, different incentives for correct performance, and conditions producing different degrees of knowledge [29]. In a recent study using the memory-for-past test, Finn remarked a possible mechanism of UWP [30]. Finn hypothesized that judging of learning effects would be constrained by performance in previous trials. For example, people could have proper judgments for learning effects on items that they answered correctly in previous trials.

However, people could not judge appropriately learning effects on items that they answered wrongly in the previous trial. That is, people do not appreciate occurring learning effects in the current trial because they are concerned about several items that they answered inappropriately in previous trials.

The results of the present study may have several implications for product and work design. Firstly, the flipped button configuration (i.e., partial change) can produce overconfidence and overestimation. Because numerous product functions are recently assigned to limited operational buttons, complexity of operation has increased.

It would be essential to ponder not to allot flipped button configurations in design. Secondly, the UWP effect occurred in the test session from the learning session.

Underestimation would cause inappropriate consequences as well as overestimation would do. In order not to being influenced with the UWP effect, reducing errors in operating for the first time might play a key role.



V. CONCLUSION Metacognition of one's own ability and performance  constitutes one of the determining factors of human  performance and human error. The present study investigated overestimation and underestimation for performance by using the new task-transfer paradigm. The results showed that the partial change in stimulus and response association (Flipped condition) produced the worst performance. The task performance tended to be underestimated when the stimulus-response association was entirely reversed (Reversed condition) but was overestimated in the Flipped condition. These results suggest that differential changes in stimulus-response association lead to underestimation or overestimation. Further investigations are warranted to elucidate these issues and to examine how these findings may be related to the real-world learning and transfer of task operations.

