Exploration in commercial websites on the  association rules base on the consumers? behavior

Abstract?Association rules data mining on consumers condition in commercial websites is an important aspect of research in FP-Growth algorithm. In the general application of FP-Growth algorithm, the transaction data contain only the customers? purchase acts data, and neglect the data of acts which contain customers browsing, selecting, evaluation, this phenomenon may lead to data distortion. For this reason, this text proposed a method which divides the customer acts data into browsing, evaluation, selection and purchasing four act data, and combines these data to the goods data, thus it can provides to commerce web site managers the results that more close to actual acts of the relevant rules.

Keywords-association rules, FP-Growth, Data Mining

I. INTRODUCTION In the movement of internet technique rapid  development, commercial websites pay more attention to data mining in mass commercial data. By the way of finding the association rules in commercial data, it is can provide better support to business decision making. So it is the important territory in mass commercial data association rules mining. In this territory, there are already had some achievements, such as: Apriori [1], Partition [2], DHP [3]-[4], DHA, TDA [5], FP-Growth [6] and etc.

Nevertheless, these achievements have some problems in practical applications. The main problem is that these methods may only emphasize transaction data which contain the action of consumers? purchasing, but neglect other consumers? action in commercial websites, such as: browsing action, selecting action, evaluation action. If do so, the association rules must be distorted.



II. THE TECHNOLOGY OF ASSOCIATION RULES MINING  A. The fundamental concept of association rules mining The technology of association rules mining was  suggested by Agrawal and his team in analyzing about the supermarket shopping basket. This research has focused on the seeking the consumers? purchasing habits in the selling database, so that, it can help to enhance the sales volume.

There are some fundamental concepts about the technology of association rules mining must be involve:  Supposing that commodity lists I= {i1, i2, ? , im} is the gather of the name of commodities; The action of  consumers purchasing commodity called transaction, commodity lists I contain the transaction data T, to represent in T? I; The transaction database is the set of T [7].

Supposing A is a items set, and, A?D. Association rules is something like the formula A? B, and, A? D, B?D, A?B=? . Association rule A?B, which has the support s, is in the transaction database D, and s is the  proportion of A? B in the transaction database D [8].

B. FP-Growth algorithm  In 2000, a frequent item set mining algorithm named FP-Growth which improve the efficiency of Apriori algorithm was created by Han Jiawei. This algorithm finds the conditional pattern base by means of search FP-tree, finally, getting the maximal frequent patterns [9].

FP-tree which is the abbreviation of frequent pattern tree has some definitions [10]-[11]:  ? A root node, its several child nodes and a frequent set table constitute a FP-tree;  ? Item?s name which show the name of the node, support count which means the number by which the transaction pass and node pointer which point to the next node compose the child node;  ? Item?s name and node pointer which point to next node in FP-tree.

FP-Growth algorithm has great application on mining of association rules in terms of consumers? conduction in commercial websites. Nevertheless consumers? conductions conclude not only purchasing but also browsing, selecting, valuing and etc. So the data that noting the consumers? conduction must be the two dimension structure. There are some methods to improve the FP-Growth algorithm about that, in the FP-tree, every node must record browsing selecting purchasing valuing and etc. In this thesis, we find a better method CCFP-Growth (Commerce Conduction FP-Growth) based on FP-Growth algorithm.

___________________________________

III. THE ANALYZING OF COMMERCIAL WEBSITES DATA AND ITS PROCESS  A. The classify of consumer service data in commercial websites  Consumer service data in commercial websites can be classify in three pattern, that is: commodity data conduction data evaluation data.

? Commodity data includes commodity name, commodity amount, unit-price and etc;  ? Conduction data includes consumers every operation like browsing, selecting, purchasing, evaluating and etc;  ? Evaluation data includes consumers? evaluation which aims at commercial websites and the commodity in it.

B. The analyzing of commercial websites consumers? conduction process  In the ordinary course of events, commercial websites consumers? conduction must in succession like the following illustration:  Figure 1. Analyzing of commercial websites conduction  Obviously, this four conducts must in succession: browsing? selecting? purchasing? evaluation, and it can be interrupt in any conduct.

C. Data structure of consumers? conduction Obviously, in order to accomplish the association rules  mining about consumers? conduction in commercial websites, it must to combine the commodities data and the conduction data, and the data structure set up like the following describing:  ? Data structure 1: commodities name set I= { i1, i2, ?, im }, it used to record the commodities name, expressing by character;  ? Data structure 2: consumers conduction name set U= {1, 2, 3, 4}, it used to record the consumers conduction name, representing browsing selecting purchasing evaluation separately;  ? Data structure 3: transaction database D= {i1p1, i2p2, ?, impn}, it used to record every consumer the last operation which base the specific commodity. In transaction database, ii is the element of commodity name set I, pi is the element of consumer? conduct name set U;  ? Date structure 4: transaction statistics database B= { i1p11: k1, i2p2: k2, ?, impn: kz }, it used to permutation the transaction data according to the ki based on transaction database D. Due to the records which are in the transaction database D only note every consumer last operation on the specific commodity, it is necessary to census the transaction that before the last transaction.



IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF CCFP-GROWTH MINING METHOD  A. The design of CCFP-Growth mining method Commodities name set I, consumers? conduction name  set U and transaction database D are the data base of the CCFP-Growth mining method, among which transaction database D stems from real time capture of every consumer last operation which aim at commodity in website.

The first step of Implementation of CCFP-Growth must be that according to the preset minimum support threshold counting the transaction database D?s data and its forward data in time windows and ranking data in descending order according to the count, thus generate the transaction statistics database B.

Then, adopting depth-first-search algorithm synthesizing FP-Growth algorithm can get hold of ?the conditional pattern base: minimum support count? and can get hold of ?conditional FP-tree: count?.

Finally, it can get hold of association rules according to the specifying transaction.

B. The implementation of CCFP-Growth mining method Supposing that transaction database D like the  following table:  TABLE I. Initial commodity-conduction transaction database  1) Generating the transaction statistics database B Stretching the forward data in the transaction database  count in descending order according to the time windows, can find that: D1:6 A1:4 B1:4 C1:4 E1:3 A2:4 C2:4 B2:3 E2:2 A3:4 B3:2 E3:2 C3:1 A4:4 E4:2 B4:1 C4:1.

Supposing minimum support count is 2, sifting the data in transaction database and recording in transaction statistics database B can find that D1:6 A1:4 B1:4 C1:4 E1:3 A2:4 C2:4 B2:3 E2:2 A3:4 B3:2 E3:2 A4:4 E4:2 like the following table:  TABLE II. commodity-conduction transaction statistics database    2) Building FP-Tree Aim at the data in transaction statistics database B  building the FP-Tree as following illustration:  Figure 2. FP-Tree of CCFP-Growth mining method  Adopting depth-first-search algorithm can get hold of ?the conditional pattern base: minimum support count?; it can get hold of ?conditional FP-tree: count? according to the preset minimum support threshold, as the following table:  TABLE III. Conditional pattern base and conditional FP-tree of CCFP- Growth mining method  3) Computing association rules It can find association rules about specify transactions  according to the Conditional pattern base and conditional FP-tree of CCFP-Growth mining method. In this example, websites administrators can only get the association rules about consumers? purchasing commodity action with other consumers? action if they are mere interested in the association about consumers? purchasing commodity action  with other actions, thus it can delete other elements in FP- Tree which represent other actions and generates the association rules like the following table:  TABLE IV. Association rules of consumers? purchasing action with other actions

V. CONCLUSION Purchasing is one of the actions in commercial websites;  nevertheless it is not enough to pay attention to the association among the purchasing action and commodity, thus it is must to seek a variety of consumers? conduct associate with specify commodity, so that can get the closer association rules result to the real.

This text suggest CCFP-Growth mining method which is the method that associate the commodity data with consumer action data, so that it can provide the association rules which closer to the real. By the way of calculate, this method can provide efficient data mining in term of variety of association support data about consumers? conduct.

This method still has exploration space. Because there are different level and good, medium, bad evaluation, it is can efficient enhance the intelligence level of commercial websites if associate the evaluation data in this algorithm; in addition, setting minimum support threshold according different category can find association rules dynamic. All of them are the matter which study in future.

