A Fuzzy Set Theoretic Approach to Discover User Sessions from Web Navigational Data

Abstract?Due to the continuous increase in growth and complexity of WWW, web site publishers are facing increasing difficulty in attracting and retaining users. In order to design attractive web sites, designers must understand their users? needs.

Therefore analysing navigational behaviour of users is an impor- tant part of web page design. Web Usage Mining (WUM) is the application of data mining techniques to web usage data in order to discover the patterns that can be used to analyse the user?s navigational behaviour. Preprocessing, knowledge extraction and results analysis are the three main steps of WUM. Due to large amount of irrelevant information present in the web logs, the original log file can not be directly used in the WUM process.

During the preprocessing stage of WUM raw web log data is to transformed into a set of user profiles. Each user profile captures a set of URLs representing a user session. This sessionized data can be used as the input for a variety of data mining tasks such as clustering, association rule mining, sequence mining etc. If the data mining task at hand is clustering, the session files are filtered to remove very small sessions in order to eliminate the noise from the data. But direct removal of these small sized sessions may result in loss of a significant amount of information specially when the number of small sessions is large. We propose a ?Fuzzy Set Theoretic? approach to deal with this problem. Instead of directly removing all the small sessions below a specified threshold, we assign weights to all the sessions using a ?Fuzzy Membership Function? based on the number of URLs accessed by the sessions. After assigning the weights we apply a ?Fuzzy c-Mean Clustering? algorithm to discover the clusters of user profiles. In this paper, we provide a detailed review of various techniques to preprocess the web log data including data fusion, data cleaning, user identification and session identification. We also describe our methodology to perform feature selection (or dimensionality reduction) and session weight assignment tasks.

Finally we compare our soft computing based approach of session weight assignment with the traditional hard computing based approach of small session elimination.



I. INTRODUCTION  The World Wide Web as a large and dynamic information source is a fertile ground for data mining principles or Web Mining. Web mining is primarily aimed at deriving actionable knowledge from the Web through the application of various data mining techniques [1]. Web Usage Mining is the discov- ery of user access patterns from Web server access logs[2].

Web Usage Mining analyses results of user interactions with a Web server, including Web logs, clickstreams, and database transactions at a Web site. Web usage mining includes clus- tering to find natural groupings of users or pages, associations to discover the URLs requested together and analysis of the sequential order in which URLs are accessed [3].

Web Usage Mining (WUM) consists of three main steps: preprocessing, knowledge extraction and results analysis. The goal of the preprocessing step is to transform the raw web log data into a set of user profiles. Each such profile captures a sequence or a set of URLs representing a user session. Web usage data preprocessing exploit a variety of algorithms and heuristic techniques for various preprocessing tasks such as data fusion, data cleaning, user identification, session iden- tification etc. Data fusion refers to the merging of log files from several Web servers. Data cleaning involves tasks such as, removing extraneous references to embedded objects, style files, graphics, or sound files, and removing references due to spider navigations. User identification refers to the process of identifying unique users from the user activity logs. User Session identification is the process of segmenting the user activity log of each user into sessions, each representing a single visit to the site.

Once user sessions are discovered, this sessionized data can be used as the input for a variety of data mining tasks such as clustering [4], association rule mining [5], sequence mining [6] etc.If the data mining task at hand is clustering, the session files are filtered to remove very small sessions in order to eliminate the noise from the data [7]. But direct removal of these small sized sessions may result in loss of a significant amount of information specially when the number of small sessions is large. We propose a ?Fuzzy Set Theoretic? approach to deal with this problem. Instead of directly removing all the small sessions below a specified threshold, we assign weights to all the sessions using a ?Fuzzy Membership Function? based on the number of URLs accessed by the sessions. After assigning the weights we apply ?Fuzzy c-Mean Clustering? to discover the clusters of user profiles.

Fuzzy clustering techniques perform non-unique partition- ing of the data items where each data point is assigned a membership value for each of the clusters. This allows the clusters to grow into their natural shapes [8]. A membership value of zero indicates that the data point is not a member of that cluster. A non-zero membership value shows the degree to which the data point represents a cluster. Fuzzy clustering algorithms can handle the outliers by assigning them very small membership degree for the surrounding clusters. Thus fuzzy clustering is more robust method for handling natural data with vagueness and uncertainty.

Rest of the paper is organized as follows: in section-II, we provide a detailed review of various techniques to preprocess the web log data including data fusion, data cleaning, user and session identification. In Section III, we describe our method- ology for feature selection (or dimensionality reduction) and session weight assignment. In this session we also discuss In this section we also discuss the work how to apply Fuzzy c- Mean Clustering algorithms to weighted user sessions. Section IV gives the results of our methodology applied to a real Web site. Finally section V provides the conclusion.



II. PREPROCESSING OF WEB LOG DATA  In accordance with the W3C?s web characterization termi- nologies, [9] and [10] provided definitions for the main WUM terms which are described in Table 1.

TABLE I DEFINITION OF WUM TERMS  WUM Term Description Resource It can be anything that has identity.

URI A compact string of characters to identify a resource.

e.g. an HTML file, an image etc.

Web resource A resource accessible through the HTTP protocol Web server Server that provides access to Web resources.

Web page Set of data constituting one or several Web resources  that can be identified by a URI.

Page View Set of files that contribute to the display of a web  page on a web browser at a specific moment in time.

Web Browser Client software that sends Web requests, handles the  responses, and display requested URIs.

User An individual that is accessing files from one or more  web servers using a Web browser.

Web request Is a request, a Web client makes for a Web resource.

Click stream Is a sequential series of a page view requests.

User session Click-stream of page views for a single user across  across one or more Web servers.

Server session The set of page views in a user session for a particular  Web site.

Episode is a subset of a visit constituted from related clicks.

The goal of the preprocessing stage in Web usage mining is to transform the raw web log data into a set of user sessions.

Each session consists of a sequence or a set of pageviews. This sessionized data can be further transformed and abstracted or used as the input for various data mining algorithms. Web usage data preprocessing exploit a variety of algorithms and heuristic techniques for various preprocessing tasks such as data fusion, data cleaning, user and session identification [11] etc. Data preprocessing step of Figure 1 depicts the primary  Fig. 1. Web log processing to extract weighted user sessions  tasks involved in web log data preprocessing in order to discover the user sessions.

A. Data Fusion:  Many important organizations have several Web servers for their Web sites. Tanasa and Brigitte TrousseIn order to perform analysis of the of the users? behaviours on the entire Web site, web log files generated by different web servers should be combined [12]. Data fusion refers to the merging of log files from several Web servers. This requires global synchronization across these servers. The Web server?s name is added in the requests before the file path. Web server clocks are synchronized across various time zones. The original host name is replaced with an identifier [9].

