

Application of Association Rules in College Teaching    Huiping Wang  Ruowu Zhong Institute of Computer  Institute of Computer Shaoguan University Shaoguan University  Shaoguan, Guangdong Province, China Shaoguan, Guangdong Province, China HuipingWang2011@126.com      Abstract - This paper introduces the concepts of data mining and focuses on the most important and commonly used method of association rules mining. Then association rule mining is applied to the related teaching activities, and some information and rules are got. Using this information can better predict teaching situation and assess teaching effectiveness.

Index Terms - data mining; association rules; teaching

I.  INTRODUCTION  With school enrollment in recent years, the number of students has been increased dramatically, which greatly increased the workload of departmental management staff.

Traditional manual management mode has been unable to meet the needs of the current work. There are obvious shortcomings of low efficiency, poor security, difficult to find, maintain and update, it can not meet the development of the times, and wastes human and material resources.

Information management system can provide users with adequate information and fast search tool. Its contents are critical to both school?s policy makers and managers.

Therefore information management systems have become an indispensable part of educational institutions. And how to use modern information processing technology in the management of the school to improve work efficiency, and derive useful information to help decision-making is an important task in the process of constructing high-level school. The use of data mining technology can easily and efficiently find useful information and hidden rules from a large number of data, and give full play to the role of information database, and provide guidance to university management and teacher?s work and student?s study.



II. THE CONCEPTS OF DATA MINING  Data mining is from a large number of incomplete, noisy, ambiguous and random data, extracting implicit in them, people do not know in advance but is potentially useful information and knowledge. Data mining is used to specify the model type that the data mining task to find. Data mining tasks can generally be divided into two categories: description and prediction. Descriptive mining tasks characterize the general characteristics of data in the database. Predictive data mining tasks predict on the base of the referring of current data.

Data mining system can mine models of a variety of types and various time granularities to meet the needs of different users or different applications. Its main function is as follows  [1]: (1) conceptual description; (2) correlation analysis; (3) classification and prediction; (4) clustering; (5) outlier analysis; (6) evolution analysis.

The objects of data mining contain database, text, images, and other structured or unstructured information. In many cases, we can not directly analyze the data. The process of using data mining to analyze generally requires the following steps: [2]  1) Data selection: Data required in data mining process may be obtained from heterogeneous data sources. We must obtain data from a variety of different types data sources.

2) Pretreatment: There may be some deviations or exceptions that do not meet the formal processing in initial data. These data must be corrected and eliminated, in order to ensure correctness of later data processing.

3) Transformation: The data obtained from different data sources must be converted into a uniform format. We use codes or other methods to simplify data representation.

4) Data Mining: Applying mining algorithms to the transformed data to produce the desired data mining results.

5) Interpretation / Evaluation: The results of data mining should be handed to the user in an appropriate manner. We can use graphical tools or documentation in the form of tables and so on.

The main methods of data mining include: association rules, decision trees, cluster analysis, genetic algorithms and neural networks, association rules and decision trees are the most frequently and widest used ways.



III. ASSOCIATION RULES MINING  Association rules is a data mining method used to reveal hidden relationships between the data. Data mining is one of the questions that first be studied, and it is the main research direction and one of the most sophisticated methods of analysis. Association rules analyze the relationship of a set of objects in the database, and then through the confidence and support threshold to do selection, and valuable rules and facts are got. The typical application is market basket analysis, by analyzing sales data to find some customers shopping habits and the common rule.

Association rules can be decomposed into the following two steps:  (1) Generate all frequent itemsets: A frequent set is an itemset that has transaction support above minimum support.

(2) Generate all confident association rules from the frequent itemsets. A confident association rule is a rule with   DOI 10.1109/ICICIS.2011.60     confidence above minimum confidence. For each large itemset A, if B ? A, B ? ?, and Support (A) / Support (B) ? minconf, then there are association rules B => (A-B).



IV. APPLICATIONS OF DATA MINING ASSOCIATION RULES  A. Data Preprocessing For evaluation of the quality of teachers, a number of  factors are considered: student evaluation, peer evaluation and expert evaluation. The most notably case is from the perspective of students, give teachers assessment of teaching quality. Colleges and universities engage teaching evaluation survey each semester, and have accumulated large amounts of data. At present, the evaluation of teaching is mainly based on numerical calculation; a weights allocation table is subjectively determined, not as in-depth thinking. Whether from a large number of teaching evaluation data[3], mining the necessary link between the effect of teaching quality and teacher's age, professional title, educational level and teaching methods; the relationship between class teaching and the overall quality of teachers. These can provide decision support for the teaching sector, better promote teaching work of teachers and improve teaching quality.

First of all, we can extract data items associated with mining from the database, create association mining transaction table of the basic conditions of teachers and evaluation of levels, as shown in Table I.

TABLE I TRANSACTION DATABASE   We can not mine the association between the quantitative  data, which is a major shortcoming of the boolean association rule mining. However, in practice, it often contains a number of quantitative data such as teacher's age, educational level, professional title and so on. In order to deal with quantitative data and translate into a known association mining methods, the usually steps are: (1) discretization of numerical attributes; (2) map the value in discrete interval about property classification to a continuous integer to generate the transaction database; (3) generate frequent itemsets in discrete data sets; (4) generate association rules; (5) output interest association rules. The process is shown in Table II.

To illustrate association rules algorithm based on data mining, combining practice, we randomly select 100 copies of teaching quality assessment records and input the job number, age, educational level, professional title, teaching methods and assessment level into database. Part of the teaching evaluation information is shown in Table III.

B. Results of Association Rules Mining and Analysis  We set the minimum support is 10%, the minimum confidence is 50%, then the association rules by mining are as shown in Table IV.

TABLE II MAP THE ATTRIBUTE VALUE TO INTEGER AND THE CODES   TABLE III  PART OF TEACHING ASSESSMENT INFORMATION   TABLE IV  ASSOCIATION RULES   Among them, rule 1 indicates that the support of those  whose age is between 35 and 50 years old, whose professional title is associate professor and assessment level is excellent is 21%, and the confidence is 58%; Rule 2 shows that the support of those whose age is under 35 years old, whose educational level is bachelor and assessment level is good is 30%, the confidence is 75%; Rule 3 shows that the support of those whose age is under 35 years old, whose teaching method is diverse and assessment level is excellent is 25%, and the confidence is 70%; Rule 4 shows that the support of those whose teaching method is diverse and whose assessment level is good is 27%, and the confidence is 60%; Rule 5 shows that that the support of those whose educational level is master, whose professional title is professor and assessment level is good is 12%, and the confidence is 85%; Rule 6 shows that that the support of those whose educational level is doctor, whose assessment level is good is 13%, and the confidence is 58%. By the above rules, we can find: for high educational level, high professional title teachers, because they have rich teaching experience ,higher teaching and the scientific     research level, and thus they have better teaching quality; and some young teachers have diverse and scientific teaching methods, they are well received by students. In the actual teaching activities, we should let young teachers and those teachers with high professional title and higher educational level exchange ideas, and learn from each other to make progress.



V. CONCLUSION  Whether the teaching quality is high or low is the external manifestation of teaching quality. Good quality assessment has teaching-oriented, promote, motivate and control functions, and it is an important part of the management and the primary means of evaluation of teaching performance.

Theory of association rules in data mining is the most important theory. And applying it to the research of teaching evaluation is just beginning. With the deepen of the association rule mining research and application, a fair, just, reasonable teaching assessment and efficient association rule mining can not do without theoretical support[4]. We use data mining algorithm to mine association rules in the teaching assessment data and ensure the scientific nature of teaching evaluation. How to evaluate the quality of classroom teaching to mine large amounts of data relationships between data is an important way to check the level of teaching effectiveness, improve teaching and optimize the training model, and provide scientific basis for teaching.

