- 1345 -

Abstract: Based on the credible association rule (CAR) and its maximum clique mining algorithm and combined with the composition of the evolution of risk events, this paper analyzes the data of 9 earthquakes which bring greater impact to the world than any others in recent 4 years, simultaneously, definites14 typical critical incidents of earthquake disaster. According to the results of data mining, this paper represents the credible association relationships and the probabilities of these critical incidents in different areas. Moreover, the paper discusses the results of maximum clique to prove the exactness of these credible association relationships, and reflects the effectiveness of the CAR and its mining algorithm based on maximum clique to a certain degree.

As a result, it could be used to broadcast the occurring probability of the relevant critical incidents under the situation of the earthquake, in order to achieve the purpose of forecasting and early warning.

Keywords: earthquake; critical incident; credible association rule; maximum clique; data mining   1 Introduction   Critical incidents of earthquake disaster are series of  problems about the society and economy in the secondary disasters which are caused by the earthquake disasters, such as people?s lives being threatened, a huge loss of the economy, the destruction of regular production and living order, the turbulence and confusion of some part of society. At present, the work against natural calamities is gradually changing from passive rescue to initiative precaution. Early warning of a critical incident of earthquake disaster is on the basis of analysis of the historical data, using data mining algorithm, to find useful information from huge data, and finally in order to provide scientific proofs and effective solutions to promptly handle coordinate critical incidents in the future. Now, early warning of a critical incident of earthquake disaster is still in the first stage. The frame of public crisis management theory is lack of research achievements of maneuverability[1]. This paper is based on credible association rules and its mining algorithm based on maximum clique[2] to analyze 9 influential crises of earthquake disasters in recent 4 years in the  world, according to mine the credible association relationships and probabilities of these crises to forecast the occurring probability of related critical incidents and then to achieve the purpose of forecasting and early warning.

2 CAR and its mining algorithm based on maximum clique  2.1 Synopsis of CAR  In the area of data mining, association rule is a hot research direction, which is used to extract unknown yet potentially useful rules from a large number of data.

Agrawal first suggested to find the association relationships of projects from transaction database, and gave the Apriori[3,4] algorithm based on frequent item set in 1993. This algorithm attributes to using minimum support pruning to create frequent item set. Various mining methods appeared then mostly rely on this strategy to reduce the space of combinatorial search in order to produce frequent sets more quickly and people can use the minimum confidence parameters on every set to evaluate the effectiveness of the rule[5,6].  Association rule mining is also applied to discover the frequent pattern of orderly events, such as alarm correlation analysis. The method is still based on supportive -confidence framework[7,8].

Credible association rule (CAR), which its definition is differ from the traditional association rule, CAR requires each item to have same support level, while does not care about the size of the whole support degree, which uses the redefined confidence to reflect the rule?s credibility, noted as credibility of CAR. This paper adopt MaxCliqueMining algorithm, which uses the adjacency matrix to create two credible sets, and then using the thought of maximum clique[9] to create all the credible association relationships. According to the related content, this paper gives the following definition:  Definition 1 (CAR) To suppose that ? ?? is a set with m different items,  given a work database ? ?? ,each transaction  among the database is one set of items in , that is ITi ? . If there are k items which represent  ? ? ?  September 13-15, 2011                                 Rome, Italy    - 1346 - ?  as ?? ? ?? , having the result of  ? ? ? ???? , it says these k items constitute a k-item credible association rule, which is noted as ? ?. Its essence is that any 2 items of the rule are meeting as co-occurrence, therefore, it expresses a stronger association degree than any others.

Especially, 2-item CAR can be directly represented as  .

Definition 2 (support of CAR ) As the definition of the support of the traditional association rule, if 00s records in the work database contain , the support of CAR ? ?is 00s noted as ? ? ? .

Definition 3 (credibility of CAR ) To suppose that  0a  records in the work database contain , 00b records contain and 00s  records contain both and , as a result, the credibility of 2-item CAR  is sba  s ??  , noted as .

Definition 4(maximum clique)  For graph ? ?EVG ,? , ??? , if the subgraph ? ?????  which derived from the given point set V ? is a complete graph, defining G?  as the clique in the graph G . If  ??? and ???  making the subgraph which derived from the point set ?????   is a complete graph, defining G?  as the maximum clique of the graph.

2.2 Implementation process of maxcliquemining algorithm  1) Scanning the work database D  to calculate the support of all 1-item sets and setting minimum credibility for all 2-item sets in the program to obtain set  2L which constitutes from all frequent 2-item sets that meet conditions.

2) Combined different items in the item set consisted of known frequent 1?k with each other to  expand to candidate k-item sets . If ? ??	 ,  ? ?? and when ????  , while 11,1 ?? ??? kk qpki ,  then ? ??????  are the elements of candidate k-item sets .

3) When a 1?k  subset in the candidate k-item sets Ck is not the member of , namely this subset is not credible, this candidate item set is impossible frequent, deleting it from .

4) Scanning work database , calculating the support degree of each item set in , eliminating items which are not meet the minimum support of 00s , forming set  that constitute from frequent k-item sets collection.

5) Iterating and repeating the steps (2) ~ (4), until it cannot produce new collection of frequent item sets. The final result of such frequent item sets collection, namely the maximum clique arising from data mining   3 Empirical research   The data collection of this empirical research is collected from several large Chinese websites (including www.souhu.com, www.sina.com, www.huanquan.com and www.people.com.cn), which is related records (47,492 records) about 9 earthquake disaster (table 1) which have great impact all over the world in the past 4 years. Combined with characteristic analysis of evolution and derivation chain of critical incidents[10], considering various unexpected risk events such as lifeline engineering accident, group incidents, political events in database, this paper ultimately determines 14 representative earthquake disaster critical incidents, shown as table 2. According to relevant principles of Bayes classifier, this paper classifies the records to obtain the support degree of different critical incidents of the earthquake disasters in different countries or regions, shown as table 3.

Tab.1 Earthquakes  Time Location Magnitude Number of records  2008-05-12 Wenchuan, China 8.0 27668  2009-04-06 L?Aquila, Italy 6.3 750  2009-09-02 Djawa, Indonesia 7.3 1555  2010-01-13 Haiti 7.3 1694  2010-02-27 Chile 8.8 1251  2010-03-04 Kaohsiung, Taiwan 6.7 2132  2010-04-14 Yushu, China 7.1 4156  2010-12-20 Kerman, Iran 6.6 2050  2011-03-11 Northeast coast, Japan 9.0 6236    - 1347 - ?  Tab.2 Critical incidents of earthquake disaster  No. Critical incidents Specific information  1 Land traffic jams The cracking of roads and bridges, tram damage and the collapsing of the tunnels in the cities or suburbs, hindering the  supplies transportation and rescue after the earthquake  2 Waterway congestion Port damage caused by the earthquake, leading to the closing of the port after the disaster  3 Aviation congestion  Airport or related facilities damage caused by the earthquake, leading to the stagnation of air traffic after the disaster 4 Shutdown of enterprises  Shutdown of the factories or enterprises  5 Shutdown of school Shutdown of the schools or related education departments  6 Social chaos Small range of social chaos such as theft, steal and loot, leading to the rising rate of crime  7 Political chaos A wider range influence on social security, such as terrorist attacks, regime change and social riots  8 Price inflation The rapidly rising of the price of the necessities for life during a short time after earthquake  9 Supplies scarcity The scarcity of the supplies including professional materials for the earthquake, necessities for life and producer goods  10 Shortage of water and power supply Water or power supply system damage caused by earthquake, leading to the shortage of water and power for victims  11 Radioactive pollution The radioactive toxic substances massive leak caused by the nuclear power station or chemical plant damage  12 Environment pollution The non-radioactive pollution such as water pollution, air pollution, etc  13 Plague epidemic The group epidemic disease or animal epidemic plague after the disaster  14 Communications blackout The interruptions of Internet, phone or other basic communication facilities transmission caused by the earthquake   Tab.3 The support of different critical incidents of the earthquake disasters(%)  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14  Wenchuan, China 13 0 2 1 15 1 4 14 15 4 1 1 5 7  L?Aquila, Italy 30 4 2 2 35 25 25 30 45 15 0 1 1 50  Djawa, Indonesia 13 2 3 0 3 0 12 15 12 3 0 1 0 8  Haiti 10 4 4 0 6 14 39 29 21 5 0 2 9 16  Chile 15 6 6 2 5 13 20 16 13 14 0 0 1 8  Kaohsiung, Taiwan 8 0 0 0 17 0 4 2 0 17 0 1 10 14  Yushu, China 11 0 3 0 15 1 5 24 12 6 0 2 8 8  Kerman, Iran 8 0 2 0 4 16 14 18 10 16 0 0 8 4  Northeast coast, Japan 6 3 4 2 4 0 7 17 13 12 28 0 3 16   Using CAR algorithm in the database of the critical  incidents of the earthquake disasters, the initial condition should be set at first, including the minimum support and the minimum credibility[11,12]of CAR. In this research, setting the minimum support as 10%, the minimum credibility as 20%, according to the fact that the data set of earthquakes is an extremely discrete one, if the minimum support and the minimum credibility are set to a high value, it is entirely possible that no credible association relationships could be found or the result of mining is useless. In addition, the value of minimum support in this research is enough to assure that support  of all critical incidents are at the same order of magnitude, which represent within the range of 10% to 50%. At the same time, due to that the digging result of 2-item credible association represents the necessary and sufficient relationship between two objects, the lower credibility level does not affect the researchability of the results, therefore, the minimum support and the minimum credibility are both set to a low value. After mining earthquakes data in different areas, the results of maximum clique are shown in Table 4 and Figure1 and 2.

- 1348 - ?  Tab.4 Maximum cliques of 2-item credible set  Maximum clique Credibility Wenchuan, China Price inflation ? Supplies scarcity 0.2 L?Aquila, Italy   Land traffic jams ? Communications blackout 0.33 Price inflation ? Supplies scarcity 0.25  Djawa, Indonesia Land traffic jams ? Supplies scarcity 0.35  Price inflation ? Supplies scarcity 0.29 Kaohsiung, Taiwan Shortage of water and power supply ?  Communications blackout 0.5  Shortage of water and power supply ? Plague epidemic  0.28  Shutdown of school ? Shortage of water and power supply  0.24   Yushu, China Price inflation ? Supplies scarcity 0.23  Kerman, Iran Land traffic jams ? Shortage of water and power supply  0.2  Shortage of water and power supply ? Plague epidemic  0.2  Northeast coast, Japan Supplies scarcity ? Radioactive pollution 0.23 Price inflation ? Supplies scarcity 0.22  Supplies scarcity ? Shortage of water and power supply  0.21  Shortage of water and power supply ? Communications blackout  0.21    (Chile)  (Kerman, Iran)   Fig.1 The graph of maximum cliques of 3-item credible set  Supplies scarcity?  Shortage of water  and power supply  Price inflation  Shortage of water  and power supply ?  Price inflation?  Social chaos?  Land traffic jams  Shortage of water  and power supply  Supplies scarcity  ?  Land traffic jams  Political chaos  Social chaos    - 1349 - ?  (Haiti)  (Chile)   Fig.2 The graph of maximum cliques of 4-item credible set   3 Data analysis  3.1 Analysis of 2-item credible set  Based on the order of credibility, we can find from the statistics of the research, all the obtained results of 2-item credible set are different in the critical incidents of earthquake disasters in different areas, however, they have some kind of tendency, some critical incidents with high credibility in common, such as price inflation, supplies scarcity, land traffic jams, shortage of water and power supply and plague epidemic etc. In some special areas there are other incidents that need to be carefully paying attention to such as radioactive pollution. This paper will use the2-item credible set which are high ranking in the order of the credibility and happen in different areas but still have the universality to analysis, and will illustrate in detail of special cases in special places.

1) Price Inflation? Supplies Scarcity It is suggested that demand is a decreasing function  ofprice by general microeconomic theory, however, demand may become an increasing function of price, due to the prospects of imbalance between supply and demand, and panic of victims after disasters[13]. This theory fully explains the credible association relationship between the two critical incidents, which are price inflation and supplies scarcity respectively. After the unexpected earthquake, it may stimulate the public's demand of basic living materials, which grows rapidly in a very short time, for people tend to exaggerate the consequences of the disaster psychologically. Meanwhile,  the earthquake may affect the production capacity of the relevant materials in disaster-affected regions, which could lead to strategic behavior, such as hoarding, by material supply enterprises and logistics service enterprises. What is more, it will also affect the service ability and costs of transport and logistics network dynamically and uncertainly[14], which was listed in Table 2, including land traffic jams, waterway congestion and aviation congestion. These effects will lead to an imbalance of supply and demand of living materials.

Simultaneously, the price formation mechanism after the earthquake, should consider the process of interaction behavior among consumers, businesses and government in the seismic environment. To some extent, the price formation process after disaster is decided mainly by the game between the stakeholders, but not by the balance of supply and demand. The influencing factors include not only consumer's demand for goods, from basic needs to disaster requirements, even to panic demand, but also factors in the enterprise level, like horizontal competition mechanism and supply chain transmission factors. In addition, government plays a decisive role in price formation process, with price intervention policies, the degree of commodity reservation and the suitable guide.

2) Shortage of water and power supply ? Plague epidemic  Earthquakes will always cause ground cracking, which is likely to cause body or tube joint damage of water pipes, and result in lacking of water pressure or losing water supply capacity. Meanwhile, it might also cause power plants, substations or transmission lines do  Land traffic jams  Social chaos?  Supplies scarcity?  Price inflation  Political chaos?  Social chaos?  Supplies scarcity  Price inflation    - 1350 - ?  not work in particular regions. Power systems as well as water supply systems are important components of the lifeline systems, which are directly related to the normal operation of social production and all aspects of life.

Moreover, in emergency rescue after earthquake, as an important energy supply, power system is not only the source of motive power for lifeline project like communication, but also the main guarantee to transport materials and rescue the wounded. Meanwhile, the normal running of water supply system determines the condition of victims' living water and public health situation directly. During 48 hours after the disaster, the meaning of pure water for the survivors is more important than food, unless enough clean water is supplied by the rescuers quickly, otherwise, survivors may be infected with any diseases one can imagine. In Haiti, the most common diseases of the victims are respiratory disorders caused by heavy smoke and dust inhalation and diarrhea caused by drinking polluted water, which lead to increasing risk of suffering from dengue fever, malaria and urticaria. Once the earthquake or epidemic plague occurs, it might not be limited to a certain part, but spread rapidly affecting the entire region, threatening the entire country and even other countries.

Large-scale public health epidemic that has the characters of spreading rapidly, continuity and chain properties, which often make a regional disaster, quickly escalated into a national or even global crisis. And with the development of information age, the link between things become diversification and synchronic, and limited resources can also lead to attend one thing and lose another, forming a "cascade effect", which will increase the impact of the crisis [15]. Therefore, the spread of crisis will be more visible and prominent in globalization and information age. Thus, the stagnation of water and power supply systems, is likely to cause infectious disease outbreaks in a very short time after natural disasters[16].Therefore, it is impossible to ignore the credible association relationship between shortage of water and power supply and plague epidemic, and the mining results of this study indeed confirm the relationship between the two critical incidents.

3) Shortage of water and power supply ? Communications blackout  The anti-earthquake ability of a communication system will affect the rescue after the disaster directly, without considering the breakdown of the signal propagation which attributes to the power supply which was destroyed in the earthquake, when the communication equipment such as the signal tower is destroyed, the whole system will crash as well. It probably leads to the situation that the information of disaster rescue operation cannot reported to the headquarter in time, the rescue command cannot arrive and the effective rescue cannot be taken place within a short time after the earthquake, these will result in the situation expanding to an uncontrollable state[17].For example, after the earthquake in Wenchuan, China, the communication between the distress area and the outside  was cut off as long as 20 hours, it highly increased the difficulty of rescuing. The blackout of communication can be mainly represented as telephone line cutoff or internet cutoff. Based on the mining results, the situation happened more obviously in the Japan and Taiwan earthquakes than any others, for most of the voice and internet data are transmitted through the fiber-optic cable in the ocean, which would be easily destroyed in the earthquakes in the islands areas such as Japan and Taiwan. According to this point, a higher credibility of the relationship between communication blackout and shortage of water and power supply was concluded. Thus, this result indicates the effectiveness of CAR and its maximum clique mining algorithm again to a certain degree.

4) Supplies scarcity ? Radioactive pollution In the mining result of 2-item credible set of this  empirical research, there is a couple of incidents need to be paid high attention, which is the relationship between radioactive pollution and supplies scarcity, the two critical incidents of the earthquake in March 2011,Japan.

Due to the earthquake, Fukusgima nuclear power plant got a large-scale nuclear leakage accident, which led to a huge damage to the environment, not only polluting the air with radioactive substances and atomic dusts, but also it caused secondary pollution for the residents in Japan.

The accident intensified the worry from all the parties about the Japanese food, which is influenced by the nuclear pollution seriously, and unfortunately, it tended to be diffusion. By March 26th 2011, it had already been 99 kinds of products suffered from nuclear contamination in Tokyo and five other areas[18]. In Japan, lots of individuals panic bought agricultural products and necessaries for living, as a result, the phenomenon of supplies scarcity appeared gradually. Meanwhile, Japan is one of the world's biggest food import state, its domestic resources are limited, what was worse, these limited products would decrease rapidly attributing to the nuclear pollution. Therefore, the import demand of agricultural products would expand to a higher level, it is likely to stimulate the increasing of agricultural products imports in some Asian economies, and then it is entirely possible to push some worldwide food prices to a higher level. Although the effect may be not appear very soon, it indeed confirm the credible association relationship between radioactive pollution and supplies scarcity.

3.2 analysis of 3-item credible set and 4-item credible set  To observe the results of the maximum cliques shown in Figure 1 and 2, any two vertices, namely any credible association credibility between two critical incidents is greater than 0.2, which means that in many critical incidents of earthquake disasters of the special areas, several events shown in the figure are most likely to occur simultaneously. In the analysis of the 2-item credible set, it has been illustrated the relationships between the incidents and the reasons for them such as supplies scarcity. Therefore, this paragraph would pay    - 1351 - ?  more attention to explain the credible association relationships between the political chaos, social chaos and other critical incidents in special areas.

Due to the earthquake, lacking of supplies, the rising prices and other series of crises become inevitable incidents to victims, and it indirectly lead to social disorder and unrest. Wang Hanzhong analyzed the process that the ancient Chinese farmers became the bandits because of their hungry or displaced when disaster came[19]. When the farmers did nothing to the disaster, the ending of them was sitting and waiting for death. However, when the farmers became desperate to be the bandits, they might survive from the disaster.

Although it is rarely to see that victims becoming bandits after disasters in modern society on a global scale, the emergence of critical incidents might inhibit the implementation of the policy to a certain extent, which would affect the people?s normal production and living order. When a disaster occurs in a country with a unstable political situation, this social disruption would occur, and even eventually lead to violent incidents.

According to the years of colonial domination and slavery system, there are 3 main political forces in Haiti areas, and due to historical grievances, they have never got a political consensus.  Therefore, no matter who take office, it is hard to obtain universal supported, and it is difficult to produce a strong internal cohesion in the state[20]. Facing to a disaster, the government is hard to obtain people?s trust, and people barely can be taken care of the government either. During the period after the disaster, society was disordered and looting happened everywhere, besides, limited social relief organizations always seemed too weak to solve the problem. It is difficult to implement national political wills effectively, and also difficult to obtain positive responses from other social organizations. After the earthquake, not only the victims were difficult to obtain drinking water, food, basic shelter and social security, but also the social contempt for the dead demonstrated a kind of disrespect for life, which caused large-scale post-earthquake humanitarian crisis in Haiti, and violence events occurred frequently. Thus, as the results shows above, there are strong credible association among the critical incidents, supplies scarcity, price inflation, land traffic jams, social chaos and political chaos.

4 Enlightenment of the paper   In recent decades, due to the frequent occurring of the earthquake, different governments all over the world positively formulated diverse emergency response plans for destructive earthquake according to their national conditions. They published relevant policies and took measures to try to decrease the damage of the earthquake into a small range. Considering the analysis above, results of data mining based on CAR and its maximum clique mining algorithm indeed reflect the relationships between different critical incidents of earthquake disaster, so it is entirely possible to propose more effective  emergency response plans based on this research, that means to observe these relationships of the incidents systematically. The government should fully consider the cascade effect of the critical incidents of earthquake disasters, through the occurring of one incident, they could forecast which one is the most likely to happen next. It would help to avoid suggesting single solution to only one critical incident and overmuch paying attention on lower possible ones, in other words, it is entirely possible to try to suggest more effective and comprehensive emergency response plans. As a result, not only can it help to rescue smoothly, but also it is significant to stabilize the society and decrease the negative impacts.

5 Conclusion   This paper introduces credible association rule and its maximum clique mining algorithm, combined with the composition of the evolution of risk events, this paper analyzes the data of 9 earthquakes which bring greater impact to the world than any others in recent 4 years as an empirical research. According to related theories and discussions, this paper verifies the exactness of the mining results and the effectiveness of the CAR and its maximum clique mining algorithm under the situation of earthquake. The results of data mining represent the credible association relationships of the critical incidents of the earthquake disasters, after the global observation, the paper analyzes couples of critical incidents which have the universal properties and higher potential occurring probabilities, and it is significant to conduct the governments in different areas for proposing the emergency response plan scenario for destructive earthquake. However, there is a defect in this paper as well, namely lacking of the research on the incidents which credibility is lower than the threshold, while, they would be analyzed in the future study to avoid omitting other constructive significant information.

