A Methodology for Empirical Analysis of Brain

Abstract?Graph theoretical analysis has been applied to both structural and functional brain connectivity networks and has helped researchers conceive the effects of neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases including Alzhemier and Schizophre- nia. However, existing graph theoretical approaches to brain connectivity networks simply assume that temporal correlations between brain regions are stable during the entire timeseries under consideration, and only focus on high-level network topo- logical characteristics such as degree distribution. To advance the understanding of brain connectivity networks at a fine granularity, we propose a new method that can help discover connectivity-oriented insights from a time series of brain connec- tivity networks. In particular, our method is capable of identifying (1) strong correlations, which are represented as frequent edges in brain connectivity networks, for each individual subject, and (2) frequent substructures, which are connected components appearing frequently in brain connectivity networks, for a group of subjects. We apply the method to a data set of 38 subjects that were involved in a study of early life stress on depression development. Our findings have been echoed by the domain experts in terms of their clinical implications.

Index Terms?brain connectivity, computational neuroscience, graph theory, graph mining, frequent itemset mining

I. INTRODUCTION  Graph theoretical analyses of both structural and functional  human brain networks have been rapidly applied to the un-  derstanding of human brain network organizations [1] [2] [3].

Previous studies have found that both structural and functional  brain networks resemble features of complex networks such  as small-world topology [4] [5], scale-free degree distribution  [6], highly connected hubs with high degree or high centrality  [7], and modularity [8] [9]. However, most of the previous  studies mainly focus on understanding human brain networks  through measuring network characteristics on a small scale.

Investigation of the correlation between a subject?s brain  connectome and her clinical conditions still remains largely  untouched.

Network characteristics such as mean clustering coefficient,  path length, degree distributions, and robustness have been  used to capture the differences between diseased subjects and  healthy control subjects in Alzheimer [10] and Schizophrenia  [11]. However, to simplify analysis, existing graph theoretical  approaches (e.g., [12]) to brain connectivity networks do not  take the stability of correlations into consideration, assuming  that the temporal correlations between brain regions are sta-  ble across the entire timeseries. Moreover, these approaches  are not able to discover fine-grained knowledge that exists  at correlation level instead of network level. For example,  strong correlations in neural network operations, which are of  high interest for neuroscientists, cannot be identified by using  existing approaches.

In this paper, we propose a new brain network analysis  method that can help discover connectivity-oriented insights  from a time series of brain connectivity networks. Our method  focuses on identifying strong edges (i.e., correlations) that  repeatedly appear in brain networks of a subject over time  and frequent substructures that are commonly shared by a  group of subjects with the same clinical conditions, aiming  to provide a microscopic view of important areas in brain  networks. Specifically, we use frequent edgesets mining to  find frequent substructures. We apply the method to a real-  life data set to study the effects of early life stress (ELS)  on depression development. Our initial results have triggered  great interests from clinical psychiatrists as they find that  the frequent substructures derived from the data set exhibit  functional modules of brain networks, shedding light on their  understandings of brain networks.

ELS includes a wide range of stressors occurring before  sexual maturation such as physical and sexual abuse, neglect,  and malnourishment. ELS can have profound long-term effects  on the development of the central nervous system and its  regulation of basic psychology function. ELS can lead to  later cognitive impairment. And, ELS is widely documented to  increase risk for depression [13]. The neurobiological conse-  quences of stress exposure also involves dysfunction of neural  networks mediating cognitive and affective processes [14].

Stresses during infancy may result in deficits in communication  between brain cells, memory loss and impaired cognitive  abilities that manifest later in life, such as the development of  depression [15]. Both ELS and depression might be conceived  as a disorder of connectivity between components of brain  networks. Presumably, ELS has a high risk of developing  depression in later life, and functional brain connectivity  network should show some distinct topological characteristics  associated with ELS. However, under certain circumstances, a  subject can be resilient to the impact of ELS on depression de-     velopment. Even though, a depression resilient subject?s brain  connectome might show noticeable feature differences from  depressed subjects or healthy subjects. In this work, we tested  this hypothesis by constructing and comparing functional brain  network topologies among different subject groups derived  from resting-state functional MRI (fMRI) timeseries.

The rest of the paper is organized into four sections. In the  next section, we discuss the background of the study: a) func-  tional and structural brain connectivity and graph theoretical  analysis; b) frequent itemset mining and graph minging. In  section III, we present our methods from converting subjects?  fMRI images to functional brain connectivity graphs, to min-  ing for common substructures and inducing signature graphs.

Results and their clinical implications are discussed in section

IV. Finally, we conclude with the importance of devloping a  such general framework for brain connectivity analysis and its  potential impacts in the future.



II. RELATED WORK  A. Brain connectivity and graph theory  There are two types of brain connectivity networks: struc-  tural network and functional network [16] [1] [5]. Structural  networks represent anatomical and physiological associations  among different brain elements. This can be achieved by  examining the white matter connections among gray matter  regions from diffusion tensor image (DTI) data. Functional  connectivity indicates the statistical functional association or  dependency among individual neurons or brain regions. Func-  tional brain networks can be obtained through measuring  temporal correlations between spatially remote neural events  based on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), elec-  troencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG),  or multielectrode array (MEG) data.

In this paper, we focus on functional brain connectivity  networks obtained from fMRI data. fMRI has been widely  used to detect the changes of regional brain activity through  their effects on blood flow and blood oxygen consumptions.

As a neuronal activity requires glucose and oxygen from the  blood stream, it will result in a noticeable change of the local  ratio of oxygenation and generate the markers of blood oxy-  gen level-dependent (BOLD) signals for fMRI. The temporal  correlations between defined regions of interest (ROIs) can  then be calculated by measuring the linear dependence of  the signal strengths between two ROIs. In this study, we use  the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient (PMCC) to  measure the strength of connection between two ROIs. Other  correlation measurement approaches including lag correlation,  mutual information, and peak correlation can also be used  to measure the dependency between two variables from time  series [17].

Using the matrix of correlation coefficients, an undirected  graph G = (V,E) of degree n = |G| (i.e. number of vertices/nodes), can be defined to represent the functional  brain connectivity network, where a node/vertex of the graph  represents a ROI or a neuron and an edge represents a  connection/correlation between two nodes and thus indicates  the functional connectivity. Such an abstraction eases the  application of Graph theory in quantitative investigation of the  topological organization of brain networks. Recent studies have  found that both structural and functional brain connectivity  networks exhibit properties similar to other complex networks.

For example, the small-world phenomenon (i.e. nodes are  locally clustered and large networks can be traversed, on  average, in a small number of steps) exists in both human  brain networks [18] and social networks [19]. For a brain  network, a number of network metrics can be measured to  analyze its network properties including 1) node degree, degree  distribution and assortativity; 2) clustering coefficient and  motifs; 3) path length and efficiency; 4) connection density  or cost; 5) hubs centrality and robustness; and 6) modularity.

Such analyses not only advance our understanding of human  brain organizations, but also promote the study of comparing  brain networks between diseased patients and healthy subjects  to provide more accurate clinical decision support [10] [11].

B. Frequent itemset mining and graph mining  Mining frequent items to find association rules has been  extensively studied since the work by Agrawal et al. [20].

Association rules can be used to discover the shopping patterns  from massive amounts of sales data, which can then be  used as the basis of decision making in various activities  such as advertising, product placement, etc. An association  rule, such as {onion, hamburger,meat} ? {potato, chip} demonstrates the customer buying behavior. Frequent sets of  products in sales transaction data describe how often items are  purchased together.

Formally, let I = {i1, i2, ..., im} be a set of items. Let D be a collection of transactions, where each transaction T = (tid, Itid) has a transaction id tid and a set of items Itid ? I .

The support of a set (X) in D is the number of transactions that contains item set X . A set X is called frequent if its support is no less than a given minimal support (minsup). The  relative minimal support rminsup is defined as  rminsup = minsup/|D|,  indicating the probability of set X occurring in all D. The problem of frequent itemset mining is to find all X in  F (D,minsup) = {X ? I|support(X,D) > minsup}.

To go one step further, we can then look for association rules.

An association rule is an implication of X ? Y , where X ? I, Y ? I , and X ? Y = ?. We say that an association rule X ? Y has confidence c, if c% of transactions in D that contain X also contain Y . For the purpose of this study, we only mine frequent itemsets.

The search space of frequent itemset mining on a set of  unique items I contains exactly 2|I| different sets. If I is large enough, it is computationally hard to find the supports  of all sets over a database D. Therefore, we often just look for closed itemsets and maximal itemsets. A frequent itemset  is called closed if no superset has the same support. And a     frequent itemset is called maximal if no superset is frequent  (i.e., exceeding the minimum support).

In graph theoretical analysis, we are often interested in  finding frequent subgraphs. For example, in [21], biologists are  interested in identifying functional modules and evolutionarily  conserved subnetworks from biological networks. Frequent  subgraph mining is similar to frequent itemset mining. Given  a graph dataset, D = {G0, G1, ..., Gn}, support(g) is the number of graphs (in D) in which g is a subgraph. The problem of frequent subgraph mining is to find any subgraph g that has support(g) ? minsup. One of the key differences between frequent subgraph mining and frequent itemset mining is to  identify isomorphism in graphs. However, in our study, we do no consider isomorphic subgraphs, since each ROI is uniquely  labeled.

In recent years, solutions on frequent itemset mining (e.g.,  apriori [20], eclat [22], and fp-growth [23], etc.) and frequent  subgraph mining (e.g., AGM [24], FSG [25], and gSpan [26],  etc.) have been well explored.



III. METHODS  A. Subject grouping, fMRI data acquiring and data prepro-  cessing  In total 38 subjects have been scanned, and all the sub-  jects are female. Each individual?s ELS and depression were  characterized by structured interview for Clinical Disorders  (SCID) and Early Trauma Inventory (ETI) with trained clinical  staff. In addition, all participants completed the Childhood  Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ) and Hamilton Depression Scale  (Ham-D) to further characterize their ELS histories and current  major depressive disorders (MDD). Current or past diagnoses  of MDD were determined based on the SCID; ELS history  was determined by the ETI and CTQ. 38 subjects were split  into three subject groups: 1) a healthy control group (13  subjects), in which subjects had neither ELS nor observation of  depression; 2) a resilient group (9 subjects), in which subjects  had ELS but did not develop depression symptoms; and 3)  a ELS-depression group (16 subjects), in which subjects had  ELS and were diagnosed with depression.

Image acquisition was performed using a 3.0 T Siemens  Magnetom Trio modality with a Siemens transmit-receive head  coil. Anatomic images were acquired at 1 ? 1 ? 1 mm3  resolution with an MPRAGE sequence as 176 1 mm thick slices with the following parameters: FOV 224 ? 256 mm, TR 2600 ms, TE 3.02 ms, FA 8o. Functional images were acquired with a z-saga sequence 42 to minimize artifact in the  medial prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortex due to sinus cavities.

Z-saga images were acquired at 3.4? 3.4? 4 mm3 resolution in 20 4 mm thick axial slices with the following parameters: FOV 220 ? 200 mm, TR 2020 ms, TE1/TE2 30/66 ms, FA 90o. In each session, 210 planar images depicting BOLD responses were acquired with a 2.02s TR, total duration 7.2 minutes. During the resting-state scan, participants were  instructed to lie passively in the scanner and to refrain from  thinking about anything specific.

Images first underwent slice timing and motion correction  (i.e., corrected for head movement by realignment and regres-  sion), and low frequency Fourier bandpass (0.009 ? 0.08Hz) filtering, then were spatially smoothed to a 6mm FWHM Gaussian filter, and finally were normalized to the MNI 452  template brain. White and grey matter voxels were segmented  using FSL, and noise from white matter voxels was regressed  out of the time courses from gray matter voxels.

Certain neural regions are more important than others for  emotion processing and emotion regulation. Many studies in  neuroscience field have consistently reported such findings  among healthy individuals, individuals exposed to ELS, and  individuals with MDD [27] [28] [29]. Therefore, we selected  21 well-studied ROIs (see Table I), which have emotion  processing and emotion regulation impacts on both healthy and  depressed populations [27] [30] [31] [28], to form an emotion  regulation network.

TABLE I SELECTED ROIS IN THE EMOTION REGULATION NETWORK.

Region of Interest Description  lHPC Left hippocampus rHPC Right hippocampus  rAMY Right amygdala lAMY left amygdala rDFC Right dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex lDFC Left dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex  rT Right thalamus lT Left thalamus lC Left caudate rC Right caudate  sACC Subgenual anterior cingulate cortex rACC Rostral anterior cingulate cortex dACC Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex  mFC Medial prefrontal cortex vmFC Ventral medial prefrontal cortex lvFC Left ventral lateral prefrontal cortex rvFC Right ventral lateral prefrontal cortex  raI Right anterior insula laI Left anterior insula rpI Right posterior insula lpI Left posterior insula  Time courses were first extracted from 6mm sphere ROIs centered at the coordinates of each node for each individual  and then averaged across voxels within an ROI, which results  in a 21?210 (ROI?TPs) matrix for each individual. In the matrix, each column is an ROI, each row is a time point (TP),  and the value of each cell indicates the activity strength of a  specific ROI at a specific time point.

B. Constructing functional brain connectivity graphs  In this study, we use the Pearson product-moment corre-  lation coefficient (PMCC) of the time courses to measure the  linear dependency (correlation) between two ROIs. The PMCC  is calculated based on two variables? covariance, defined as  ?X,Y = E[(X ? E[X])(Y ? E[X])]/?X?Y (1)  where E stands for the mathematical expectation, and ?X and ?Y are the standard deviations of X and Y , respectively.

The product of PMMC yields a value between ?1 and +1     inclusive (i.e., ?1 ? ?X,Y ? +1). A value of +1 indicates a perfect positive linear correlation between X and Y while ?1 indicates a perfect negative linear correlation. By calculating  the PMCC for every pair of ROIs based on the extracted brain  activity time courses, we generate a correlation matrix (21?21) for the 21 ROIs. The matrix is symmetric and the values in  the main diagonal are not interested as those values indicate  the correlation of an ROI to itself.

lHPC  rHPC  rAMY  lAMY  rDFC  rT  lT  lC  rC  sACC  rACC  dACC  mFC  vmFC  rvFC  ral  lal  lDFC  rpllpl  lvFC  Fig. 1. A sample functional brain connectivity graph that depicts a subject?s emotion regulation network.

We can then derive a binary adjacency matrices from the  correlation matrices. Two ROIs will be regarded as adjacent  to each other and connected via an edge in the connectivity  graph, if the two ROIs are highly correlated (either positive  or negative). For an adjacency matrix, the value of its entries  is either 1 or 0, where 1 indicates the existence of a connec-  tion/edge and 0 indicates nonexistence. Formally,  A(i, j) =  {  1 if |?i,j | ? T  0 if |?i,j | < T , (2)  where A(i, j) stands for the value of entry [i, j] in an adjacency matrix, ?i,j is the correlation value in the corresponding correlation matrix, and T is the given threshold. From an adjacency matrix we can easily construct an undirected graph  of brain connectivity network. Each node/vertex in the graph  represents an ROI and two ROIs are directly connected if their  entry value is 1 in the matrix.

The decision of the value of T is based on the density of a graph. The graph density is defined as the number of  edges divided by the total number of possible edges. For an  undirected graph G = (V,E) of degree n = |G|,  density = |E(G)|  n(n? 1)/2 . (3)  Aligned with previous research [11], the graph density is set in the range [0.37, 0.50]. A graph tends to be fragmented if density is smaller than 0.37, and it may not represent a biological system if density is larger than 0.50. Clearly, a lower T incurs more correlations and thus more edges, resulting a higher density of the graph.

Figure 1 shows an example brain connectivity graph using  the selected 21 ROIs with density = 0.37.

C. Mining for strong-edges graphs  Visualizing brain networks through functional brain connec-  tivity graphs is very helpful for neuroscientists to understand  and analyze the effects of diseases [10] [11]. However, there  are two limitations in the existing approaches. First, generated  connectivity graphs usually are very complex, full of connec-  tions and hard to make comparisons for either between-group  subjects or in-group subjects (e.g., see Figure 2). Second, a  correlation is decided over the entire timeseries, which assumes  that temporal relations between brain regions are quite stable  over time. However, it is likely that the assumption is not true  [32].

To help better understand functional brain networks, we  propose a method that can generate strong-edges graphs from  basic functional brain connectivity graphs. The method consid-  ers the the frequency with which connections between brain  regions occur over time and regards the connections that occur  frequently as ?strong? and important to the function of the  overall network. By considering only strong connections, the  method can effectively prune the network and reveal patterns  of communication across distributed brain regions that define  a functional neural network.

We define the strength of an edge (i.e., a correlation between  two ROIs), denoted by Sei,j (1 ? i ? |ROI|, 1 ? j ? |ROI|, andi 6= j), as the frequency of its appearance across all the brain connectivity graphs generated from the scan and  use it to derive strong edges. The scan on each individual took  7.2 minutes and has 210 time points (TP). We divide the 210  TPs into 41 groups, where each group contains ten TPs. For  data smoothing purpose, two consecutive groups have five TPs  in common. That is,  TPG1 = [TP1, TP2, ..., TP10],  TPG2 = [TP6, TP7, ..., TP15],  ...

TPG41 = [TP201, TP202, ..., TP210].

In general,  TPGm = [TP(m?1)?step+1, ..., TP(m?1)?step+n], (4)  where TPGm is the m-th group, TPi is the i-th TP, and |TPG| is total number of groups. Apparently, |TPG| = ?(|TP | ? n)/step? + 1. In this study, we set step = 5 and n = 10.

We create a correlation matrix and its connectivity graph  from each group TPGm. The strength of an edge ei,j for one     lHPC  rHPC  rAMY  lAMY  rDFC  lDFC  rT  lT  lC  rC  sACC  rACC  dACC  mFC  vmFC  rvFC  ral  lal  lpl  lvFC  rpl  (a) Subject 2031 from the control group  lHPC  rHPC  rAMY  lAMY  rDFC  lDFC  rT  lC  rC  rACC  dACC  mFC  vmFC  rvFC  ral  lal  rpl  lpl  sACC  lvFC  lT  (b) Subject 2034 from the resilient group  lHPC  rHPC  rAMY  lAMY  rDFC  lDFC  rT  lC  rC  sACC  rACC  dACC  mFC  vmFC  lvFC  rvFC  ral  lal  lpl  lT  rpl  (c) Subject 2044 from the depressed group  Fig. 2. Functional brain connectivity graphs of three subjects, randomly picked from each clinical group.

subject is defined as  Sei,j = |ei,j |/|TPG|, (5)  where |ei,j | is the number of graphs that contain edge ei,j and |TPG| is the total number of graphs (i.e., 41 in our study).

Strong edges are those edges whose strengths are no smaller  than the predefined minimal support Sminsup (Sminsup ? [0, 1]). Figure 3 shows a strong-edges graph for subject 2031, where density = 0.42 and Sminsup = 52%. Compared to the original connectivity graph of the same subject in Figure  2(a), the strong-edges graph focuses on edges more frequently  observed within operation of the network and therefore in-  creases interpretability by decreasing the total number of edges  considered. For example, we can immediately see a clustering  effect in Figure 3. Nodes lT, rT, vmFC, mFC, and raI form  one cluster, and nodes laI, dACC, rC, lHPC, rHPC, rpI, and  rDFC form the other cluster. The two clusters are connected  through raI and laI.

D. Frequent edgeset mining and mining for common substruc-  tures  We use frequent itemset mining technique to extract a set  of key substructures from the individuals? brain connectivity  graphs of a subject group. In the context of frequent edgeset  mining, given a graph G = (V,E) of degree n, let D be a col- lection of transactions, where each transaction T = (tid, Etid) has a transaction id tid and a set of edges Etid ? E. The support of a set X ? D, denoted by support(X,D), is the number of the transactions that contain edgeset X . A set X is called frequent if its support is no less than a given minimal  support (minsup). We define the relative minimal support (rminsup) as rminsup = minsup/|D| and use it to indicate the frequency of set X occurred in all transactions. We also restrict the size of X to be larger than minsize. The problem of frequent edgeset mining is to find all the subsets X with large enough support and size, that is, to compute the set  {X ? D|support(X,D) ? minsup, |X| > minsize}.

lAMY  lvFC  laI dACC  raI  lpI  rvFClT  rDFC  lHPC  rC rHPC  rpI  sACC  rAMY  lC  rTvmFC rACC  mFC  lDFC  Fig. 3. A sample of a graph that contains only strong edges for subject 2031.

In our study, we define a transaction T as a set of unique edges from each time point group graph of a subject. Aligned  with our previous settings (i.e. step = 5 and n = 10), 210 time points are split into 41 groups. For each group, we can generate  a connectivity graph; and we consider each graph of the time  point group as a transaction. Using frequent edgeset mining,  we can extract frequent substructures (edgesets) of a subject  group. Figure 4 shows four different substructures extracted  from the healthy control group (i.e. 13 subjects, and 13?41 = 533 transactions) with the following setting density = 0.50, rminsup = 15%, and minsize = 5.

lHPC  rHPC  rAMY  lAMY  rDFC  lDFCrT  lT  lC  rC  sACC  rACC  dACC  mFC  vmFC  lvFC rvFC  raI  laI rpI  lpI  (a)  lHPC  rHPC  rAMY  lAMY  rDFC  lDFCrT  lT  lC  rC  sACC  dACC  vmFC  lvFC rvFC  raI  rACC  mFC  lpI  laI  rpI  (b)  lHPC  rHPC  rAMY  lAMY  rDFC  lDFC  rTlT  lC  rC sACC  rACC  dACC  lvFC rvFC  raI  mFC  vmFC  laI rpI  lpI  (c)  lHPC  rHPC  rAMY  lAMY  rDFC  lDFCrT  lT  lC  rC  sACC  rACC  dACC  mFC  vmFC  lvFC rvFC  raI lpI  rpI  laI  (d)  Fig. 4. Samples of frequent substructures extracted from the healthy control group.



IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  The purpose of this study is to explore new approaches  to enriching the understanding of human brain networks and  discovering insights from them. Traditional graph theoretical  approaches (e.g., [12]) to analyzing fMRI data suffer from a)  assuming temporal stability across the entire timeseries and  b) neglecting to differentiate between commonly used edges  and infrequently used ones in neural network operation. In  contrast, our approaches focus on strong connections between  well-defined ROIs. The immediate result is that we are able  to generate strong-edges graphs for each subject and make  connectivity graphs much more straightforward, so that key  characteristics of a network can be easily observed. As shown  in Figure 3, it is clear that two clusters are formed, and  connected through nodes raI and laI. Regions within the raI  cluster are predominantly involved in executive function (mFC,  vmFC), attention (rACC) and integrating multimodal stimuli  (rT, lT). Conversely, regions in the laI cluster are commonly  associated with affect (lAMY, rAMY, sACC), memory (lHPC,  rHPC), interoceptive sensation (lpI, rpI), sensory and motor  gating (lC, rC) and error processing (dACC). Figure 3 thus  depicts a rough division of higher-order cognition from sensory  and internal monitoring processes, an interpretation aided by  the increased modularity of Figure 3 and not readily evident in  the network depicted in Figure 2(a). However, this observation  is difficult to draw from the original brain connectivity graph  for the same subject in Figure 2(a). Moreover, the strong-  edges graphs help infer the stability information of a subject?s  functional brain networks over time. In this study, 210 time  points are grouped into 41 groups and a connectivity graph  is generated for each group, which is equivalent to taking a  snapshot of the functional brain network of a subject at a given  frequency along the time course. The frequency with which an  edge appears across the snapshots implies the importance (i.e.,  strength) of the edge for the overall operation of the network.

We use the frequent edgeset mining techniques to discover  common patterns/substructures from brain connectivity graphs  of all the subjects within the same clinical group. As shown in  Figure 4, frequent substructures are extracted from the healthy  control group, with density = 0.50, rminsup = 15%, and  minsize = 5. Successful emotion regulation is a multidimen- sional and temporally unfolding process. Neurally, emotion  regulation has been found to recruit a diverse array of neural  regions that mediate cognitive control, conflict monitoring,  memory, emotion and saliency processing, and interoceptive  awareness and integration. It is interesting to note that when  mining frequent substructures, the control group demonstrated  a common substructure consisting of the rostral ACC, subgen-  ual ACC, ventral medial PFC, and medial PFC, as these regions  have known direct anatomical pathways connecting them to  emotion generation regions (e.g., amygdala and hippocampus).

The finding that these regions form a common substructure  among healthy individuals suggests that these tightly linked  nodes act in concert to bias information processing in emotion  generation regions.

Moreover, some literatures suggested that the densities of  the brain connectivity networks varied among subjects, there-  fore, the brain network metrics should consider all reasonable  densities, from 0.37 to 0.50 (i.e. for example, take the mean  of network metrics produced at a range of densities from 0.37  to 0.50 in 0.01 increments) [11]. In our study, we choose to  use a higher density value (i.e. 0.50 at most). As mentioned  in Section III-B, the threshold T is determined by the target density, a higher density value results in a lower T , and consequently creates more edges in the graph. Also, we can  make the conclusion that if an edge exists in a graph generated  using a higher T value, the edge should still exist, if we chose a lower T value (i.e. higher density) and use the same correlation coefficient matrix. In summary, for the purpose of  mining for frequent edgesets, a high density value preserves  all the necessary edges, and prevents information loss.

Although the methods investigated were only tested on  functional brain connectivity networks, they should be also  applicable on structural networks, because of their similarities  in terms of network characteristics.



V. CONCLUSION  In this paper, we have proposed a new methodology in graph  theoretical analyses of brain connectivity networks. Different  from traditional approaches, our method does not assume     temporal stability of the brain activities over the entire time-  series. To help deepen the understanding of brain connectivity  networks, our method focuses on identifying strong edges and  discovering common subgraph patterns that exist in subjects of  the same clinical conditions. By not assuming static functional  connectivity, our method allows improved identification of  brain states that differentiate clinical populations.

Following current study, we plan to develop a classification  system that can accurately identify potential diseased subjects  or neurological flaws on a subject. One possible direction is  to rank frequent substructures according to their neurological  effects on brain networks, and discard low-ranking patterns as  outliers.

