Method of Association Rule Based on Improved Genetic Algorithm and Application  of Network Consuming for the Contemporary Youth

Abstract?Genetic Algorithm and Association Rules both are commonly used methods in data mining. In this paper, a brief overview of Genetic Algorithm and Association Rules has been given, and this paper has presented an improved extract method of association rules of genetic algorithm based on their respective advantages and disadvantages. It also did some research on designing encoding methods, structuring and choosing fitness functions, and improving crossover operators and mutation operators. In the end, the analysis of contemporary youth consumption condition has been shown as a specific example to illustrate the process of mining association rules of contemporary youth?s consumption behavior.

Keywords-Data mining, Genetic Algorithm, Association Rules, Network Consuming

I. INTRODUCTION  Data Mining is to extract the hidden, implicit and valid information and knowledge from numerous and irregular practical data [1]. Mining Association Rules is an important aspect of data mining and it is also an important kind of rule contained in the data. Its goal is to find all the concurrency relation in the data items. However, Association Rules only concern about support and confidence, and this may probably arouse some false rules, and in the meanwhile, mining frequent itemset is a difficult job because it will take a lot of time to traverse all the records in a database for several times. And the Genetic Algorithm has its own unique advantages in solving large space, nonlinear and global optimization problems; just to make up for the weakness of Association Rules. This paper has presented an algorithm for mining based on the improved Association Rules of Genetic Algorithm. This can greatly improve the algorithm?s calculate efficiency by avoiding the production of numerous frequent itemsets[2].



II.   RELEVANT CONCEPTIONS AND PRINCIPLES  Association Rules  Let 1 2I {i , i , i }m? i }m  be the items, and D be the set of all transactions, transaction T is a subset of set I,  set T I? , and each transaction has its own transaction  ID identification. An association rule is defined as an  implication of the form X Y?  where X I? Y I? and X Y=?Y=?  , X is called antecedent of the rule, and Y is the consequent of the rule. Association Rules has two widely-used numbers to express the degree of uncertainty of the rules:  (1) Support S ( X Y? ): T contains the percentage of transactions in the set X YY , it shows the frequency that the rule has been used in the transaction T.

S X Y? = |{D : , }|  | | X Y T D T  T ? ?,,,,,,  2-1  (2) Confident C ( X Y? ): it is the percentage of amounts contains both transaction X and Y occupy in all the amounts contain transaction X.

C X Y? =  |{D : , }| |{D , }|  X Y T D T X T D T  ? ? ? ?  ,,,,,,  2-2  Genetic Algorithm Genetic Algorithm is a mechanism that premised on the evolutionary ideas of natural selection and genetic [3-5]. It simulates the method of searching optimal solution in natural evolutionary process. The method is to improve the individual?s adaptability through natural selection, genetic, and variation mechanism. Usually, in the simple genetic algorithm, during the process of crossover, the two individuals are randomly picked. And this means has some kind of one-sidedness. It cannot find all the global optimal solutions. What has been used in this paper is an improved algorithm based on the traditional simple genetic algorithm.



III. MINING ASSOCIATION RULES BASED ON GENETIC ALGORITHM  A    Encoding In the Genetic Algorithm, there are several kinds of encoded mode, such as binary coding, real coding, symbolic coding and variable length coding. And usually we?ll take the binary coding, but due to the high accuracy, low volatility of   DOI 10.1109/ICMeCG.2011.45    DOI 10.1109/ICMeCG.2011.45     coded-decimal notation, we choose decimal coding in this paper. That means to give each attribute a decimal number, then each decimal number can represent gene. Put all the decimal numbers (represent the attribute) of one individual together to form a decimal string. Each string represents a chromosome, the carrier of genetic information.

Then, use the real number array method for encoding.

The numbers of the elements in the real number array should be in accordance with the number of fields in the transaction database. Each element represents an attribute value of the field. Suppose to use an array of length N for the individual encoding in a transaction database, that means A[1] represents field 1, A[2] represents field 2,  A[R] represents field R[6]. After the encoding, crossover and variation operation have become array operation.

B.    Construct Fitness Function Fitness Function is used to evaluate the performance of individuals of the population in Genetic Algorithm. This will help us pick the individuals with high confidence. We can use the support and confidence of association rules to define its fitness value, that is:  fitness X Y? =S X Y? +C X Y? 3-1 It means that only those individuals with high support and confidence can survive. This will make the association rules we mined more reliable than those rules mined based on the fitness function which is defined only with the consideration of support.

Improve the Genetic Operators According to the characters of association rules and the  weakness of traditional basic genetic algorithm, we can improve the basic genetic algorithm from the operator perspective. This will accelerate the genetic evolution process, and can also enhance the global convergence of the algorithm to avoid the premature convergence.

1) Choose operator  Choosing operator is in order to avoid gene deletion, and to enhance global convergence and calculate efficiency.

It is established base on the evaluation of the individual?s fitness. It picks those chromosomes with high degree of adaption from the initial population, and then put them into the mating pool preparing for the crossover to generate new population. Generally, simple genetic algorithm often use roulette wheel selection, but this method is easy to result in premature convergence, and can probably make the genetic algorithm lose its evaluation ability. In this paper we have chosen another selection algorithm instead of the roulette wheel selection, and in this algorithm individuals are sorted according to their degree of fitness. And copy the sorted population one more time can improve its quality. The description of this algorithm is as follows:  { Sort the individuals of population according to their  degree of fitness } Do while (the population hasn?t been scanned over) { Copy the top 20% of the excellent individuals Do not copy the 80% normal individuals }   2) Crossover Operator Generally speaking, there are two ways in crossover,  one is point crossover and the other is multiple point crossovers. Because this paper has adopt the decimal coding method, so the crossover operators will make the two selected individual genes cross randomly for n times according to the point crossover method. This will generate 2n offspring, and then choose the best two individuals of them into the next generation. This will keep the genes of male parent and female parent, and can also improve the performance of genetic algorithm.

3) Mutation Operator  Although mutation operator is just a helping method in the genetic algorithm to generate new individuals, it is a necessary step in the algorithm, because it determines the local searching ability of genetic algorithm. The mutation operator presented in this paper is that: To take a random value form the corresponding gene range to a predetermined probability to substitute the origin gene value, and generate a new chromosome. Therefore, the search point can move freely in the whole searching space. This can enhance the population?s diversity.

4) Rules Extraction  The output of rules extraction is not an optimal solution, but a set that accords with the rules? requirements. Use the association rules to extract the rules according to the pre-set support and confidence requirements, and if the rules fit the requirements then output them, otherwise, reject them.



IV. THE APPLICATION OF IMPROVED ALGORITHM  Today, the study and life condition for new generation is much better than before. Their consumption level and structure have changed a lot. With the fast development of E-commerce, network consumption spreads quickly among young consumers, and it is becoming the main form of consuming gradually. What kinds of consuming habit and behavior can instruct college students to establish correct consuming concept, how to give suggestions to them, this means a lot to society and individuals. The example below uses these improved methods discussed above to mine and conclude the consuming situation of the contemporary youth nowadays.

Select 200 data samples according to results of investigation, freshman, sophomore, junior and senior account for 25% separately. Maintain those useful columns,     remove those useless ones, such as name, student ID. There are many factors affect college students? consuming view, here we select 6 main factors, related with 6 attributes, so the length of code string is six, attributes are as below: grade, sex, develop status of hometown, monthly family revenue, monthly consuming status, network consuming amount.

A. The coding method of genetic algorithm It can do decimal coding for each attribute; it should keep the sequence of fields consistent when coding, coding as follows: the attribute values of grade field are grade one, grade two, grade three and grade four, the corresponding coding values are 1, 2, 3 and 4; similarly, male is 1, and female is 2; the field values of development level of domestic seat are developed, relatively developed, general and underdeveloped, the corresponding coding values are 1, 2, 3 and 4; the field values of family income per month are less than 2000 Yuan, from 2000 to 4000 Yuan, from 4000 to 6000 Yuan, and over 6000 Yuan, the corresponding coding values are 1, 2, 3 and 4; the field values of consumption level per month are under 500 Yuan, from 500 to 800 Yuan, from 800 to 1000 Yuan, and over 1000 Yuan, the corresponding coding values are 1, 2, 3 and 4; the field values of network consumption amount are no network consumption, from 50 to 100 Yuan, from 100 to 200 Yuan, from 200 to 300 Yuan, and over 300 Yuan, the corresponding coding values are 1, 2, 3 , 4 and 5.

For example: code value ?212321? is means that it is a male of grade two, the development level of domestic is relatively developed, the family income per month is between 4000 and 6000 Yuan, the consumption level per month is between 500 and 800 Yuan and no network consumption. The coding table is as ?Fig. 1? below:  Table 1: Coding Table S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6   ?   ?   ?   ?   ?   ?    B.  The basic idea of algorithm According to the idea of genetic algorithm, you can do some operations to species group, such as encode, select, intersect and variation, finally you can draw some useful association rules. The main promotion lies in taking support and confidence as calculation standard of fitness function in the meantime, and considering the influence of two individuals.

In the initial species group, it will produce more excellent individual copy, which can raise the quality of species group; According to the mutation operator on variation, and then adjust the individuals in the two small species groups according to the fitness size, further guarantees the quality of  population.

C.  The implementation steps of algorithm Step 1: initialization. It will randomly generate an initial species group which include N individuals after coding, and then calculate the fitness and average fitness of each individual in species group according to the calculation formula of fitness which has been defined above;  Step 2: sorting each individual in the species group according to their fitness size from large to small;  Step 3: copying individuals according to the size of fitness. Copying the top 20% individuals, and don?t copy the rest 80% individuals, and calculating the number of reserved individuals as M;  Step 4: if M<N, then randomly generates N-M individuals, and keep the total number N of species group, otherwise skip step 4;  Step 5: comparing the individuals according to fitness and average fitness, and then confirm the individual mutation rate;  Step 6: calculating the minimum fitness value of top 20% excellent individuals and the maximum fitness value of 80% general individuals, if the minimum fitness value is less than the maximum fitness value, then exchange the two individuals, otherwise jump to step 7; repeating this step until it can?t exchange, then jump to step 7;  Step 7: selecting two individuals from top 20% excellent individuals copy group randomly, then conducting many single points across to the two individuals, finally selecting the most excellent individual from the obtained individuals and storing into new species group;  Step 8: stopping until it meets end conditions, otherwise jump to step 2;  Step 9: drawing the rules.

D.  Association rules extraction According to the front algorithm, application examples can be found in the part of association rules as follows: <3213>?<000022>  (35%support 100%confidence)  Namely < grade: junior, gender: female, domestic development level: developed, family income: 4,000 to 6,000 Yuan >?  < monthly consumption level: 500 ~ 800 Yuan, network consumption amount: 100 to 200 Yuan >.

<1132>?<000034>  (21%support 100%confidence)  Namely < grade: freshman, gender: male, domestic development level: generally, family income: 2,000 to 4,000 Yuan >?  < monthly consumption level: 800 ~ 1000 Yuan, no network consumption >.

<4213>?<000023>  (13%support 96%confidence)  Namely < grade: senior, gender: female, domestic development level: developed, family income: 4,000 to 6,000 Yuan >?  < monthly consumption level: 800 ~ 1000 Yuan, network consumption amount: 100 to 200 Yuan >.

<2124>?<000045>  (7%support 94%confidence) Namely < grade: sophomore, gender: female, domestic  development level: more developed, family income: above 6,000 Yuan >?  < monthly consumption level: above 1000 Yuan, network consumption amount: above 300 Yuan >.

According to the above result of extracting rules, we can get the conclusion that the family of level high monthly consumption income also has the high consumption level; Network consumption amount also depends on the monthly consumption level; the person who comes from the domestic that developed well, can accept outside new things faster, so has the advancing consumption concept; In the groups of the contemporary youth network consumer, girls accounts for the majority of network consumption, thus it can be seen that women are more attractive to the network consumption.



V.   CONCLUSION  This article combined genetic algorithm with association rules, and constructed association rules mining model in data mining by genetic algorithm, and then calculated the fitness function through the support degree and confidence degree, found law hidden in the database, to help us analyze and solve problems. Using the decimal array coding method, it facilitated operation of crossover, mutation, and selection operators. Association rules mining technology, based on the genetic algorithm, can also be used in the student  information analysis, financial credit risk analysis, traffic accidents analysis and other areas. It has very good practical value.

