Building Hierarchical Keyword Level Association Link Networks  for Web Events Semantic Analysis

Abstract?With the increase of information scale of web events on the time, it is extremely difficult and challenging to grasp the semantics of web events artificially, because of the limitation of the time and energy of human beings. Herein, we propose a method to map the web event to keyword level association link network (KALN) for deep analysis of the semantics of web events, such as the evolution semantics of web events. Firstly, the original KALN is constructed at a given time by traditional data mining technologies. Then, the hierarchical KALN, consisted of Theme Layer Network, Backbone Layer Network and Tidbit Layer Network, is built based on the original KALN by information entropy to identify the different semantic levels of the web event, including stable semantics, sub-stable semantics and unstable semantics. With the semantic analysis of hierarchical KALN, human could easily gain a thorough understanding of the web event. Finally, experiments show that our method can effectively capture the different level semantics of web events.

Keywords-web event ; association link networks ; semantic analysis

I.  INTRODUCTION When an event happens in the society or a topic attracts  broad attention on the web, there will be a huge number of web pages covering that on the web. As time goes by, hundreds and thousands of web pages, blogs and posts come out with the evolution of events. The large scale of information makes it impossible for human to grasp the event by reading the massive web pages one by one. So it would be very useful for human to know what the events are talking about if the semantics of web events can be well organized and automatically showed at each time stamp.

For example, in one day, there are about 7000 web pages covering the Libya War that happened on Mar.20, 2011. It is hard and useless to read all these web pages, because web pages are so many that it would be a kill of time and energy.

However, what do people want to know through reading the web pages about this event? Perhaps, on Mar.23, 2011, most people want to know what have not changed and what kind of changes has been made. The final goal of this paper is to effectively solve this problem.

In order to automatically analyze a web event, the first thing is to represent the web event in an automatic way, which should preserve the semantics as much as possible. In  this paper, we use the keyword level association link network (KALN) to represent a web event, as shown in Fig. 1. The KALN is a complex network comprised of keywords and association rules between keywords, which can be mined from the web pages. The KALN could be considered as a capture of semantics of the web event at a given time stamp.

Through the analysis of the KALN?s properties, we could get the properties of the web event. For example, the hierarchical property of the KALN reflects the hierarchy of the web event.

Then, based on information entropy, an algorithm is proposed to identify the hierarchical semantics of the KALN.

Here, a new web event stability is defined by the keywords? weight distribution and is measured by the information entropy. Different level semantics of the web events have their counterpart in hierarchical KALN, such as stable semantics, sub-stable semantics and unstable semantics. If these semantics can be automatically identified, it will be easy for people to know the changed semantics and unchanged semantics of the web event. Finally, any variation of web event will also have the counterpart on the hierarchical KALN. The detailed definition is given in Section 3. In fact, there must be some properties dominating this web event while some trivial properties are dispensable.

Here, the properties of web events are represented by their keywords.

The main contributions of this paper are 1) to represent the web events using their KALNs, 2) to introduce the information entropy for KALN/web event stability measurement, 3) and to build the hierarchical KALN to   Figure 1. The KALN representation of a web event. At a time point, the event is represented by a network, which is constructed by keywords and their relations extracted from web pages about this event. And these web pages may come from different sources, such as ChinaDaily, BBC,  Google news.

DOI 10.1109/DASC.2011.163    DOI 10.1109/DASC.2011.163    DOI 10.1109/DASC.2011.163     identify different level semantics of the web event.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2  reviews the related work. In Section 3, the general problem is formally defined and two sub-problems are extracted, which are discussed in Section 4 and Section 5 respectively. Section 6 shows the experimental results and Section 7 concludes.



II. RELATED WORK Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) has been discussed  over ten years. Some similar works like [6, 4, 3] are conducted to detect the appearance of topics, but no more analysis of topics are not involved. And the users? query is used to reduce the scale of data and realize the query-guided event detection [12]. The topic summary is generated to describe this topic in [2]. However, they only focus on the selecting of important sentences. Other related work, such as [11, 10], have analyzed the life cycles of topics using their defined models. The competitive relations of topics have been studied in their life cycle in [7]. The basic metrics of the complex network are introduced in [1]. In [5], the keywords and the co-occurrence of them are considered together, but it does not introduce the complex network.

Yang [15] tries to model the event evolution relationships between events in an incident. However, it is only keywords that are considered in these models without considering the association rules between keywords. Luo and Xu have considered the association rules of keywords to build ALN of web pages in [9, 14] and some successful application have proposed in [8, 13] based on that. In fact, utilizing the KALN consisting of keywords and their association rules, the semantics of a topic can be well captured in our work.



III. PROBLEM FORMULATION The general problem of the semantic analysis of web  event using its KALN can be formulated as follows.

In this paper, the ultimate goal is to recognize the  different level semantics of a web event. In order to achieve this goal, two important sub-questions need to be answered:  ? How to represent the event at each time stamp with the existing data?

? How to identify the different level semantics of an event at a given time?

Suppose we have a collection of time-indexed web pages about a web event, { }1 2, ,..., nW w w w= , where iw  refers to a web page coming from news sites, blogs or forums. Then, we give some basic definitions as follows:  DEFINITION 1 (Keyword level Association Link Network) A KALN consists of keywords and the association rules of keywords, which can be defined as  { }, ,,t k t r tKALN S S=  (1) where ,k tS  is the keyword set and ,r tS  is the rules set at a given time t  which are all extracted from the web pages of events.

DEFINITION 2 (Web Event) A web event is defined as a time series of KALNs,   1 2 , ,...,  nt t t WE KALN KALN KALN=< >  (2)  where it  KALN is a KALN at given time it .

According to the above definitions, we can represent a  web event as time series KALNs based on the original web pages. Meanwhile, the semantics of these web pages is preserved more than the situation of only considering keywords because not only the keywords but also the relations of keywords are considered here. Finally, the different level semantics of KALN at a given time should be identified.



IV. ORIGINAL KALN ANALYSIS Before the study of web event, it would be necessary to  have a deep understanding of KALN at first. A KALN is the semantic description of an event?s status at a given time, which is composed of keywords and association rules of them. Some other models or methods use the distribution of keywords in the data set. In fact, not only the keywords but also the relations of them should be considered in describing the event, because they are both basic semantic elements of an event and almost play the same important role at the semantic analysis of web events.

A. Original KALN Construction Given a collection of web pages about an event at a given  time t , by utilizing some existing keyword extraction methods (i.e. tf-idf (Term Frequency and Inverse Document Frequency)), we can get the node set of KALN from this data set. As we all know, there are plenty of keyword extraction algorithms, such as SNR (Signal-Noise Ratio), MI (Mutual Information) and 2?  based method. Once the keywords are confirmed, next step is to extract the association rules of them. There are also many works on that.

Since they are not the main concern of this paper, here we just select tf-idf to get keywords and Apriori algorithm to get the association rules.

Apparently, the more precise the keyword and association rule extraction algorithms are, the better the event is described and the variation of KALN is more close to the evolution of an event.

B. Using Entropy to Measure KALN The entropy has been used in measuring the stability of a  system. Here, we look upon the KALN as a system constructed by keywords with different properties. Actually, a keyword in KALN has many properties, such as term frequency (TF), document frequency (DF) and so on. We simply select DF as the unique property of keywords.

Therefore, the system?s uncertainty, namely KALN stability, is determined by the DF distribution of keywords.

In a KALN, there are plenty of keywords with different power in describing an event. At the same time, the evolution process of them must have their own properties, and the variation of the sub-KALN, which is composed by a category of keywords, must be different. For example, in the     event ?Japan earthquake?, the word ?earthquake? exists from beginning to the end. On the contrary, the word ?rescue? only exists for a period of time.

For the sake of measuring the KALN stability and distinguishing different types of keywords, we introduce the information entropy. Our KALN entropy definition is given as follows: DEFINITION 3 (KALN Entropy) The KALN Entropy is the measurement of KALN system?s uncertainty.

( )   ( )  log  ( ) ( )  keywordnum K ALN  KALN j j j  j k keyw ords K ALN  H p p  p D f j D f k =  ?  = ?  =  ?  ?  ? (3)  where KALNH  is the entropy value of KALN, ( )keywordnum KALN  is the keyword number of KALN,  ( )Df j  is DF of keyword j in KALN and jp  is the proportion of keyword j?s DF to the sum of all keywords? DF in the KALN.

Then, we make a thorough study about (3) of which three characteristics are discussed as follows,  CHARACTERISTIC 1 KALN Entropy increases with keyword number.

For logj jp p? ?  is a positive numerical value, KALNH is always a positive numerical value too. So, the entropy value increases with the number of keywords in KALN. That means the more keywords a KALN has, the less the stability that KALN has. One way of explaining this is that with more keywords, there is tending to be more semantics hidden in KALN, like subtopics. To a web event, that means a lot of aspects have been discussed. Therefore, the system?s stability is decreased.

CHARACTERISTIC 2 KALN Entropy is sensitive to the keywords DF distribution.

The jp  actually reflects the keywords DF distribution, which contains every word?s important degree compared with other words. Here, this important degree means the contribution of each keyword to the entire semantics of a web event and the power to describe or dominate a web event. When each word has equal important degree, the final entropy value reaches the maximum which means the system has the maximal uncertainty. In other words, the bigger the difference between the important degrees of keywords in a KALN is, the less the stability that KALN has. The explanation is that the main content of this event will be fixed, while a web event has one or a finite number of dominant keywords. Instead, while all the keywords have equal status, there is no predominant theme and ?everything? in this KALN could be the main content of this event. So, the stability of the KALN is bad. For example, suppose a KALN has only two keywords, Ka and Kb. And the DF ratio is ?9:1?.

It is clearly shown that this event is mainly talking about Ka.

So the semantics of this KALN is stable and the stability of  this KALN is well. On the contrary, if the DF ratio is ?5:5?.

we will not be sure about what this event is talking about.

CHARACTERISTIC 3 KALN Entropy will reach a stable value with the adding of new keywords in descending order of DF.

How many and which keywords can approximately describe a KALN or the information of a web event in one day? If the order of adding keywords is fixed as descending, it can be observed that the KALN entropy will get close to a stable value. It means that the influence of the new adding keywords is too small to have impact on the stability of the former keywords. So, a proper number of keywords can be selected to represent this web event.

The above section has discussed how to measure the stability of a KALN using entropy. Next, we turn to another objective in this section: the use of this in identifying the different types of semantics in a KALN based on information entropy.

C. KALN?s Entropy Computation In order to distinguish different impacts on the KALN?s  entropy by different keywords, we compute a series of Entropies of KALNs which contain different number of keywords. The procedure is described as follows:  Step 1 Original KeywordSet is consisted of all the keywords in a KALN;  Step 2 The KALN is considered as a system constructed by one keyword with maximize DF. Remove this keyword from KeywordSet. Get the first Entropy  0H by (3); Step 3 Select the keyword with maximize DF in the  KeywordSet to add to this system. Remove this keyword from KeywordSet. Compute the new Entropy iH ;  Step 4 Do Step3 until KeywordSet is empty. Finally, we get 0 1, ,..., nH H H< > .

It is obvious that we have added keyword to the system one by one in the descending order of DF. The advantage of this order is that the final entropy value curve can be relative smooth compared with randomly adding keywords.

Figure 2. The entropy values with the variation of keyword set. The new  keyword is added into the keyword set in the order of DF descent. The x-axis is the keyword number and the y-axis is the entropy value. (Web  event: Japan earthquake Time: May 9, 2011)             1 24 47 70 93 11                        E nt  ro py  V al  ue  Keyword ID  Entropy Value (H) Curve     The reason why we construct this series of entropies is that the difference of two consecutive entropy values in the series can show the impact on the former system by the new adding keyword. Apparently, the bigger the difference is, the bigger impact from the new adding keyword is and the more powerful this keyword can characterize this event at the given time. As shown in Fig. 2, the shape of entropy value curve, which is strictly ascending and ascending rate continually becomes small, well match the properties of the KALN entropy.



V. SEMANTIC ANALYSIS OF HIERARCHICAL KALN In this section, we present how to use the entropy value  curve to split original KALN for answering the second sub-problem proposed in Section 3, which is to identify the hierarchical property of KALN.

A. Disscusiton on the Hierarchical Property of KALN There are two kinds of situations to influence the stability  of KALN system. First, while the number of keywords is fixed, the change of DF?s ratio can lead to the change of stability of KALN system as talked in DEFINITION 3.

Second, while the keywords? DFs in existing KALN system are fixed, the new adding keywords can also lead to the change. Actually, the second situation also satisfies the DEFINITION 3, because the new KALN system?s DF ratio relative to former system also has some change after adding new keywords. Next, we focus on the second situation.

As the procedure of entropy computation discussed above in Fig. 2, the difference of two points? values on the entropy curve reflects the importance degree of the latter keyword relative to the former keyword set. The bigger curvature of a point is, the smaller contribution the keyword added at this point makes to the former keyword set and the more stable the former system is. An explanation is that if the characteristic reflected by the new adding keyword has a little impact on the uncertainty of the web event, this characteristic or this keyword can be neglected. During the recursively splitting, it can be found that different impacts on the different granularity of KALN systems can be made by the same keyword. The reason for this phenomenon is that the KALN system has the hierarchical property. The low level keyword may have big impact on the low level KALN system, but it may have small impact on the high level KALN system at the same time. For example, in the event ?Japan Earthquake? the keyword ?earthquake? belongs to high level KALN and the keyword ?evacuate? belongs to low level KALN. The ?evacuate? has big impact on the sub event ?People and Corporation Evacuation? and has small impact on the whole event ?Japan Earthquake?.

In order to identify this hierarchical property of KALN, the property of entropy value curve is analyzed. Here, we use the curvature of a point on the curve to denote the influence degree of the keyword added at this point. In mathematics, curvature of plane curve reflects the bend sharpness of a curve. To the entropy value curve, that means how much contribution to characterize this event by the new adding keyword. The bigger curvature of a point is, the smaller contribution the keyword added at this point makes.

B. Algorithm to Compute the Curvature Due to the complexity and the time consuming of the  classical method (curve fitting and compute second-order derivative) used to get the curvature of plane curve, below we give an approximate method.

For example in Fig. 3, suppose we want to get the curvature of point A in this curve. Without curve fitting and computing second-order derivative, we can simply use the angle B A? ??  as the curvature of point A, which is formed by two tangent lines at the point A and its former point B. It is defined as follows:  Curv BA A? ?= ? (4)  where ACurv  is curvature of point A and A? , B?  are the angles formed by tangent lines of point A and point B with x axis respectively.

It would be easy to obtain A?  of point A if the slope of tangent line of point A is get. So, our goal here is to get the slope of each point without curve fitting. As shown in Fig. 3, the slopes of secant line BA and AC are:  ( ) ( )BA B A B AS y y x x= ? ?               (5) and  ( ) ( )AC A C A CS y y x x= ? ?              (6) where ix  and iy  are the coordinates of point i .

Along with the curve, the tangent line of point A actually is the limit when secant lines BA and AC tend to coincide.

Under the circumstance of limited points around A (without curve fitting) of real data, it is reasonable to use the   Figure 3. The example of computing the curvature of point A on the entropy curve. The x-axis is the keyword set, and each point represents a keyword in this set. The y-axis is the entropy value corresponding to the  keyword.

summation of two slopes, which belong to the two points nearest to point A, as the slope of point A as,  ( )( ) ( ) ( ) ( )( )  1 2A BA AC  C A C A B A  S S S  y y y y y y  ? ? ?  ? = + ?? ?  = ? ? + ???  ? ?   (7)  where AS  is the slope of A and ? is the mixing weight to reflect the distances between point A and points B,C. The more a point is close to point A, the more the slope of that point is close to the slope of point A.

Finally, we can get A?  as:  ( )arctan  ( ) ( )1arctan  ( ) ( )  ( )( ) arctan  ( ) ,  ( )( ) ( )  A A  A CB A  B A B A A C  A C B A  A C B A A C  B A A C  B C  A C B A  B A A C  B C  S  y yy y x x y y y y  y y y y x x y y y y  y y y y y y  x x x x fixedtimespan y y y y  y y  ? =  ? ? ??? ?   ? ? + ?  =  ? ?  +   ? ? + ?? ?? ? ? ?? ?  ? ?? ? ? = ? =  ? ? ?  ?  ?  ?  ?  (8)  Considering our goal which is to distinguish the characterizing power of different keywords, the A?  is only used to compare with other points. Additionally, the function arctan(x) is a monotonic function. So, we could only use the approximate value in (8).

C. Hierarchical KALN Construction According to the different curvatures of different points,  the original keyword set can be divided into two parts with the boundary of average value of curvatures of all keywords.

As shown in Fig. 4, we can get a binary tree by dividing keyword set recursively, in which nodes are keyword sets and root node is the original keyword set. Through this tree, we have a new and deep understanding of the KALN and the event at this given time. Every node?s left child node is the core keywords of this node and could well characterize this node. Herein, we just split the original keyword set into three layers, as shown in the Fig. 5, which are corresponding to the three nodes marked in Fig. 4.

At first, we could get the two points of division:  ( )  ( )  ( )  ( )  i i KeywordSet KALN  p  i i KeywordSet KALN  p  curv curv  NumofKeywordSet KALN curv  curv NumofKeywordSet KALN  ?  ??  ? ? =?? ? ? ? = ? ??  ?  ?    (9)  where 1pcurv  is the first division point and the original keyword set KALN  is split at this point. The Theme keyword set is got from this splitting. And The KALN ?  is the left part, which is split at the second division point  2pcurv . The Backbone keyword set and Tidbit keyword set are formed through this splitting.

Then, we give each layer?s definition as follows, DEFINITION 4  Theme Layer Network (Top Layer)  { }1:ThemeLN i i pC keyword curv curv= >     (10) ThemeLNThemeLN KALN C= ?         (11)   Figure 5. The new identified three layer network from the orignial  KALN. The left part graph is original KALN. The right part three graphs are Theme Layer Network, Backbone Layer Network and Tidbit Layer  Network from top to bottom. (Web event: Japan earthquake Time: May 9, 2011)   Figure 4. The binary tree representation of a web event. The root of this tree is the original keyword set of a web event and the left child of it is the core set of root and the right child is the left set. The marked three nodes in  this tree is selected to represent the web events here.

The theme layer network is comprised of keywords, which satisfy the condition that curv  is bigger than 1pcurv , and their association rules between them. This layer network is the core of the original network. It expresses what this KALN or this event is talking about and has a little variation with the time.

DEFINITION 5  Backbone Layer Network (Middle Layer)  { }1 2:BackboneLN i p i pC keyword curv curv curv= > >  (12) BackboneLNBackboneLN KALN C= ?       (13)  The backbone layer network is comprised of keywords, which satisfy the condition that curv  is smaller than  1pcurv and bigger than 2pcurv , and their association rules between them. This layer network is the backbone of the original network. It gives more details than the Theme Layer Network and shows main content of this event. As time goes by, it has phase variation.

DEFINITION 6  Tidbit Layer Network (Bottom Layer)  { }2:TidbitLN i i pC keyword curv curv= <       (14) TidbitLNTidbitLN KALN C= ?          (15)  The theme layer network is comprised of keywords, which satisfy the condition that curv  is smaller than 2pcurv , and their association rules between them. This layer network is the tidbit of the original network. It gives details of all aspects of this event and is the most sensitive to time in three layers.

DEFINITION 7  Hierarchical Keyword level Association Link Network (Hierarchical KALN)  { }, ,HierarchicalKALN ThemeLN BackboeLN TidbitLN=  (16) The Hierachical KALN is consisted of ThemeLN, BackboneLN and TidbitLN, each of which reflects a semantic level of Hierarchical KALN.

In our tests, we found that the keyword and arc numbers of each layer network are approximately one order smaller than its lower layer?s, as Table I shows. Of course, it depends  on the DF distribution of keywords. However, the density remarkably decreases from the top layer to the bottom layer.

The splitting of small number of keywords leads to the big decrease of arcs, which expresses that different keywords have different characters and small number of nodes has big number of arcs. The Diameter and Mean Distance of Theme layer network are 2 and 1.03. That means the distance between two nodes/keywords is smaller than 2. It is close to a complete graph and the new adding keywords almost needs to link to every node/keyword of old network. This condition is so rigid that the theme layer KALN?s structure is the most stable. So this layer KALN reflects the stable semantics. On the contrary, the Density and the Diameter of Tidbit Layer KALN are 0.016 and 8 respectively, which means this layer network is a sparse graph. It is not sensitive to lose a node or add a new node. So this layer KALN reflects the unstable semantics.

So far, 1) we have a deep understanding of a KALN, viewed as a tree, and split it into three layer networks. 2) Meanwhile, through the recursively splitting the core set of original keyword set and terminating at a desired precision, the most characterizing keywords can be identified by our algorithm.



VI. EXPRIMENTS AND DISSCUSSIONS  A. Data Preparation In this section, we describe the dataset in our experiments.

The Chinese web pages of Libya War are collected from Feb, 22 2011 to Apr, 22 2011 in the way of using search engines, including www.Google.com.hk and www.Baidu.com. By the way, the algorithm proposed in this paper can handle Chinese and English web pages either. Finally, 11868 web pages are downloaded with time stamps, which may come from different web sites. However, the number of search engines results is huge. It is hard and unnecessary to get all these web pages. We just select the top 500 web pages to be the sample and we suggest that the main keywords of the web event at the given time have been included by the selected web pages because of the relevance ranking of search engines? results.

B. Experiments on Libya War In order to show the evaluation methods proposed in  Section 4,5 and 6, some important days are selected to build hierarchical KALN for comparing with the important things happened in that day. So, the chronicle of Libya war is list in Table II and the hierarchical analysis results which are generated by our methods are shown in Table III and Table IV.

Due to the low accuracy of the algorithm of extracting the main text of web pages, which is not main concern of this paper, there are some noise words in each layer KALN. As space is limited, the top 10 keywords of each layer KALN are list in Table IV to reflect three levels semantics of the web event.

TABLE I.  COMPLEX NETWORK PARAMATERS OF THREE LAYER NETWORKS ( WEB EVENT : JAPAN EARTHQUAKE  TIME : MAY 9, 2011 )  Parameters KALN  Theme Layer Backbone Layer Tidbit Layer  number of nodes 12 48 584  number of arcs 128 986 5346  Density 0.97 0.437 0.016  AverageDegree 10.667 20.542 9.154 ClusteringCoeffic  ient 0.973 0.756 0.825  MeanDistance 1.03 1.661 3.325  Diameter 2 4 8     TABLE II.  THE CHRONICLE OF LIBYA WAR ( FROM NEWS WEBSITES, SUCH AS REUTERS.COM, CHINADAILY.COM)  Time point (day) Some import things happened in that day  Feb. 26  2011 The Council imposed an arms embargo against Libya, Gaddafi to freeze their overseas assets abroad.

Mar. 1  2011 United Nations condemned by the UN General Assembly plenary meeting by Botswana, Gabon, Jordan and other countries asked about the suspension of Libya's membership in the Human Rights Council draft resolution.

Mar. 5  2011 Gaddafi elite troops fighting brigade of the oil city of Khamis zawyet stormed the rebels back to be outdone, the two sides at war six hours later, the Mediterranean Sea re-back the petrochemical industry in Hong Kong Las Lanu husband refineries.

Mar. 19  2011 The first air raids Libya, France war, the U.S. Navy in the middle of the night, through its deployment of more ships in the Mediterranean, northern air defense systems to Libya launched a missile attack, the British Royal Air Force sent fighter planes involved in the subsequent air strikes.

Apr. 10  2011 Including South African President Zuma made four African countries, including Libya, problem-solving roadmap, Gaddafi agreed to accept the road map. But Libya said the day after the opposition refused to accept the road map.

TABLE III.  THE EXPERIMENT RESULT OF FIVE DAYS CORRESPONDING TOTHE CHRONICLE OF LIBYA WAR  Time point (day) Keyword Number Keyword Number of  Theme LN Keyword Number of  Backbone LN Keyword Number of  Tidbit LN Feb. 26  2011 1873 18 107 1748  Mar. 1  2011 2968 22 116 2830  Mar. 5  2011 1988 14 106 1868  Mar. 19  2011 4910 24 156 4730  Apr. 10  2011 3737 23 133 3581  TABLE IV.  THE HIERARCHICAL SEMANTIC OF EACH DAY ( DUE TO OUR DATA ARE CHINESE WEB PAGES, THE CORRESPONDING ENGLISH WORDS ARE GIVEN TO ASSIST READING)  Time point (day)  Theme LN Backbone LN Tidbit LN  Feb.

(Libya) (international) (civil war) (political) (state)  (crude oil) (situation) (oil) (America) (global)  (plan) (break out) (datum) (foreign exchange) (maintain)  (scope) (organization) (supply) (level) (trend)  (strategy) (Iran) (technique) (political situation) (intervene)  (deposit) (activity) (save) (measure) (relationship)  Mar.

(Libya) (international) (civil war) ( global) (country)  (America) (state) (break out) (situation) (Middle East)  ( organization) ( policy) (development) (area) ( crisis)  (lead to) (price) (situation) (oil) (media)  (Europe) (construct) (background) (plate) (import)  (transaction) (part) (financing) (announce) (technology)  Mar.

(Libya) (civil war) (international) (state) (America)  ( opposition) (government) (world) (situation) (oil)  ( policy) ( military) (confirm) (protect) (break out)  (area) (Gaddafi)  ( depravation) (publish) (standpoint)  (increase) (unemployment rate) (position) (life) ( authorize)  (Russia) (reveal) (spread) (foreign exchange) (sovereignty)  Mar.

(Libya) (civil war) (war) (America) (China)  (international) (government) (country) (military) (situation)  (launch) (Government troop) (the U.N.)  (air defense) (part)  (force) (history) (political) (power) (world)  (consultant) (space) (avoid) (air force) (trend)  (weapon) (cost) (demand) (interview) (televisionstation)  Apr.

(Libya) (government)  (opposition) (military) (warplane)  (international) (arms)  (Benghazi) (statement) (action)  (resolution) ( intercept)  (Tripoli) (country) (protect)  (army) (support) (violate) (president) (bomb)  (the masses) (reveal) (show) (permit) (deadlock)  ( inspection) (forced landing) (be free from) (minister) (function)

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE STUDY In this paper, we have proposed a method to build  temporal KALNs of web events which are used to assist people to identify the hierarchical semantics of web events.

Our contributions are as follows, (1) The original KALN has been constructed and is  considered as a new semantic representation of web events to capture the semantics of web events at a given time.

(2) Information entropy has been introduced to measure the KALN stability, which is a deep understanding of corresponding web event?s stability.

(3) Based on the series of entropy values, the Hierarchical KALN, composed of ThemeLN, BackboneLN and TidbitLN, has been built to reflect different level semantics of the web events, including stable semantics, sub-stable semantics and unstable semantics. That enables people to grasp the different level semantics of web events and distinguish the different weights of different characteristics which are represented by keywords.

Through the experiments, it is demonstrated that our work can well describe the semantics of web events.

There are several interesting further research points. First, the dynamics between two consecutive time stamps could be measured through the complex network metrics. Second, the patterns of different web events must be different, which can be mined based on our existing work. Finally, we can do the most challenging prediction work. With the work of semantic analyzing and tracking on a web event, the maximum possible status of this event could be forecasted.

