Research on Ideological and Political Education  based on Family & Friendship in University

Abstract? This paper studies the application of family and friendship education carried out in scattered learning position.

The role of teacher and communication are studied based on participant ideological and political education students in a family and friendship class. The result of study demonstrated the different effects of teacher?s teaching effectiveness such as expending, rhetorical and provocative. Further, teach in family and friendship education class lacks communication often fails and proper system back-channel cues as a teaching result feedback. The study result also shows that there is balance lack between the students and teacher in the distribution of understand, eventually leading to interaction is in one-way.

Normally, the students become an recipients in class reacting against lack feedback. Statement and question posed by teacher is designed to break the barriers through mediating technology. Also Both sides of teacher and student are frequently impaired by practice , misunderstand is described as a education space connected by the communication technology.

Keywords-adult; continuing education;distanse education; status;prospect

I. INTRODUCTION (HEADING 1) In recently, family and friendship education has been  developed in the some famous university in china to promote ideological and political education in small cities. This education method to enrich sides both teacher and student in the classroom. The family and friendship classroom is a Audio-visual environment in which modern communication technology. The communication technology between human actor and physical settings is a interplay part of practice. The materiality of workplaces and schools by Jilin university(2003) and the impact of actor in family and friendship education by beihua university(2010). This paper pays close attention to how the different forms of communicate between students, teacher and technicians in family and friendship education place.

The significance and individual of group behavior to judge the meaning of faces has been studied by foreign scholars in everyday life. Perspective views interaction as performance that is shaped by environment and audience and staged to give others in impressions which are constant with hoped goals of the actor. This can be considered as ?real teaching practices? would have established a different range  of constructions of interaction and enlarged the ways actors influence themselves in their exchange with others. Gofman proposed an actor expects to present himself effectively to maximum the success presentation. Interactive teamwork with students and teachers makes an important chance to the individual?s evaluation as well as the evaluation of a team or group. It can be considered that successful exchange in family and friendship education is dependent on the bilateral definition of the station as a teaching work holding the premises face-to-face exchange origination from common education.



II. CALSS OBSERVATION The research is based on observations of participant  guided by an study strategy in which the studier is identifiable Atkinson & Hammersley 2001 and by gentle participation where the studier does not participate in the class activities actively(W J. walt & W J. walt 2003).

The research covers both qualitative and quantitative outcomes. The qualitative aspect of communication accounts on the character of utterances and the allocation of utterances while the quantitative results focus for the frequency made in classroom. The research comprises forty seven different occasions made between 2002 and 2004 at four different local learning classroom. The data were collected at two location. The most important observation lasted for approximately eight hour and was transcribe similar and recorded to the procedure of convenience interviews.

The observation data used in the research concern the different education forms both common education and family and friendship education sites. The remote class site is the physical site of local education center(ideological and political education locality). In the remote education site, data were watched directly on comprise and spot both the student?s face-to-face educate and the interaction with the students and teacher at the classroom. Datum mining plays a more important role in the intelligent study making. The aim of datum mining is to refine some important information that is mixed in the already exists databases. Classification is a method of datum analysis that is used to refine model for distinguishing important datum or predicting the data trends.

There are a lot of classification techniques to predict the trends of datum. Associative neural network that uses association rule mining among the refine rule process has   ___________________________________     shown powerful advantage than many other classification ways. The aim of association rules is to refine frequent patterns, interesting correlations, casual construction or associations in sets of among the transaction datum. In this paper, the technique for neural classification using ANN system had been studied. The origin site is the site where the students(In most cases is teachers) are located during classroom. family and friendship process such as fig.1.

teacher Admission  School education  Ideological and Political Education  Professional learning  Graduate education  Employment  family and friendship  student  Figure 1. The observation process of family and friendship education  Datum from the origin location was recorded from the internet. The observational transmission altered between all observations and different remote site made on inspection concerned participant engaged in ideological and political education.



III. INTERACTION IN THE FAMILY AND FRIENDSHIP EDUCATION CLASSROOM  The observation datum shows that there are double main styles of communication in family and friendship education classrooms that needed to study. Non-verbal and verbal communication. The spoken communication language involves expresses made in site addressing teachers, students or technicians. Further, the observation results show that there are three main styles of expresses significant for practice of family and friendship education. Statements, questions and storytelling.

The observation data used in the research concern the different education forms both common education and family and friendship education sites. The remote class site is the physical site of local education center(ideological and political education locality). Datum mining plays a more important role in the intelligent study making. The aim of datum mining is to refine some important information that is mixed in the already exists databases. classification is a method of datum analysis that is used to refine model for distinguishing important datum or predicting the data trends.

There are a lot of classification techniques to predict the trends of datum. Associative neural network that uses association rule mining among the refine rule process has shown powerful advantage than many other classification  ways. The aim of association rules is to refine frequent patterns, interesting correlations, casual construction or associations in sets of among the transaction datum. In this paper, the technique for neural classification using observation system had been studied.

In the remote education site, data were watched directly on comprise and spot both the student?s face-to-face educate and the interaction with the students and teacher at the classroom. Interaction in the family and friendship education classroom process such as Fig.2.

Observation student  Information collection  Education method  three: students teachers method  Teaching results  statistics  evaluation  N  Y  Figure 2. Interaction in the family and friendship education classroom process  The research also demonstrates that ?small talk? and storytelling are important for communication in class.

Storytelling refers to the anecdotes told by the teacher or by the students during On-site teaching. Anecdotes and storytelling do not involve necessarily questions, although some kind of response is found from the audience.

Correspondence is the Complementary approaches of the technicians and teachers. Correspondence takes place mainly inside the teamwork of the remote site and may involve both statements and questions.

The research also demonstrates that ?small talk? and storytelling are important for communication in class.

Storytelling refers to the anecdotes told by the teacher or by the students during On-site teaching. Anecdotes and storytelling do not involve necessarily questions, although    some kind of response is found from the audience.

Correspondence is the Complementary approaches of the technicians and teachers. Correspondence takes place mainly inside the teamwork of the remote site and may involve both statements and questions. From education?s perspective questions, directed at students usually consider the matter.

Teachers may propose questions to students for any reasons; to investigate an interesting topic, to the find students? knowledge or to follow up learned assignments and lectures.

Questions could also consider practice or and theory result in solving problems, factual answers or reasoned ideas or develop imaginative.

Based on the students? exposed questions, concerning the results are rarely asked of the peers or teacher during the family and friendship education class. The most frequent concerning results of family and friendship education remote sites at learning classroom in China, questions proposed by students instead consider administrative or common matters.

For example, the students want to think forms of examination, outlines for submitting written works or the time and date of future tasks. The difference in the common of the questions is important to family and friendship education. The teacher focuses on the detail while student is engaged in rules, forms and settings.



IV. STATEMENTS AND QUESTIONS The teacher is an executor who explains informs, and  describes the state of knowledge, opinion and circumstance to the students. As mentioned, a important amount of the teachers? teaching is based on questions. All data show that the questions asked in family and friendship education class have significant functions. The function follow as:  ? expanding function r ? hetorical function ? management function ? provocative function Other questions proposed in the classroom are intended  to dialogue. Datum mining plays a more important role in the intelligent study making. The aim of datum mining is to refine some important information that is mixed in the already exists databases. Classification is a method of datum analysis that is used to refine model for distinguishing important datum or predicting the data trends. There are a lot of classification techniques to predict the trends of datum.

Associative neural network that uses association rule mining among the refine rule process has shown powerful advantage than many other classification ways. The aim of association rules is to refine frequent patterns, interesting correlations, casual construction or associations in sets of among the transaction datum. The most frequent concerning results of family and friendship education remote sites at learning classroom in China, questions proposed by students instead consider administrative or common matters. For example, the students want to think forms of examination, outlines for submitting written works or the time and date of future tasks.

In this paper, the technique for neural classification using ANN system had been studied. For example, when the students have been asked ?is there anything else you are thinking about? or students to give their points of view as in  the instance below. The statements and questions process such as Fig.3.

Teacher:Student A can you comment on the election in China?

Teacher:Does anyone else have something to add?

Teacher:No,he had raped and humiliated and forced two women into prostitution.Isn?t it good that he was given the maximum punishment?

Teacher: We?ll start in the municipality of student with topics of the day.Is there anything you?d like to tell us?

Teacher: Hate crimes have increased in the Chinese society. Such crimes are directed at homosexuals, but also religious groups such as Tibet and Xinjiang.

These crimes have been increased in few years.

Teacher:(?)by now there is plenty written here [whiteboard], which has to be proved right? And I can?t hear any of you protesting loudly.

Student: I don?t think this is correct at all. Do you want me to explain why?

Teacher: Yes, please.

Teacher: Do you think the form is demanding nowadays, to write neatly and correctly?

Student: Yes.

Teacher: Yes, isn?t it.

Teacher: What is a society?

Student: We are the society?

Teacher: Yes, aren?t we?

Figure 3. statements and questions process  Based on the students? exposed questions, concerning the results are rarely asked of the peers or teacher during the family and friendship education class. The most frequent concerning results of family and friendship education remote sites at learning classroom in China, questions proposed by students instead consider administrative or common matters.

For example, the students want to think forms of examination, outlines for submitting written works or the time and date of future tasks. The difference in the common of the questions is important to family and friendship    education. The teacher focuses on the detail while student is engaged in rules, forms and settings. such as Tab.1  TABLE I. DISTRIBUTION OF UTTERANCES IN FAMILY AND FRIENDSHIP EDUCATION CLASS  University college(20 observational occasions)  -remote site  -origin classroom  - distribution oriented communication  - multi- between teacher and students  Adult education(18 observational occasions)  -remote site  -origin classroom  - distribution oriented communication  - multi-between teacher and students

V. CONCLUSION The study results shows that some achievements take on  a character that may be important for family and friendship education.

It is need a balanced distribution of communication between the students and the teacher where teachers are responsible for utterances.

it can be discussed that the triadic utterance pattern is a way of make the teacher to play the important role in the content and structure of the lesson.

The family and friendship education system seems to effective fundamental education requirements.

family and friendship education is a complex teaching situation that government must add the complexity of Financial support and mediating technology.

