Discovering Medical Association Rules from Medical Datasets

Abstract-- In this paper, we aim to discover interesting medical association rules from medical datasets for prediction purposes. This medical dataset is a data set of patients? records, where each record is a combination of both textual information (personal and medical) and extracted image features for the given patient. We provide an association rule mining system that discovers constrained association rules in medical records that includes numeric, categorical and image features.

Keywords- data mining; association rules; constraints; medical datasets

I. INTRODUCTION In the last decade, with the continuous growth  of the digital collections techniques, data mining has become a very important research field, where efficient knowledge discovery techniques deal with large amounts of data. Data mining techniques, also known as Knowledge Discovery in Databases, can be used in various domains such as market basket analysis, medical application, business management, space exploration, and financial data analysis [6].

Association rule mining, classification and clustering are the main techniques used in data mining, Association rule analysis is the task of discovering association rules that frequently occur together in a given data set. Classification is the process of finding a set of patterns that can distinguish among different classes in a data set for the purpose of using such knowledge to predict class labels for new incoming objects. Clustering is grouping some points in some space into a small number of clusters, each cluster consisting of points that are similar. Such techniques could be utilized to improve the efficiency of processes in the medical field which is considered as one of richest sources of knowledge.

In the medical field, building computer-aided systems to assist medical staff in medical care facilities is becoming of high importance and priority for many researchers. Medical databases have accumulated quantities of information of patients and their medical conditions. The relationships and patterns within this data could provide new medical knowledge. Data mining techniques could be used to search for potential useful relationships in large medical databases [8].

The use of data mining techniques in the medical domain has many challenges, the medical  data sets usually are very large, complex, heterogeneous, hierarchical and vary in quality [9].

The purpose of this research is to illustrate how medical database information can be mined for knowledge discovery. The eventual goal of this knowledge discovery effort is to discover the interesting and concise medical rules for prediction purpose to assist the medical decision makers.

Medical data is generally analyzed with classifier trees, clustering, or regression [4]. In our research, we do not consider target classes, and also we do not have a global understanding of the data set. For those reasons we prefer to use association rule mining because of its combinatorial nature.

We propose a constraints medical data mining system that could be used in solving some medical related problems. Three different medical problems are considered. Those problems are  Problem 1: A medical data set is a set of patients? records, where each record is a combination of categorical and numerical attributes of that patient (textual information and extracted image features). The problem appears in medical data set representation that is not suitable for data mining, Solving this problem could be by preparing these data before the data mining process starts. The Data Preparation process in our system includes the activities:  ? Data cleansing: Only complete and unified data will be mined.

? Data transformation: Since association rule mining algorithms only work with binary variables, we devise a mapping from the data set information to binary data.

Each binary variable is referred to as an ?item?. So we will transform the medical data into a transaction format suitable to discover association rules.

Problem 2: Large search space is needed when applying Association Rule Mining algorithms on medical data sets. The Association Rule Mining algorithm has two main steps:  1. Search for items (attribute values) with frequency exceeds a user-defined threshold (the minimum support). Such sets are referred to as frequent itemsets.

___________________________________    2. Discover all large itemsets (patterns) with frequency exceeds a second user-defined threshold (the minimum confidence).

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In section 2, related work is presented. Data preparation techniques used in preprocessing, and the proposed data mining system specification and algorithm are presented in section 3. Experimental Results are given in section 4 and the paper is concluded in section 5.



II. RELATED WORK Ranjit [9] has discussed the challenges facing  the medical data mining. He focuses on issues, difficulties and discovered rules. Commercial data mining tools such as XLMiner and Knowledge Studio have been used, where different data mining techniques such as Neural Network, Naive Bayes. In Samah [5], the problem of mining interesting association rules from large databases has been investigated. In that work, a hypothesis that the background knowledge provides useful domain information that may help to subjectively evaluate and interpret the extracted rules. Prather, et. al. [8] have described the processes involved in mining a clinical database including data warehousing, data query and cleaning, and data analysis. They illustrate how medical production systems such as the Duke Prenatal Database can be warehoused and mined for knowledge discovery which identify factors to improve the quality and cost effectiveness of prenatal care. In [8] the clinical database are transferred from comprehensive computer-based patient record system (CPRS) into a data warehouse server, then they create the dataset for analysis by extracting and cleaning selected variables, and mining the data using exploratory factor analysis.

Krzysztof J. Cios, et. al. [3] have emphasized on the uniqueness of medical data mining. They discuss ethical, security and legal aspects of medical data mining. They conclude that data from medical sources are voluminous, heterogeneous, different in structure or quality. They suggest that the methods of medical data mining should address the heterogeneity of data sources, data structures, and the pervasiveness of missing values for both technical and social reasons. Adepele Williams [10] has developed an efficient association-rule mining algorithm called the Partitioned FP-growth (PFP- growth). The algorithm is suitable for large data sets with long patterns. It involves the use of parallel processing techniques to the FP-Growth algorithm to reduce the processing bottleneck that arises when extremely large data sets are mined sequentially.

The used test data is extracted from medical images (mammograms) which is a typical example of such large data sets. The experimental results have shown that the PFP-growth algorithm improves the mining efficiency of the FP-growth algorithm speed up by  23.20% to 45.07%. The results are a set of association rules that provide a framework for an image classifier. In classifying new images with the resulting image classifier, it is done with a detection accuracy of approximately 80.

Maria, et. al. [6] have proposed a new classification method that uses association rule mining to discover interesting patterns in data that can be further used in building a classifier. Antonie, et. al. [2] have investigated the use of different data mining techniques. Neural networks and association rule mining are used on medical images (digital mammograms) for anomaly detection and classification. The same data set is mined using both the Apriori association rule algorithm and artificial neural networks. The results show that the two approaches have performed well, and the classification accuracy has reached more than 70% for both techniques. Generating association rules is much faster than training a neural network.

Ordonez, et. al. [7] have used constraint Association Rules in medical domain to reduce the number of discovered patterns and to provide a greedy algorithm to compute rule covers. Those rules are summarized to get a concise set of rules. They focused on using association rules for predicting combinations of several target attributes. The significance of association rules is evaluated by using support, confidence and lift. The proposed constraints include maximum association size, an attribute grouping constraint, and an antecedent/consequent rule filtering constraint. They have shown that the problem of mining association rules in a high dimensional data set with numeric and categorical attributes is challenging, due to the large number of patterns rather than data set size. A large number of patterns impacts the running time of the data mining algorithm, making results interpretation difficult. In [5], a simple mapping algorithm to transform medical records to a transaction format has been introduced. The mapping algorithm uniformly treats attributes as numerical or categorical. A mapping table is constructed, and used in mapping attribute values to items.



III. THE PROPOSED MEDICAL ASSOCIATION RULE MINING SYSTEM  The system works with a specific format of metadata to simplify the resulted medical Rules interpretation. For each attribute, the following fields are identified:  ? Attribute ID #, ? Attribute Description (attribute name), ? Attribute Type (categorical or numerical), ? Attribute place in the Rules (antecedent,  consequent, or both of them), ? Attribute Ranges Number which means:    a. The number of discrete values of Categorical Attributes;  b. The number of bins (intervals) for Numerical Attributes  ? The description of each ranges (the range number, the minimum and maximum value of range (for numerical attributes only), and the meaning of the range).

The user must enter the following: ? The Minimum Support.

? The Maximum Association Rule items.

? The Minimum Confidence.

Our system implementation consists of the following:  ? Initial Attribute Selection module that selects the irrelevant attributes manually.

? Preparation module that prepares the medical raw data set by cleaning the selected attributes and transform them to binary format suitable for mining process.

? Mining module that uses FP-Growth algorithm and constraint association rule generation process.

? Summarize module that calculates the Rule Cover.

Our target data set structure stores all patients? information in a single record. Each record is a combination of both textual information (personal and medical) attributes, and image features attributes. The dataset may contain hundreds of attributes, many of which may be irrelevant or redundant to our mining task. Only relevant attributes for the mining task are selected. The mining task discovers those association medical rules that could assist the medical decision makers.

An attribute such as the patient?s name is likely to be irrelevant, unlike attributes such as age or race.

Relevant attributes from the medical data set are selected manually.

The medical dataset used in the system is collected, where cleaning and reduction techniques are applied for each attributes values as follows:  ? If there is a missing value, a global constant value (9999) is used to fill in the missing value: Replace all missing attribute values by the same (9999) value, then identify this item in the mining program as missing value.

? If there is noisy data (outliers), o For categorical attributes: if the  attribute value is not one of the attribute discrete values specified in the metadata, it will be outlier.

o In the Numerical Attributes: we will use a binning technique (bin boundary method) to detect the outliers (out of  bins boundary) in the numerical attributes.

o outlier values are replaced by the number (9999).

Before applying the data mining methodology to extract useful rules from data, we must transform the data into a form that is acceptable to the mining method. The ?flattened table? format is most common and is required for most methods. In the flattened table format, each row represents an instance for training and/or testing a model (often containing relevant data for an individual patient); each column represents the values for a variable across the instances. Due to the characteristics of medical practice and of the data structures required in medical databases, some form of data transformation is invariably necessary to convert data from its original format to a flattened table.

In this work, we have selected constraint based association rule mining, and the frequent pattern growth (FP-Growth) algorithm has been chosen. A new significance measure for association rules called lift (also called interest ) is used. Lift is defined as  lift(X => Y ) = P(Y |X)/P(Y ) = confidence(X => Y )/support(Y ).

Lift measures how much the presence of Y depends on the presence or absence of X, or vice versa. Lift values greater than 1 indicate that the presence of Y depends on the presence of X.

Support, confidence and lift were used as the main filtering parameters in our technique. Support was used to discard low probability patterns. Confidence was used to look for reliable prediction rules. Lift was used to compare similar rules with the same consequent and to select rules with higher predictive value. Confidence, combined with lift, was used to evaluate the significance of each rule. Several problems will appears when trying to discover association rules in a high dimensional data set. For each problem we propose solution that is generally in the form of a constraint.

The Mining algorithm works in two phases:  Phase 1: Find all frequent itemsets (we use the FP- Growth algorithm). By definition, each of these itemsets will occur at least as frequently as a user- specified minimum support count.

Phase 2: Generate strong association rules from the frequent itemsets. By definition, these rules must satisfy minimum support and minimum confidence and minimum lift.

We add the Antecedent/consequent rule filtering constraint in this phase. We will specify a 0 value constraint for the image feature attributes, and 1 value constraints for all other attributes.

If the number of discovered rules is large, even incorporating filtering constraints, interpretation becomes difficult. It is desirable to get a few representative rules so that many rules can be derived from them. We propose to generate a cover of association rules with the same consequent in order to generate a rule summary that can be interpreted by in less time. Given two rules with the same consequent,

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS A Medical data set consist of 80 patients  records with 142 attributes have been chosen. Each record corresponds to the information of one patient.

This profile contains personal information and some image related information (date of study, film type), and the mammograms images features variables (64 Mean, Variance, skewness and kurtosis for each right and left breasts) from the output of the image processing program.

Our system goal is to discover the associations between the 128 mammograms image features and between them and other medical attributes. The medical data set consist of some attributes with no relevant value to the data mining goal. For instance, the file name does not give any medical information for mining. Such selection is applied manually. In  our experiments, 142 attributes have been chosen for the mining. After the initial selection, only 129 attributes have been selected. For space considerations, in Table 1, we only display a sample of such data.

The resulted transactional medical data set is converted into a format where each attribute becomes several binary variables as required by the data mining algorithm. This conversion resulted in 1157 binary variables for the attributes in the database.

If all 129 attributes had been used for the original data mining algorithm, there would have been a huge set of association rules found (approximately 2129). Therefore, we have used the FP-Growth algorithm with the maximum association rule size constraint to reduce those possible associations, and reduce the number of discovered association rules. In our experiments, a 50% Minimum Support and 4 items association rule items as Maximum have been used. The algorithm finding a 26419 huge amount of frequent item sets.

The Resulted number of rules before the rule cover was 4607 and after applying the rule cover summarization the rule was decreased to 4170, which means that 437 rules were deleted. The produced association rules are given in Table 2.

Table 1 A sample of initial attribute selection # Attribute Accepted Reason for rejection  12 LEFT_MLO LINES 4616 PIXELS_PER_LINE 2942 BITS_PER_PIXEL 12 RESOLUTION 50 NON_OVERLAY  No It is relevant to image processing not our mining goal  13 RIGHT_CC LINES 4640 PIXELS_PER_LINE 2982 BITS_PER_PIXEL 12 RESOLUTION 50 NON_OVERLAY  No It is relevant to image processing not our mining goal  14 RIGHT_MLO LINES 4640 PIXELS_PER_LINE 2982 BITS_PER_PIXEL 12 RESOLUTION 50 NON_OVERLAY  No It is relevant to image processing not our mining goal  15 MeanRightbreat1 Yes 16 VarianceRightbreast1 Yes SkewnessRightbreast1 Yes 17 KurtosRightbreast1 Yes 18 MeanRightbreat2 Yes 19 VarianceRightbreast2 Yes 20 SkewnessRightbreast2 Yes 21 KurtosRightbreast2 Yes 22 MeanRightbreat3 Yes 23 VarianceRightbreast3 Yes 24 SkewnessRightbreast3 Yes 25 KurtosRightbreast3 Yes 26 MeanRightbreat4 Yes 27 VarianceRightbreast4 Yes 28 SkewnessRightbreast4 Yes 29 KurtosRightbreast4 Yes    Table 2 Produced Association Rules Association Rules  {KurtosRightbreast9=Averagly Peaked}, {KurtosLeftbreast8=Averagly Peaked}?{KurtosLeftbreast4=Averagly Peaked} {KurtosRightbreast9=Averagly Peaked}, {KurtosLeftbreast1=Averagly Peaked}, {KurtosLeftbreast8=Averagly Peaked} ?{KurtosLeftbreast4=Averagly Peaked} {KurtosRightbreast9=Averagly Peaked}, {KurtosLeftbreast8=Averagly Peaked}, {SkewnessLeftbreast3=Average} ?{KurtosLeftbreast4=Averagly Peaked} {KurtosRightbreast9=Averagly Peaked}, {KurtosLeftbreast5=Averagly Peaked}, {KurtosLeftbreast8=Averagely Peaked} ?{KurtosLeftbreast4=Averagly Peaked} {SkewnessRightbreast3=Average}, {KurtosLeftbreast9=Averagly Peaked}, {KurtosLeftbreast8=Averagely Peaked} ?{KurtosLeftbreast4=Averagly Peaked}

V. CONCLUSIONS  In this work, we have focused on using association rules for predicting combinations of several target attributes. The main reason behind using association rules for predictive purposes is, instead of other data mining techniques, that they are adequate to discover combinatorial patterns that exist in subsets of the data set attributes. In our technique, association rules are filtered using support, confidence and lift. Lift helps selecting rules with high predictive power and is used in conjunction with confidence to evaluate the significance of discovered rules.

In this work, we provide a simple approach for solving the problem of mapping information from categorical and numerical attribute values to binary format. In the experiments done with medical data sets, data sets of patients? records, each record is a combination of textual information and extracted image features. Constraints were shown to significantly reduce the number of discovered rules.

We were able to show interesting association rules predicting with high confidence and high lift. We have used rule covers to summarize rules with a higher number of attributes and higher lift. We have showed some representative rules selected from the rule covers. Our proposed System can be applied in other domains where prediction based on subsets of attributes is required on combinations of several target attributes.

