

Abstract?This paper proposes a human tracking method with a wearable acceleration sensor and networked laser range scanners in an intelligent space. Human walking activities are measured and associated between laser range scanners and acceleration sensor. In this paper, person identification rules between two types of sensors are improved. Especially, similarity calculation using difference of behaviors and optimal parameters is introduced. Optimal parameters are derived from many tracking results obtained with actual system. Some experimental results with optimal parameters show higher performance of target recognition than cases with the conventional parameters.



I. INTRODUCTION ecently, sensor network for configuring intelligent spaces has been actively studied [1][2]. There are various sensors,  such as laser range sensors and cameras installed in the environments or mobile sensors with human in intelligent spaces. Especially, in order to support activities and understand behaviors based on movements of human in the environments, various methods to track the position of human have been proposed. Existing studies can be classified into three types according to properties of sensors.

(1) Vision sensor [3] System with vision sensors can provide not only human position but also appearance and motion of human. However, they are lacking robustness, because false detections frequently occur due to change in lighting conditions or occlusions by obstacles in the environment.

(2) Laser range finders (LRF) [4] LRFs have higher reliability and less noise signal because they are not affected by conditions in the environments. However, scan data obtained from laser range scanner cannot get personal identification. Therefore, when tracking multiple people, ambiguity occurs in identifying targets.

(3) Portable sensors [5] Recently, small devices such as ID tags, acceleration sensors or other sensors have been developed, and they are often installed in mobile phones. Then, humans can easily carry such sensors.

ID information can be easily associated to human based on information from mobile sensors. They are effective to ensure  individual identification. However, position estimation with these mobile sensors is not accurate. In order to accurate position estimation with only mobile sensors, humans have to wear various kinds of sensors [5].

There are several studies as the solutions for obtaining human ID information and accurate positions simultaneously.

Literature [6] shows that ID information ca be obtained and human positions can be estimated accurately by integrating touch sensors or pressure sensors installed on the floor and acceleration sensors. Literature [7] shows person tracking and identification based on similarities between angular velocities obtained from gyro sensor with human and estimated by LRFs installed in the environment. In the literature [8], acceleration sensors and cameras installed in the environment are integrated.

Correlation between movement of human extracted in images captured from vision sensors and acceleration signals from acceleration sensor with human are calculated.

This study introduces a method to accurately achieve human position estimation and identification based on LRF installed in the environment and an acceleration sensor that human is carrying. Fig.1 shows a concept of this study. Especially, improvement of person identification rules and similarity caluculation with optimal parameters are described in this paper. In the proposed method, occurrences of walking behaviors in LRF and acceleration sensor are evaluated. The parameters used for evaluation should be optimal for target association between two types of sensors. In this paper,  Improvement of Person Identification Rules Based on Walking Behavior Association between  Wearable Acceleration Sensors and Intelligent Space  Tomoyasu Takigawa, Kazuyuki Morioka Dept. of Electrical Engineering, School of Science and Technology,  Meiji University, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, 214-8571, Japan  Email: ce01052@meiji.ac.jp, morioka@isc.meiji.ac.jp  R  Fig.1 Concept f the study  - 218 - SI International 2011    optimal parameters are derived from actual tracking results.

Then, as for the experiments using the optimal parameter and improved identification rules, similaritiy changes and target recognition results are shown.



II. TRACKINGBASEDON FUSIONOFNETWORKED LASER RANGE SCANNER AND ACCELERATION SENSOR  In this study, human walking behaviors are detected in networked laser range scanners in the intelligent space and an acceleration sensor with human respectively. Walking behaviors of two types of sensors are associated according to steps of walking.

2.1 Walking detection using laser range scanners First, moving objects are extracted by networked laser range sensors installed in the intelligent space calculating difference between current range data and background range data. Then, the position information of only moving objects are detected.

Second, hierarchical clustering is applied to the extracted range data. After that, each moving object can be separated and tracked. Fig.2 shows detection and tracking of the human with two legs. If movements of detected human are bigger than threshold amount during a given period, the human is detected as ?walking?. Details of detecting and tracking human are shown in [9].

2.2 Walking detection using am acceleration sensor First, the two low-pass filter (LPF, cut-off frequency: 0.5Hz, cut-off frequency: 10Hz) are applied to raw acceleration signals. LPF of 10Hz cut-off is used to eliminate the noise. In  addition, DC components are obtained by LPF of 0.5Hz cut-off.

DC components are treated as gravitational acceleration components. Fig.3 shows a vertical direction and a forward direction used for analysis of walking motion. If specific changes were appeared in the measured acceleration data, that motion is detected as ?walking?. Details of this ?walking? detection is described in [11].

2.2.1 Estimation of vertical acceleration To obtain the vertical acceleration, it is necessary to remove gravitational acceleration vector from raw acceleration vector.

In addition, it is also essential to obtain the attitude of the acceleration sensor attached to the waist of the human. In this case, "attitude" means orientations of the acceleration sensor to the ground and the forward direction along human walking. In this study, the vertical acceleration is estimated from inner product between unit gravitational acceleration vector based on DC components and acceleration vector that the noise is eliminated.

2.2.2 Estimation of forward acceleration In the acceleration sensor attached to the waist, the relative heading to the forward direction of the human is unknown. It is necessary to calibrate in order to decide forward direction after the sensor is attached to human. In order to estimate forward acceleration, accelerations of two directions on the horizontal plane which is perpendicular to gravity direction are calculated at first. The acceleration components on this horizontal plane are calculated in each sampling time. The accelerations are saved while several seconds. Second, the principle axis is calculated by applying principal component analysis to acceleration distribution. Then, the inner product between the principle axis and the acceleration components of two directions on the horizontal plane is calculated. The answer is  After a given period  Fig.2 Human tracking and walking detection by laser sensors  Fig.3 Axis definition of vertical direction and forward direction  Fig.4 Acceleration change in one cycle walking  - 219 - SI International 2011    treated as the acceleration of the forward direction. This calibration was carried out using acceleration data while 900 times at the beginning of walking.

2.2.3 Estimation of walking a unit period Fig.4 shows the typical pattern of acceleration change in the forward direction and the vertical direction for the walking motion on a flat floor. This shows one cycle of walking motion.

In this case, we focus on when top and bottom peaks are appeared in each acceleration. Literature [4] introduces that the bottom peak comes next to the top peek in the vertical acceleration and the top peak comes next to the bottom peek in the forward acceleration. In one cycle of walking, peaks of accelerations appear in order of the top peak in vertical, bottom peak in forward, bottom peak in vertical and top peak in forward. When these peaks are detected, the human carrying an acceleration sensor is ?walking?.

However, this traditional method cannot detect ?walking? as shown in Fig.5 [a], when acceleration peaks are jumbled as shown in Fig.5 [b] even though the human with sensor is walking. We review the conditions for detecting as ?walking? based on comparison between accelerations in ?walking? behavior and in ?non-walking? behavior. Fig.6 shows acceleration changes in two behaviors of ?stand up? and ?sit down?. As for the location of the peak in each acceleration, they are completely different ?walking? behavior shown in Fig.4. Therefore, conditions for detecting walking in the traditional method can be relaxed as follows. When top peak in forward, bottom peak in forward, and bottom peak in vertical are placed between sequential top peaks in vertical appear within a given time, the motion is treated as ?walking? in the  relaxed conditions.

When the human with the acceleration sensor performed non-walking behavior including ?stand up? and ?sit down?, most of motions were not detected as ?walking?.

2.2.4Estimation of stopping behavior The proposed method also needs recognition of stopping for behavior based matching between laser scanners and acceleration sensor. In this work, the system decides as stopping behavior in acceleration sensor if walking behaviors are not detected for three second after the last walking detection.

2.3 Matching based on walking behaviors Fig.7 shows a flow chart of associating the target person by two types of sensors. "Walking" behaviors are detected by networked laser range scanners installed in the intelligent space and the acceleration sensor with person. In this study, we focus on the occurrence and duration of walking and stopping.

In the matching process, association between behavior detectons by laser range scanners and the acceleration sensor are performed. The matching process evaluates whether ?walking? behaviors at the same time are detected. A similarity of behaviors between two types of sensors is introduced to  [a] Result of walking  [b] Appearance of acceleration change from 12 to 14 seconds  Table.1 Rules of changing lij Acceleration sensor i  Laser scanner j Rule  Walking Walking lij = lij + a Stopping Walking lij = lij - b*f Stopping Stopping lij = lij + c Walking Stopping lij = lij ? d*f  [a] Acceleration change in ?stand up? behavior  [b] Acceleration change ?sit down? behavior Fig.6 Acceleration change in non-walking behavior  Fig.5Walking and acceleration change in a certain walking  - 220 - SI International 2011    evaluate matching. A similarity sij is calculated with Eq.(1) to each combination of detections by acceleration sensor i and laser scanner j.

lij changes based on behavior detections. If ?walking? or  ?Stopping? is detected at the same time with both sensors, lij increases. On the other hand, when different behaviors are detected in both sensors, lij decreases. Then, a similarity also increases with same behavior and decreases with different behaviors from both sensors.

))exp(1/(11 ijij lS (1)  Although walking detections with both sensors are not perfect, this calculation can keep high similarity between both detections of a target person. The rules of changing lij are shown in Table.1. Similarity calculation and identification performance depend on four parameters a, b, c, and d. These parameters should be determined according to optimizing identification performance. In this study, optimal values of these parameters are determined by evaluating similarities to many walking patterns actually obtained by an experimental system described in Section III. Details of optimization method are also described in Section III. In the mis-matching between walking detections, subtraction amount of ?l? is also affected according to the number of difference f value.

The person who has the acceleration sensor can be identified from several candidate persons tracked by networked laser range scanners according to the similarity.



III. EXPERIMENT 3.1 Experimental environment Laser range scanners (Hokuyo Electric Machinery URG-04LX) are set at the height of about 25cm on a smooth floor. The target person wears the sensor (ATR-Promotions WAA-006) with gyro of three axes and acceleration of three axes on the waist. Components including the interface with each sensor and processing of walking detection are developed in each sensor by using the Open Robot Technology Middleware (RT Middleware) of AIST[10]. Detected results of ?walking? are communicated between components.

3.2 Calculation of the optimal parameters 10 data sets of walking behaviors were acquired for parameter optimization using the above experimental setup. Patterns of these data sets include similar combination of walking and stopping. Optimal parameters as the values of evaluation function Eq.(2) are maximized, are searched with the obtained data sets. This evaluation function is designed as the similarity of the target person is high, and similarities of the other 9 persons are low.

N  i  N  jij ijii SNSE  1 ,1 * (2)  The similarity of each non-target person Sij is subtracted from the similarity of a target person Sii. N is number of non-target persons and used for weighting a similarity of the target person Sii in the evaluation function. In the case that maximum E value is acquired, the parameters are regarded as the optimal parameters. All 10 persons performed the similar behavior including three sets of ?walking? 60 seconds and ?stopping? 30 seconds. Total is 270 seconds. As a result, the optimal parameters calculated as Eq.(2) is maximized are shown in Table 2.

Experiments to identify each target from 10 candidates are performed. The comparison examples with conventional parameters and the optimal parameters are shown in Fig.8.

Fig.8 [a] shows change of similarities of a target person and the other 9 non-target persons using conventional parameters.

Fig.8 [b] shows change of similarities of a target person and 9 non-target persons using optimal parameters. In the case of conventional parameters, it was not able to identify a target person from 10 persons. However, in the case of optimal parameters, the target person is able to be identified from 10 persons after around 250 seconds. These results show parameters affect identification performance. Optimal parameters with the other evaluation functions and tracking  Fig.7 Flow chart  - 221 - SI International 2011    Table3 Walking pattern Pattern01 Only walking Pattern02 Walking 40 sec & Stopping 20sec ? 4 Pattern03 Walking 40 sec & Stopping 20sec ? 4 Pattern04 Walking 30 sec & Stopping 30sec ? 4 Pattern05 Walking 30 sec & Stopping 30sec ? 4  Table2 conventional parameters and optimal parameters Member of parameters  Conventional parameters  Optimal parameters  a 0.2 0.2 b 0.02 0.3 c 0.1 0.01 d 0.1 0.5  data might be considered.

3.3 Experiments of human Identification Experiments on identification of the target human with the acceleration sensor were performed. Five persons with the acceleration sensors walked around in the intelligent space.

Laser range sensor is installed in the intelligent space for person tracking. Five persons walked and stopped as shown as Table.3 respectively. Pattern 02 and Pattern 03 are similar behavior. Pattern 04 and Pattern 05 are also similar. The algorithms for detecting correct persons in these similar behaviors are required for person identification. Seconds for walking or stopping were measured by a stopwatch.

Fig.9 and Fig.10 show the examples of identification experiments among a target person and non-target persons.

Fig.10 shows the similarities compared with walking detection results based on an accelaration sensor of Pattern 01 person.

Fig.11 also shows the case of Pattern 03 person. In each figure,  the first vertical axis shows the walking distance measured by the laser range scanner, and the second vertical axis shows the number of walking steps detected by the acceleration sensor in [a]. Each figure [b] shows similarity changes of all persons using the optimal parameters calculated in section 3.3.

In the results, the similarities of the target person (Pattern 01) are the highest in the similarities of the non-target persons after around 120 sec. However, the similarities of the target persons are not the highest values around 50 sec. That represents that it takes several seconds to identify the correct person. When walking behaviors were not associated to output of the other acceleration sensors, similarities decrease and f values to the correspondent persons increase. Then, similarities of correspondent persons are larger with time because similarities decrease according to f values. In Fig.9, non-target persons? walking patterns differed from the target person?s pattern.

Then, differences between behaviors can be easily appeared and the similarities of non-target persons can be kept in low  [a] Number of steps measured by acceleration sensor of target person and distance of five persons  [b] Similarity of five persons [Optimal parameter]  [a] Identification result with the conventional parameters  [b] Identification result with the optimal parameters  Fig.8 Comparison of identification with different parameters in the similar behaviors  Fig.9 Target recognition from five persons [Target is patturn01]  - 222 - SI International 2011    level after around 120 sec. As shown in Fig.11, one of non-target persons performs a similar walking pattern compared with the target person (Pattern 03). In this figure, the similarities of Pattern 01, 04 and 05 were suppressed smaller than the similarities of Pattern 02 and 03 after around 60 sec.

Although it took more time to distinguish Pattern 03 with Pattern 02 than the other patterns, the highest similarity was obtained after around 200 sec.

In Fig.9, as for change of parameters, there are little influences in person identification. However, in Fig.11, since the values subtracted in behavior mismatching (parameter b and d) increased, similarity of the target person does not approach 1 after 220 second. In this case, since similarity of the target person is still higher than similarity of the other persons, target identification is achieved.

These results introduce the association based on behaviors focused in this study has a possibility to identify a specific person from several persons and track him in high accuracy with laser range sensors in the intelligent space.

3.4 Discussion Experiments on identification of the target human with the acceleration sensor were performed in our previous paper [12].

Target person and non-target person performed several ?walking? or ?stop? behaviors as same as experiments in this paper. Rules of similarity calculation in this paper can identity the target person, if completely different behaviors are  measured. It takes shorter time to obtain the highest similarity with this method than the previous rules. The proposed rules can identify the person more correctly than the previous rules, even if similar petterns were measured.



IV. CONCLUSION This study aimed to identify a specific person with the accurate position measurements by integrating the networked laser range scanners installed in the intelligent space and an acceleration sensor with the person. This paper proposed the identification of a person based on associating the detections of walking behaviors from both sensors. Some experimental results showed the feasibility of the method and improvement of performance based on change of parameters.

Improvement in accuracy of the decision of behavior in each sensor, and how to evaluate the similarity should be reconsidered in order to improve the performance as the future work. Experiments to identify the target from many persons should be performed.

REFEERENCE [1] Joo-Ho Lee, Hideki Hashimoto, "Intelligent Space concept and  contents", Advanced Robotics, Vol.16, No.3, pp.265-280, 2002 [2] Kazuyuki Morioka, Joo-Ho Lee, Hideki Hashimoto, "Human-following  mobile robot in a distributed intelligent sensor network", IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, Vol.51, No.1, pp.229-237, 2004  [3] Atsushi Nakazawa, Hirokazu Kato, Shinsaku Hiura, Seiji Inokuchi, ?Tracking multiple people using distributed vision systems?, 2974-2981, 2002  [4] Jae Hoon Lee, Yong-Shik Kim, Bong Keun Kim, Kohtaro Ohba, Hirohiko Kawata, Akihisa Ohya, Shin?ichi Yuta, ?Security Door System Using Human Tracking Method with Laser Range Finders?, IEEE 2060-2065, 2007  [5] Masakatsu Kourogi, Takeshi Kurata, ? Personal positioning based on walking locomotion analysis with self-contained sensors and a wearable camera?, ISMAR '03 Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality,pp.103-112, 2003  [6] Tetsushi Ikeda, Hiroshi Ishiguro, Takuichi Nishimura, ? People tracking by fusing different kinds of sensors, floor sensosrs and acceleration Integration for Intelligent Systems, pp.530-535, 2006  [7] Tetsushi Ikeda, Hiroshi Ishiguro, Dylan F. Glas, Masahiro Shiomi, Takahiro Miyashita, Norihiro Hagita, ? Person indenfication by integrating wearable sensors and tracking results from environmental pp.2637-2642, 2010  [8] Yuichi Maki, Shingo Kagami, Koichi Hashimoto, ? Accelerometer Detection in a Camera View Based on Feature Point Tracking?, IEEE/SICE International Symposium on System Integration, pp.

