

Proceedings of ICCIA 2010   Computer and Information Application  2-4?November?2010  Tianjin, China                                             Computer and Information Application (ICCIA2010)  IEEE Catalog Number: CFP1016L-PRT  ISBN: 978-1-4244-8596-3  IEEE Catalog Number: CFP1016L-ART  ISBN: 978-1-4244-8598-7  Copyright and Reprint Permission: Abstracting is permitted with credit to the source. Libraries are  permitted to  photocopy beyond the limit of U.S. copyright law for private use of patrons those articles in this  volume that  carry a code at the bottom of the first page, provided the per-copy fee indicated in the code is paid  through  Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For other copying, reprint  or  republication permission, write to IEEE Copyrights Manager, IEEE Operations Center, 445 Hoes  Lane, P.O. Box  1331, Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331.

Copyright 2010 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. All rights reserved.

2010 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. However, permission to reprint/republish  this material  for advertising or promotional purposes or for creating new collective works for resale or  redistribution to  servers or lists, or to reuse any copyrighted component of this work in other works must be  obtained from the  IEEE.

By Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

iii  PREFACE  Dear Distinguished Delegates and Guests,  On behalf of the Organizing Committee, I would like to welcome all of you to ICCIA 2010. This is a  conference Co-organized by Tianjin Polytechnic University, Harbin Engineering University,  Institute of  Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and other well known universities and organizations.

The theme of the ICCIA 2010 highlights Computer and Information Application. About 110 papers  of  high quality are accepted, less than 30% of the submitted ones. Of course the most important  component of a conference is its technical program, which results from the hard work of the  authors  and the reviewers, to whom I wish to express my sincere appreciation.

ICCIA 2010 will provide a remarkable opportunity for the academic and industrial community to  address new challenges, share solutions, and discuss future research opportunities within the  area  mentioned above. This conference is also a platform for the new faces to become known and for  the  previous attendees to refresh their friendships. It is expected that the large number of attendees  including well-known scientists and engineers will bring many benefits to the scientific and  technological development for many countries and to the formation of new international  cooperation  and strengthening of established international collaborations.

I would like to express my sincere thanks to all the members of the Organizing Committee,  International  Program Committee, and volunteers for their great efforts in preparation and commitment to make  this  conference a success.

I hope that all participants and other interested readers benefit scientifically from the proceedings  and  also find its stimulating in the process. Besides, I hope you enjoy all the wonderful experiences  offered  by the city of Tianjin, which is one of the most important sightseeing cities in China with its many  historic spots and beautiful sceneries.

