Survey on Data Mining Techniques to Enhance Intrusion  Detection

Abstract?Nowadays, as information system plays critical part in the internet, the importance of secure  networks is tremendously increased. Intrusion  Detection System (IDS) is used to preserve the data  integrity, confidentiality and system availability from  attacks. Data mining is used to clean, classify and  examine large amount of network data. Since a large  volume of network traffic that requires processing, we  use data mining techniques. Different Data Mining  techniques such as clustering, classification and  association rules are proving to be useful for analyzing  network traffic. This paper presents the survey on  data mining techniques applied on intrusion detection  systems for the effective identification of both known  and unknown patterns of attacks, thereby helping the  users to develop secure information systems.

Keywords-intrusion detection; data mining;  classification; clustering;  association rule;

I. INTRODUCTION  Computer based information Systems are becoming an important part of our organizations. By connecting our computer to the Internet, we increase the risk that someone may install malicious programs and use it to attack other machines on the Internet by controlling it remotely. Computer security is the ability to protect a computer system and its resources in reference to Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability [1].In order to protect from the computer threats, various protocols and firewalls are used.   Confidentiality requires that information can be accessible only to those authorized for it; integrity requires that information remain unchanged without any modification by malicious attempts, and availability means the computer system and its resources always available to authorized users when they need it. By this definition, a computer system is said to be reliable if confidentiality, integrity and availability is a part of its security requirements [2].

A computer system is said to be secure if it can protects its data and resources from unauthorized access, modification, and denial of use. Intrusion is a type of attack that tries to deny the security aspects of a computer system. It is generally believed that intrusions show  something differs from the normal pattern, and that any unknown intrusion will present patterns more similar to known intrusion [3].Based on the above assumption intrusion can be defined as a data analysis problem.

Patterns of the intrusions and patterns of the normal behavior can be computed using data mining. . Since a large volume of network traffic that requires processing, we use data mining techniques. To apply data mining techniques in intrusion detection, preprocessing is the first step to be done on the collected data. Then convert the data into a particular format for the mining process. Next, the formatted data is used for classification and clustering.

The classification model can be rule based, decision tree based, Bayesian network based or neural network based.

Data mining technique provides the guarantee that no intrusion will be missed while checking the real time data in the network, thus ensuring the accuracy and efficiency in the detection process. Data mining techniques also helps in intrusion prevention mechanisms. They can detect both known and previous unknown patterns of attacks.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives the details of intrusion detection and the general working strategy of Intrusion Detection Systems .Section 3 gives the details of data mining concepts and the system design based on Data Mining Intrusion Detection Pattern. Section 4 gives the details of different data mining techniques and explains how each technique helps in detecting intrusions.

Section 5 presents our conclusion.



II. INTRUSION DETECTION   Taxonomy of Intrusion  Detection Intrusion is a set of actions that attempt to compromise the integrity, confidentiality, or availability of any resource on a computing platform [4]. An intrusion detection system (IDS) is a combination of hardware and software that detect intrusions in the network. An IDS can monitor all the network activities and hence can detect the signs of intrusions. The main objective of IDS is to alarm the system administrator that any suspicious activity happened. There are two types of Intrusion detection techniques:  ? Anomaly Detection: Detecting malicious activities based on deviations from the normal behavior are            considered as attacks. Although it can detect unknown intrusions, rate of missing report is low.

? Misuse Detection: Detecting intrusions based on a pattern for the malicious activity [5].It can be very helpful for known attack patterns. Also rate of missing report is high.

One disadvantage of Misuse Detection over Anomaly Detection is that it can only detect intrusions which contain known patterns of attack.

Working of  Intrusion detection systems Authors of [4] presented a four step approach for the generalized working of IDS   ? Data collection: - It involves collecting network traffic using particular software and thus helps to get the information about the traffic like types of packets, hosts and protocol details.

? Feature Selection: - The collected data is substantially large because of the huge network traffic; we generate feature vectors that contain only necessary information. In network-based intrusion detection, it can be IP header information, which consists of source and destination IP address, packet type, layer 4 protocol type and other flags.

? Analysis: - The collected data is analyzed in this step to determine whether data is anomalous or not. Here we use various methods for detecting intrusions.

? Action :- IDS alarm the system administrator that an attack has happened and it tells about the nature of the attack.IDS also participate in controlling the attacks by closing the network port or killing the processes.



III. DATA MINING TECHNOLOGY  The term data mining is used to describe the process of extracting useful information from the large databases.

Data mining analyses the observed sets to discover the unknown relation and sum up the results of data analysis to make the owner of data to understand [6].Hence data mining problems are considered as a data analysis problem. Data mining framework automatically detect patterns in our data set and use these patterns to find a set of malicious binaries.ie, Data mining techniques can detect patterns in large amount of data, such as byte code and use these patterns to detect future instances in similar data.

In intrusion detection system, information comes from various sources like host data, network log data, alarm messages etc.Since the variety of different data sources is too complex, the complexity of the operating system also increases. Also network traffic is huge, so the data analysis is very hard. The data mining technology have the capability of extracting large databases; it is of great  importance to use data mining techniques in intrusion detection. By applying data mining technology, intrusion detection system can widely verify the data to obtain a model, thus helps to obtain a comparison between the abnormal pattern and the normal behavior pattern. Manual analysis is not required for this method. One of the main advantages is that same data mining tool can be applied to different data sources. An important problem in intrusion detection is  how effectively can separate the attack patterns and normal data patterns from a large number of network data and how effectively generate automatic intrusion rules after collected raw network data. To accomplish this various data mining techniques are used such as classification ,clustering ,association rule mining etc.Examples for Data Mining based Misuse detection model of IDS are JAM (Java Agents for Metalearning),MADAM ID (Mining Audit Data for Automated Models for Intrusion Detection), and Automated Discovery of Concise Predictive Rules for Intrusion Detection.

Examples for Data Mining based Anomaly detection model for IDS are MINDS and EBays.Examples for Data Mining based both Anomaly and Misuse detection model for IDS are IIDS (Intelligent Intrusion Detection System Architecture) and RIDS-100 (Rising Intrusion Detection System).

System Design    Figure 1. Data Mining based Intrusion Detection Pattern   Authors of [8] presented a system design based on Data Mining intrusion detection pattern which is illustrated in figure 1.The functions of each module is described as follows: Data Acquisition Examines the network data for attack patterns and captures every packet for processing.

Data Preprocess module Certain techniques like data cleaning, data integration, data reduction techniques etc are used to convert a data packet into suitable mining forms.

Data Mining module Data obtained from the data preprocess module is stored in the data warehouse. Also it mines the training data which the control module outputs.

Data in the data warehouse becomes more and more rich, since the data gathering process carries on continuously.

So data warehouse contains all kinds of data and mine useful information. Data mining algorithm library consists of different data mining algorithms like sequence pattern analysis algorithm, connection rule algorithm, sorting algorithm, clustering algorithm etc.Data mining process control is responsible for choosing efficient and appropriate mining algorithm from the library and hence it is the key of the system model. Here system design considers training dataset, the data mining control module may extract features and the patterns for detection using the algorithms from the algorithms library. When the system begins running and the dataset is not trained, then the data mining control module may be trained by taking data from the data warehouse. Then data in the dataset can be categorized as normal data and attack data by choosing clustering algorithm.Finally, the output of the mining is transmitted to intrusion detection module.

Intrusion Detection Module Intrusion detection module is a combination of rule library, Intrusion detection. Rule library is the repository of rules that is needed for intrusion detection and check for a matching with the output from the data mining modules.

Manager Interface Module This module is responsible for making decision on the normal pattern and abnormal pattern. If the decision result is normal pattern, adds it to its close normal pattern in the library. If the result is abnormal pattern, add it to its close abnormal pattern in the library and carries out necessary preventive measures.



IV. DATA MINING TECHNIQUES  AND  INTRUSION DETECTION   Data Mining is used in variety of applications that requires data analysis. Now a day?s data mining techniques plays an important role in intrusion detection systems. Different data mining techniques like Classification, Clustering and Association rules are frequently used to acquire information about intrusions by observing network data. This section describes different data mining techniques that help in detecting intrusions.

Classification Classification is a form of data analysis which takes each instance of a dataset and assigns it to a particular class. It extracts models defining important data classes. Such models are called classifiers [9].A  classification based IDS will classify all the network traffic into either normal or malicious. Data classification consists of two steps ? learning and classification. A classifier is formed in the learning step and that model is used to predict the class labels for a given data in the classification step. Classification analysis requires that the end-user/analyst know ahead of time how classes are defined [1].Each record in the dataset already have value for the attribute used to define the classes. The objective of a classifier is not to explore the data to discover different classes, but to find how new records should be arranged into classes. Classification helps us to categorize the data records in a predetermined set .It can be used as attribute to label each record and for distinguishing elements belonging to the normal or malicious class [1].Different types of classification techniques are decision tree induction, Bayesian networks-nearest neighbor classifier, genetic algorithm and fuzzy logic.

As compared to the clustering technique, classification technique is less efficient in the field of intrusion detection. The main reason for this is the enormous amount of data needed to be collected to use classification. To classify the dataset into normal and abnormal, large amount of data is required to analyze its proximity. Classification method can be useful for both misuse detection and anomaly detection, but it is more commonly used for misuse detection.

Authors of [1] presented a data classification for intrusion detection that can be achieved by the following steps:- 1. In order to study about the classification models of  the normal and abnormal sequences of system calls, we want to supply it with a training data set, containing pre-labeled normal or abnormal sequences. Different techniques like linear discrimination, decision tree or rule based methods is used to scan the network traces. Then generate a collection of unique sequence of system calls and named it as normal list.

2. Next scan each of the intrusion traces. Find each sequence of system calls in the normal list. If an exact match can be found then labeled it as normal.

Otherwise it is labeled as abnormal.

3. Next ensure that the normal traces consist of all possible normal short sequence of system calls. An intrusion trace contains combination of normal and abnormal sequences of system calls since abnormal sequence only appear in some places.

Clustering Since the amount of available network data is too large, human labeling is time-consuming, and expensive. Clustering is the process of labeling data and assigning into groups.ie, Clustering is a division of data into groups of similar objects. Each group, called cluster, consists of members from the same cluster are quite similar and members from the different clusters are           different from each other. Hence clustering methods can be useful for classifying network data for detecting intrusions. Clustering algorithms can be classified into four groups: partitioning algorithm, hierarchical algorithm, density-based algorithm and grid based algorithm [12].

Clustering techniques can discovers complex intrusions over a different time period. Clustering is an unsupervised machine learning mechanism for discovering patterns in unlabeled data with many dimensions. Clustering is the collection of patterns based on similarity. Patterns within a cluster are equivalent to each other, but they are different with other clusters. Therefore patterns that are far from any of these clusters indicate that an unusual activity happened. That can be part of a new attack.

Clustering can be applied on both Anomaly detection and Misuse detection.

Authors of [1] presents basic steps involved in identifying intrusion are follows:-  1. Find the largest cluster, which consists of maximum number of instances, and label it as normal.

2. Sort the remaining clusters in an ascending order of their distances to the largest cluster.

3. Select the first K1 clusters so that the number of data instances in these clusters sum up to ?`N, and label them as normal, where ` is the percentage of normal instances.

4. Label all other clusters as malicious.

5. After clustering, heuristics are used to  automatically label each cluster as either normal or malicious. The self labeled clusters are then used to detect attacks in a separate test dataset.

Association Rule The association rule considers each attribute/value pair as an item. Collection of items referred as an item set in a single network request. The algorithm searches to find an item set from large number of dataset that frequently appears in network. The main aim of association rule is to derive multi-feature correlations from a database table [1].Association rule mining determines association rules and/or correlation relationships among large set of data items. Association rule shows conditions for attribute values that occur frequently in the dataset. An example of association rule mining is Market Basket analysis.

Association rules are obtained from the dataset and they are in the form of ?if-then? statements.Apriori was the first scalable algorithm developed for association rule mining.

Association rule mining in intrusion detection is very useful in many ways. Authors of [1] presents basic steps for incorporating association rule for intrusion detection as follows:-  1. First network data need to be arranged into a database table where each row is an audit record and each column is a field of the audit records.

2. It is always shows that the intrusions and user activities shows frequent correlations among network data. Consistent behaviors? in the network data can be captured in association rules.

3. Also rules based on network data can continuously merge the rules from a new run to the aggregate rule set of all previous runs.

4. Thus with the association rule, we get the capability to capture behavior in association rule for correctly detecting intrusions and hence lowering the false alarm rate.



V.CONCLUSION  In this paper, we describe different data mining technique applied for detecting intrusions. This paper provides the details of two types of intrusion detection and general working principle of IDS.Misuse detection techniques are not sufficient for identifying unknown attacks. For detecting unknown intrusions, we need to go for anomaly detection. Also this paper presents the main concepts of data mining process and the system design for data mining based intrusion detection pattern. Different Data mining techniques like classification, clustering and association rule are very helpful in analyzing the network data. Since large amount of network traffic needs to be collected for intrusion detection, clustering is more suitable than classification in the domain of intrusion detection. Data mining technology helps to understand normal behavior inside the data and use this knowledge for detecting unknown intrusions.

