Applying Mining Fuzzy Sequential Patterns  Technique to Predict the Leadership in Social

Abstract?Social Network has become a very popular communication tool among Internet users who connect to each other by one or more relations. Millions of users are sharing opinions and experiences on different aspects of life every day via the social network community. Comments from the members of social network can be influential and have an impact on trust among members within the social group. The Discovery of Influential Behavior Pattern of Members in Social Networks brings challenge to workers in this research field. Understanding social networks requires analysis of structural relations between the users and the patterns of interaction among users.  This paper thus focuses on 2 folds: First, we defined many factors for leadership in social network and showed that, those at individuals who are central to social networks serve as the opinion leaders. Second, we proposed a fuzzy data-mining algorithm to find association rules for analyzing the posting messages into quantitative values and discovered interesting sequential patterns among them. The sequential patterns are very important for real-world applications since the patterns mined out exhibit the sequential quantitative regularity in databases and can provide useful information to applications.

Keywords?Social Network Analysis, Group Behavior Patterns, Fuzzy Sequential Patterns.



I. INTRODUCTION  A social network is composed of a collection of members where members are connected to each other by one or more relations such as friendship, kinship, common interest, like or dislike. Examples of social networks on the internet are MySpace, Facebook, Twitter and Flickr.

The main purpose of social networking sites is to connect people by providing real-time conversations.  People can join specific network groups that correspond with areas of interest such as Facebook, with the abilities to post blogs and make new friends. Statistics show that on Facebook, [1] there are more than 500 million active users who act as passive (preview contents) and active (comments, upload VDO or tag photo) members. From the huge amount of group members in social networks, many organizations benefit social networks as marketing tool. The social network marketing communications coordinates promotional elements: advertising, personal selling, public  relations, publicity, direct marketing and sales promotion.

The users on social network [2] tend to get information they needed from each other rather than from businesses.

This means that it is much harder to control how people first come to experience on messages. Then many researches are working on the finding of influential behavior in social networks such as Sang Wan Lee et al [3], proposed a non supervised learning framework of human behavior characteristics using Agglomerative Iterative Bayesian Fuzzy Clustering (AIBFC) with a newly proposed cluster validity index. Yu Wei et al. [4], they found that supervisory plays an important role in staff?s behaviors in the following aspects: 1) Supervisor role is diversity and all can be perceived by staff, 2) Minimize correlation with administrative services, 3) Supervisory should try to optimize the relationship quality between employees and win their organization-friendly.

Finally, behavior and supervisory role can impact on employee?s behavior only by entering into their cognitive system.

This paper presents a novel fuzzy mining algorithm to find fuzzy sequential patterns from the group members of social networks. The proposed algorithm integrates the fuzzy-set concepts and the Apriori algorithm [5]. First, we used Social Network Analysis (SNA) for mapping and measuring normally invisible relationships between people that consist of 3 factors: activity, social links and closeness. Second, we transformed attributes values (ID, Name, Comments, Date, Time, Frequency#, Duration, Like and Dislike) in transactions into structure data, then filtered them to find the sequential patterns by modifying the Apriori algorithm. For example, some members always use slang, acronyms or abbreviations to express their emotions via the online social network all the time.

Finally, we predicted according to his/her previous transactions using several fuzzy sequential pattern sets described by the natural language processing, which are well suited for the thinking of human subjects and will help to increase the flexibility for users in making decisions. For example, the sequential patterns mined may     predict the users? behavior and attribute of user that have influence on other members. The patterns mined out thus exhibit the sequential quantitative regularity in databases and can be used to confirm that highly connected nodes have an important influence on their neighbors.

In Section 2, we review and describe related work on Social Network Analysis and Mining Fuzzy Sequential Patterns. Section 3 addresses the problem statement and describes the research design. Section 4 describes the results from the experiments with discussion. And, the final section provides a conclusion and describes the future work.



II. RELATED WORK There are many papers that have been proposed on  mining user behavior patterns in social networks. They can be categorized into 3 groups as: Social Network  Analysis, Mining Fuzzy Sequential Patterns and Natural Language Process.

2.1 Social Network Analysis- SNA [6, 7]: Social Networks are nodes of individuals, groups, organizations, and related systems that tie in one or more type of interdependencies: include share values, visions, and ideas; social contacts; kinship; conflict; financial exchanges; trade; joint membership in organizations; and group participation in events, among numerous other aspects of human relationships. There are several social networks such as MySpace, Facebook, Twitter, Hi5, Friendster, SkyRock and Bebo. The Social Network Analysis is focused on uncovering the patterning of people's interaction. Network analysis is based on the intuitive notion that these patterns are important features of the lives of the individuals who display them. Network analysts believe that how an individual lives depends in large part on how that individual is tied into the larger web of social connections.

A     B         C Figure 1: Cluster group members in Social Network [6].

In Figure 1, we illustrate the social network that shows the relationship between each group members.

A) Company: Nipat and Wattana work in different roles as Managing Director and Assistant Managing Director respectively. Both of them are the members of Walisa?s group. B) We represent the relationship clustered by users? behavior in the social networks.

Clusters can be displayed visually with a network map, where each group is differentiated by colors. In Walisa?s group, Nipat has the relationship status as ?Friend? and Wattana is ?Kinship?. C) LarLar, who act is a student in a primary school, has the relationship status as ?Friend? in Walisa?s group and also a friend of Nipat. Basically, we are interested in the social network representation on who is influencing whom (both directly and indirectly).

2.2 Mining Fuzzy Sequential Patterns [8]: is to find the inter-transaction relation that formed as (A, B)  where A and B are disjoint item sets, and its support is no less than a user-specified minimum support.

Sequential Pattern mining refers to the problem of discovering the existent of maximal frequent sequences in a given database. The fuzzy sequential patterns can be defined as follows [9]: ? Definition 1: A fuzzy item is the association of one  item and one corresponding fuzzy set. It is denoted by [x, a] where x is the item (also called attribute) and a is the associated fuzzy set.

? Definition 2: A fuzzy itemset is a set of fuzzy items.

It can be denoted as a pair of sets (set of items, set of fuzzy sets associated to each item) or as a list of fuzzy items.

? Definition 3: A g-k-sequence S =< s1???sg> is a sequence constituted by g fuzzy itemsets s = (X,A) grouping together k fuzzy items [x, a].

For example, a 2-sequence {Beer}, {Diapers, Milk}  may represent items Diapers and Milk being bought     together after item Beer had been bought, where {Beer} and {Diapers, Milk} are itemsets. Whereas {{Beer}, {Diapers, Milk}} is not contained in the 1-sequence {{Beer, Diapers, Milk}} since the latter sequence is shorter than the former sequence.

2.3 Natural Language Process (NLP) [10, 11]: is the computerized approach to analyzing text that is based on both a set of theories and a set of technologies.

Since text can contain information at many different granularities, from simple word or token- based representations, to rich hierarchical syntactic representation. For example, many people add text or comments in Facebook. They sometimes use slang and idioms to express their emotions such as ?Yess!!!!!?, ?Yeah I totally am!!! :p?, ?sabahlara kadar sikismek isteyen burayaaa? or ?LOVE ?? etc. We applied the NLP for increasing the efficient on understanding language means, among other things, knowing what  concepts a word or phrase stands for and knowing how to link those concepts together in a meaningful way.



III. RESEARCH DESIGN  In this section, we propose a framework which consists of modules as follows: 1) we used Facebook API for collecting the text posts from the Seventeen Magazine Facebook and form a dataset. We collected 5000 text posts, 1800 group members. 2) Analyze the comments in each post such as texts containing positive/negative emotions and objective texts that only state a fact. 3) Summarize the data from all comments. 4) Store text and metadata into the database.

5) Analyze the Mining Fuzzy Sequential Patterns by using our algorithm. The overall framework can be illustrated in Figure 2 as follows.

Figure 2: the diagram of the proposed fuzzy sequential patterns in Facebook.

As Figure 2 illustrates, we crawled the data from the Seventeen Magazine Facebook. The Seventeen Magazine Facebook is for young women who are interested in fashion.  Currently there are 786,017 people like and following this. When the administrator posts a topic, there are always many people who join and post their comments. The next module, we analyzed the comments in each post and summarized the data from 269 to 240 comments. Then, we stored text and metadata into the database. The final module, we used our algorithm to analyze the Mining Fuzzy Sequential Patterns as shown in Pseudocode 1.

Pseudocode1. Mining Fuzzy Sequential Patterns 1: Begin:  2: Sort the transaction data first by user-id and then by number frequency. From a member text posted sequence Di for each member i by sequentially listing his/her ni itemsets, where ni is the number of transactions from member i. Denote the d th itemset in Di as Did.

3:  Transform the quantitative value of each item in Did into a fuzzy set by using membership functions.

4: Find the membership value.

5: Calculate th calar rd  region R [12] ???????????????????????? ? ? ??  ? ???    (1)  e s  ca inality of each attribute  6: Find max-count and generate candidate set.

7: Map each large itemset to a contiguous integer and put it in the large 1-sequence set (L?1)  8: Transform each member sequ ce using the integer representation.

en  9: Generate the candidate set ????? from L?1 in the way similar to that in the aprioriall algorithm [5].

10: Transform the maximally large q-sequence, q>=2, into sequences of original items and output them to users as sequence patterns. Finally, the sequential patterns output can serve as meta-knowledge concerning the given transactions.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT In this section, an example is given to illustrate the  proposed mining algorithm for fuzzy sequential patterns. The data set, including 5 transactions, is shown in Table 1.

TABLE1. THE DATA SET USED IN THE EXPERIMENT  UserID Transaction time  Comments in topic  #of comments  #5 April 1, 2011 A 3 #1 April 1, 2011 B 3 #4 April 1, 2011 A 1 #3 April 1, 2011 A 1 #2 April 1, 2011 A 1 #2 April 5, 2011 B 2 #3 April 2, 2011 A 1 #3 April 1, 2011 C 1 #1 April 1, 2011 A 2  In Table 1, the first member posted 3 comments on the topic A on April 1, 2011. In this experiment, the quantities comments were classified into three fuzzy regions: Low, Middle and High. For example, Userid 5, who posted 3 comments, can be converted into the fuzzy set [(0.7/Low) + (0.3/Middle) + (0.0/High) by the given membership functions in Table 1.

TABLE2.   THE CUSTOMER SEQUENCE FORMED.

UserID Users posted sequence #1 2>3>4>5 #2 3>1>2>3 #3 1>5>1>3>4 #4 2>3>4>1>2 #5 5>1>4>2>5  Table 2 shows the sequence pattern sorted by userid. After userid 1 had posted the comment, userid 2, 3, 4 and 5 agreed and followed.



V. CONCLUSION  In this paper, we used fuzzy sequential pattern algorithm to extract the rules from the users posted sequence data set. The rules can be applied to predict the behavior of the user who posted the comment and  other people followed and agreed with it. The aim of our research is to provide a theoretical and a methodological framework as follows: 1) Enable the human behavior representation and simulation and 2) Analyze the psychological and sociological aspects of human behavior. For future work, we will apply the framework to companies in order to simulate the behavior of workers who should be the leader of the project for increasing the performance and success in the company. In other words, we should put the right man on the right job.

