A Survey and Future Vision of Data mining in Educational Field

Abstract? Educational data mining is an emerging trend, concerned with developing techniques for exploring, and analyzing the huge data that come from the educational context. EDM is poised to leverage an enormous amount of research from data mining community and apply that research to educational problems in learning, cognition and assessment.

In recent years, Educational data mining has proven to be more successful at many of these educational statistics problems due to enormous computing power and data mining algorithms.

This paper surveys the history and applications of data mining techniques in the educational field. The objective is to introduce data mining to traditional educational system, web-based educational system, intelligent tutoring system, and e-learning. This paper describes how to apply the main data mining techniques such as prediction, classification, relationship mining, clustering, and social area networking to educational data.

Keywords- Educational Data Mining (EDM); data mining; knowledge discovery in databases (KDD);

I.  INTRODUCTION The data mining has attracted a great deal of attention in  the information technology industry, due to availability of  large volume of data which is stored in various formats like files, texts, records, images, sounds, videos, scientific data and many new data formats. There is imminent need for turning such huge data into meaningful information and knowledge. The data collected from various applications require a proper data mining technique to extract the knowledge from large repositories for decision making.

Data mining, also called Knowledge Discovery in Dabatabases (KDD), is the field of discovering novel and potentially useful information from large volume of data [27].

Data mining and knowledge discovery in databases are treated as synonyms, but data mining is actually a step in the process of knowledge discovery. The sequences of steps indentified in extracting knowledge from data are shown in Fig. 1. The main functionality of data mining techniques is applying various methods and algorithms in order to discover and extract patterns of stored data. These interesting patterns are presented to the user and may be stored as new knowledge in knowledge base. Data mining and knowledge discovery applications have got a rich focus due to its significance in decision making.

Figure 1. The steps of extracting knowledge from data   DOI 10.1109/ACCT.2012.14    DOI 10.1109/ACCT.2012.14     Data mining has been used in areas such as database systems, data warehousing, statistics, machine learning, data visualization, and information retrieval. Data mining techniques have been introduced to new areas including neural networks, patterns recognition, spatial data analysis, image databases and many application fields such as business, economics, and bioinformatics.

The main objective of this paper is to survey the applications of data mining techniques/algorithms to traditional educational system. The first section is used to describe the history and current trends in the field of Educational Data Mining (EDM). We then review the different data mining techniques that have been applied in educational field grouping them by task. Finally, we discuss and summarize key applications of educational data mining.



II. EDUCATIONAL DATA MINING The educational data mining community [29] defines  educational data mining as, ?Educational Data Mining (EDM) is an emerging discipline, concerned with developing methods for exploring the unique types of data that come from educational settings, and using those methods to better understand students, and the setting which they learn in?.

There are increasing research interests in using data mining techniques in educational filed. This new emerging field, EDM, concerns with developing methods that discover knowledge from data originating from educational environments.

Educational data mining techniques often differ from traditional data mining techniques, in explicitly exploiting the multiple levels of meaningful hierarchy in educational data. EDM focuses on collection, archiving, and analysis of data related to students? learning and assessment. The analysis performed in EDM research is often related to techniques drawn from variety of literatures [4], including  psychometrics, machine learning, data mining, educational statistics, information visualization and computational modeling. The application of data mining in educational system is an interactive cycle of hypothesis formation, testing, and refinement [21] as shown is Fig. 2. Discovered knowledge should enter the loop of the system and guide, facilitate, and enhance learning as a whole. The system is used to turning data into knowledge as well as filtering mined knowledge for decision making.



III. EDM METHODS Romero and Ventura [22], and Baker categorize methods  in educational data mining into the following general categories:  ? Prediction ? Clustering ? Relationship mining Romero and Ventura?s viewpoint is focused on  applications of educational data mining to data. These methods are listed as web mining methods, and are quite prominent in mining web data and in mining other forms of educational data. These categories of educational data mining methods are largely acknowledged to be universal across types of data mining.

A. Prediction The goal of prediction is to develop a model which can  infer a single aspect of the data (predicted variable) from some combination of other aspects of data (predictor variables). Prediction has two key uses within educational data mining. In first type, prediction methods can be used to study what features of a model are important for prediction, giving information about underlying construct. This approach is basically used to analyze the students? performance [6].

Figure 2. The cycle of applying data mining in educational systems      In second type of usage, the prediction methods are used in order to predict what the output value would be in contexts where it is not desirable to directly obtain a label for that construct. Prediction can be classified in three types viz.

Classification, Regression and Density estimation.

A classifier is mapping from (discrete or continue) feature space X to discrete set of labels Y [11]. Classification or discriminant analysis is used to predict class labels (describes future situation). Classification is supervised technique which is used to label newly encountered (still unlabeled) patterns from a collection of labeled (pre- classified) patterns. Some popular classification methods include logistic regression, support vector machines and decision trees. The decision tree algorithm produces a tree- like structure of the model it produces. From the tree, it is then easy to generate rules in the form IF condition THEN outcome. It is basically a predictive model in which an instance is classified by following the path of satisfied condition from root until reaching a leaf, which will correspond to class label. Some of the most well-known decision tree algorithms are C4.5 and ID3.

Regression technique can also be adopted for prediction.

In regression, the predicted variable is a continuous variable.

Some popular regression methods within educational data mining include linear regression, neural networks and support vector machine regression. Many real-world educational data mining problems are not simply prediction.

Therefore more complex techniques may be necessary to forecast future values using combination of the techniques (e.g. logistic regression, decision trees or neural networks).

For example, the CART (Classification and Regression Tree) decision tree algorithm can be used to build both classification trees (to classify categorical response variables) and regression trees (to forecast continuous response variables). Neural network too can create both classification and regression models.

In density estimation, the predicted variable is a probability density function. Density estimator can be based on variety of kernel functions, including Gaussian function.

For each of the prediction methods, the input may be continuous or categorical. The particular predictive method is effective depending on the type of input variable used.

B.  Clustering Clustering is process of grouping objects into classes of  similar objects [15]. It is an unsupervised classification or partitioning of patterns (observations, data items or future vectors) into groups or subsets (clusters) based on their locality and connectivity within N-dimensional space.

Clustering is particularly useful in cases where the most common categories within the data set are not known in advance. In educational data mining, clustering has been used to group students according to their behavior [3]. The schools could be clustered together (to investigate similarities & differences between schools), students could be clustered together (to investigate similarities and differences between students). Some of the well known clustering methods are k-mean and expectation- maximization algorithm (EM-clustering) [9].

C. Relationship mining In relationship mining, the goal is to discover  relationships between variables, in a data set with large number of variables. This may take the form of attempting to find out which variables are most strongly related/ associated with a single variable of particular interest.

Broadly relationship mining is classified into four types: association rule mining, correlation mining, sequential pattern mining, and casual data mining.

Association rule mining discovers relationships among attributes in data set, producing if-then statements concerning attribute-values [2]. Association rule mining is one of the important technique which aims at extracting, interesting correlations, frequent patterns, associations or casual structures among set of items in the transaction databases. An X => Y association rule expresses a close relationship between items (attribute-value) in a database with values of support and confidence. Association rule mining has been applied to educational data mining for: finding students? mistakes often occurring together while solving exercises [16]; finding out relationships in learners? behavior patterns [30]; diagnosing students? learning problems and offer students advice [14] etc.

In correlation mining, the goal is to find (positive or negative) linear correlations between variables. Correlation analysis is used to find the most strongly correlation attributes.

Sequential pattern mining is a more restrictive form of association rule mining in which the accessed item?s order is taken into consideration. Sequential pattern mining [1] attempts to find inter-session patterns such as the presence of a set of items followed by another items in a time-ordered set of sessions or episodes. Sequential pattern mining has been applied to web-based educational systems. Sequential pattern can reveal which content has motivated the access to another contents, or how tools and contents are entwined in the learning process. Zaine and Luo [31] propose the discovery of useful patterns based on restrictions, to help educators evaluates students? activities in web courses. Paul and Donnelan [18] discover and compare with expected behavioral patterns specified by the instructor that describe an ideal learning path. Wang et al. [28] propose a four phase learning portfolio mining approach, which use sequential pattern mining, to extract learning features to create a decision tree which is used to predict which group a learner belongs to.

Casual data mining, attempts to find whether one event (or observed construct) was the cause of another event (or observed construct), either by analyzing the covariance of two events or by using information about how one of the events was triggered. A casual relationship can be inferred, if a pedagogical event is randomly chosen using automated experimentation, and frequently leads to a positive learning outcome.



IV. OTHER EDM METHODS The other categories of educational data mining methods  are not acknowledged to be universal across types of data mining but achieve particular prominence within educational data mining. These methods are discussed below:  A.  Outlier Detections Outlier detection discovers data points that are  significantly different than the rest of data [13]. An outlier is an observation (or measurement) that is usually large or small when compared to other values in data set. In educational data mining, outlier analysis can be used to detect students with learning problems. Ueno [45] proposes a method of online outlier detection of learner?s irregular learning processes by using the learners? response time data for e-learning data. Castro et al. [7] detects atypical behavior on the grouping structure of the users of virtual campus.

Outlier detection also has been used for detecting regularities and deviations in the learners? or educators? actions with others [17].

B. Text Mining Text mining methods can be viewed as an extension of  data mining to text data and it is much related to web content mining. Text mining can work with semi-structured or unstructured datasets such as text documents, HTML files, emails etc. Ueno [26] uses data mining and text mining technologies for collaborative learning and a discussion board with evaluation between peers in an ILMS.

Chen et al. [8] propose to automatically construct e- textbooks via web content mining. Tane et al. [24] use text mining and text clustering techniques in order to group documents according to their topics and similarities. The specific application of text mining techniques in e-learning can be used for: evaluating the progress of the thread discussion to see what the contribution to the topic is [10]; identifying the main blocks of multimedia presentations and retrieve their internal properties [5]; and personalized courseware construction proposed by Tang et al. [25].

C. Social Network Analysis (SNA) Social network analysis is a field of study attempting to  understand and measure relationships between entities in networked information. The social network analysis techniques and data mining techniques for information networks can be used to examine and assess online interactions [23]. The SNA uses the connection among units as data which relate them in system. In educational data mining, SNA can be used for mining group activities by analyzing the sociograms associated with a given group and the status of participants and the group cohesion of social interactions [20]. Rallo et al. [19] propose to use the data mining and social networks to interpret and analyze the structure and contents of online educational communities.



V. CONCLUSION The field of educational data mining is a ripe for explosive  growth. Machine learning and data mining have developed a  vast array of tools and techniques that have been well- studied and examined in myriad context. Educational data mining can be applied to wide areas of research including e- learning, intelligent tutoring systems, text mining, social network mining etc. Educational data mining is a very recent area, there is an important number of contributions published in journals, international congress, specific workshops like international Journal of Artificial Intelligence in education mining (EDM), Journal of Educational data mining (JEDM), (DMUM) etc.

In education, EDM can function as a replacement for less accurate but more established psychometric techniques.

Educational data mining is an interactive cycle of hypothesis formation, testing and refinements that alternates between two complementary types of activities. One type of activity is qualitative analysis, focuses on understanding individual tutorial events. Other type involve, knowledge tracing analyses the growth curve by aggregating over successive opportunities to apply skills.

