

Abstract?Recently, culture industry has been attached a great importance by Chinese government. It has been viewed as a new economic growth point. This paper first applies Apriori association rule algorithm on a survey data to analyze the affecting factors about participation, recognition and satisfaction of residents to cultural activities. Then, some suggestions are given to make decision support for government. The mining results show that the main factors to culture industry are the income, occupation, and education background. To improve participation, recognition and satisfaction of residents to cultural activities, government should improve residents' living standard and education background firstly. In addition, providing different cultural activities for different types of residents must be also considered.

Keywords- association rule mining; apriori algorithm; culture industry

I.  INTRODUCTION Culture is not only important for improving residents' life,  but also an important tool to measure residents' happiness index. To Build a Well-off society comprehensively, except for improving people's material living standards, it is necessary to enhance residents' spiritual and cultural quality of life. The cultural activities carried out by government departments are important means to promote harmonious development of society and improve residents' cultural quality. By analyzing the affecting factors about participation, recognition and satisfaction of residents to cultural activities, we supply better decision support for government and provide references for government on how to carry out the cultural activities in a more rational and scientific way.

Association rule is one of the most mature technique in data mining[1]. It can find the association relationships among events that hid in the data, even the association relationships that seems not related at all. Digging these relationships will help us to analyze events more thoroughly and comprehensively. Using the association rules algorithm to analyze the data from the government culture industry survey, we can reveal the local and global relations between various factors. Furthermore, it can summarize mode and provide new analysis method for government?s cultural work. So using association rules algorithm to analyze the culture data is feasible and meaningful.

To understand the information about culture industry and supply a decision support to local authority, we carry out a special investigation about culture construction on the Nanhai district located at Guangdong province in China. The goal of this paper is to supply some decision information to Nanhai authority form the data mining on this survey dataset. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief introduction for Apriori association rule algorithm. In Section 3, we carry out Apriori association rule algorithm on the survey dataset. Finally, some conclusion and discussions are given in Section 4.



II. THE BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE OF ASSOCIATION RULES  A. Basic theory The basic concepts and knowledge of association rule  technology are as follows [2]:  Definition1   Let 1 2{ , , ....., }mI I I I= be a set of items.

Give a transactions database D, where each transaction T is a set of items satisfying T I?  . Each transaction has an identifier, called TID. Let A be a set of items. Transaction T is said to contain A if  A T? . We call A as K-Itemset if A contains K items.

Definition2  If ,A I B I? ?  and A B? = ?  , then the form A B? is an association rule. A is called as the former itemset of the rule and B is called as latter itemset. It means that the transaction T including A will contain B with a large probability. If c% of the transactions including A contain B, the confidence of the rule is c%. If s% of transactions contain A B? in D, then the support of the association rule A B? is  s%. The calculation expressions are as follows:  ( ) ( )Support X Y P X Y? = ? ( ) ( | )Confidence X Y P Y X? =  The confidence and support of association rule reflect the rule's effectiveness and reliability. They are common indicators to measure the user's interest in the association rule[3]. Suppose that there is an association rule , its support and confidence satisfy min_support and min_confidence preset by users, then we call it strong association rule[2]. Strong association rules     are of interest to users and have important guiding significance for users to find potential relationships in large data.

Definition3  An itemset X is Frequent Itemset if the support of  X is no less than a min_support threshold[2].

In general, Association rules mining problems is to find all strong association rules that meet the given minimum support threshold and minimum confidence threshold in a given transaction database using some data mining algorithms.

Association rule mining can be viewed as a two-step process[5]:  Step 1: Find all frequent itemsets: By definition, each of these itemsets will occur at least as  frequently as the predetermined minimum support.

Step 2: Generate strong association rules from the frequent itemsets: By definition, these rules must satisfy the minimum confidence.

In the two steps, looking for all the frequent itemsets is the key, which determines the overall performance of the association rules[6].

B. Apriori algorithms Apriori algorithm is one of the most influential algorithms  in mining frequent itemsets which satisfy Boolean association rules. It uses an iterative method of searching step by step, using the K-Itemset to generate the (K+1)-Itemset[4].

Specifically speaking, the basic idea of the algorithm is to find all frequent itemsets by scanning the database D repeatly. In the k-th scanning, we only consider the itemsets that have the same length of k. In subsequent scanning, generate all new candidate itemsets basing on all frequent itemsets found last time. Then scan the database D, calculate the support of candidate itemsets and determine which candidate itemsets can be the frequent itemsets. Repeat the processes above until no more new itemsets can be produced [6].

The property of Apriori: All the nonempty subsets of frequent itemset is frequent too.

Consequence 1: K-Itemset is infrequent if one of its nonempty subsets is infrequent.

The consequence illustrates that if a set can't pass the test, then all its supersets can't pass the same test too. Apriori algorithm uses this fact to compress the search space.

Generating kL from 1kL ? need the following two steps: connection and pruning. Connection is that generating candidate K-itemsets by connecting 1kL ? and itself. The set of candidate itemsets is named as kC  . Pruning is that counting the number of each itemset occurs in kC and deleting the itemset that can't meet the min_support. So all the itemsets satisfying the min_support make up kL [7]. If we scan database according to the results of connection, the amount of calculation will be too large. Apriori algorithm improve the efficiency by using consequence 1 to omit a lot of useless calculations[4].



III. MINING GOALS AND PROCESS  A. Data sources To understand the information about Nanhai culture  industry deeply and give full play to the leading role of culture in the construction of HAPPY NANHAI, we carry out a questionnaire survey named ?Giving full play to the leading role of culture in the construction of HAPPY NANHAI?. The questionnaire survey was conducted twice. The first survey collected 842 valid questionnaires and the second survey collected 1099 valid questionnaires.

According to the questions set by the survey, there are 20 properties in total in data from Nanhai culture industry.

According to the correlation of these properties, we put the 20 properties into four kinds. The first kind of properties include age, gender, education, occupation, monthly income and whether he or she is local resident. We name these properties personal features. The second kind of properties include resident's recognition on culture concept, residents' agreement on the activities of sending films to countryside, the degree of resident's recognition on the concept that family need filial piety and community need moral, the view about the important role of culture and the life in five years later. we name these properties resident's recognition to the concept that culture plays a leading role in the construction of HAPPY NANHAI.

The third kind of properties include the degree of resident's satisfaction on culture construction, whether resident like the activities with Nanhai characteristics, whether the mass cultural activities carried out at present can attract residents' eyes, whether cultural infrastructure is convenient and complete, whether resident's cultural diversity demand is satisfied and the degree of residents' happiness. We name these properties individual's satisfaction on the government cultural activities.

The fourth kind of properties include the frequency of resident's participation in cultural activities, the frequency of resident's borrowing books and resident's understanding about culture resources, we name these properties individual's participation in government cultural activities.

B. Mining goals Analyzing the affecting factors about participation,  recognition and satisfaction of residents to cultural activities with the data from Nanhai culture industry survey not only supply decision support for the government to summarize the Naihai mode, but also supply references for the Naihai government about how to carry out cultural activities in the future. The concrete content is as follows:.

(1) Research the relationships between the personal features and individual's participation in government cultural activities.

Research the relationship between the personal features and individual's recognition on the concept that culture plays a leading role in the construction of HAPPY NANHAI. Research the relationship between the personal features and individual's satisfaction on government cultural activities.

(2) Research the relationships between other factors and residents' participation in cultural activities.

(3) Research the relationships between other factors and residents' recognition on the concept that culture plays a leading role in the construction of HAPPY NANHAI.

(4) Research the relationships between other factors and residents' satisfaction on government cultural activities.

(5) Research the relationships among all properties.

The specific processes are as follows:  Step1:Use SQL Server Management Studio to import the Excel data that need to be handled to local SQL database.

Step2:Create new Analysis Services project, import data sources and set data sources view.

Step3:Create data mining model, choose Microsoft association rules. Set key, predictable items and input items, and then formulate correct column content and the data type.

Step4:Set appropriate parameters, run the project to get results.

C. Mining results and analysis (1) Mining association rules in the relationships between  personal features and individual's participation in government cultural activities. Set the appropriate minimum support and minimum probability. Because the number of discovered rules is large and we can't put all the rules by listing, we only summarize the mining results (see Fig.1).

Fig.1 The relationships between the personal features and individual's  participation in cultural activities  From the mining results we can see that individual's participation in cultural activities has strong relationship with income, occupation, age and education. There are 20 discovered rules. 13 of them are related to income, 9 of them are related to occupation, 7 of them are related to age and 7of them are related to education. For example, if there is a retiree having a bachelor degree, then the confidence of that he or she knows a lot of culture resources and borrows books frequently is 100%: if there is a no-income person, aging from 30 to 40 years old, then the confidence of that he or she does not know much about culture resources is 80%.

(2) Mining association rules in the relationships between personal features and individual's recognition on government cultural activities. Set the appropriate minimum support and minimum probability. Summarize the mining results(see Fig.2).

Fig.2 The relationship between the personal features and individual's  recognition on cultural activities  From the mining results we can see that individual's recognition on cultural activities has strong relationship with income, occupation, age and education. There are 20 discovered rules. 14 of them are related to income, 13 of them are related to occupation, 4 of them are related to age and 7of them are related to education. For example , if there is a person whose monthly income is 8001 to 10000 Yuan and working in the public institutions of science and technology, education, culture, sports and hygiene, then the confidence of that he or she agrees with the concept that family need filial piety and community need moral is 100%; if there is a unemployed person whose monthly income is 2001 to 3000 Yuan, then the confidence of that he or she agrees with the activities of sending films to countryside is 87.5%.

(3) Mining association rules in the relationships between personal features and individual's satisfaction on government cultural activities. Set the appropriate minimum support and minimum probability. Summarize mining results(see Fig.3).

Fig.3 The relationship between the personal features and individual's  satisfaction on cultural activities  From the mining results we can see that individual's satisfaction on cultural activities has strong relationship with income, occupation, age and education. There are 20 discovered rules.18 of them are related to income, 12 of them are related to occupation, 4 of them are related to age and 6 of them are related to education. For example, if there is a person having master degree or above and no fixed income, then the confidence of that he or she can't make sure that whether he or she is satisfy with culture construction is 100%; the retirees who have no fixed income think the current facilities is very convenient and complete(the confidence is 90%), feel very happy(the confidence is 90%), like the culture activities with     Nanhai characteristics very much(the confidence is 90%), think the diversity of cultural activities can be fully satisfied(the confidence is 70%)or are satisfied with the current culture construction very much(the confidence is 80%).

(4) Mining association rules among participation, recognition and satisfaction of residents to cultural activities.

From the mining results we can see the participation, satisfaction and recognition show a strong relationship between each other. There are 20 rules about participation, 20 of them are related to satisfaction, 7 of them are related to recognition.

There are 20 rules about recognition, 20 of them are related to satisfaction, 4 of them are related to participation. There are 20 rules about satisfaction, 19 of them are related to participation, 14 of them are related to recognition.



IV. CONCLUSIONS The mining results from Apriori association rule algorithm  show that the main affecting factors about participation, recognition and satisfaction of residents to cultural activities are income, occupation, age and education. In addition, there exist a strong relationship among the participation, satisfaction  and recognition. From these results, the local authority should improve residents? living level and education background firstly. At the same, providing different culture activities for different types of residents should be considered.

[1] Bayardo R J, Agrawal R. Mining the Most Interesting Rules[A].

and Data Mining [C] . San D iego: ACM Press, 1999. 145- 154.

[2] Margarent H. Dunham. Data Mining Introductory and Advanced Topics.

Southern Mehodist University. 2003.

[3] Agrawal R, Wrikant R. Fast Algorithms for Mining Association Rules in Large Databases. Proc, 20th int'l Conf Very large databases. 1994. 478- 499.

[4] Savasere A, Ong B, Mitbander B. An efficient algorithm for mining association rules in large databases [A]. Proc1995, Int Conf Very Large Databases ( VLDB' 95 )[C]. 1995.

[5] Jiawei Han. Micheline Kamber. Data Mining Concepts and Techniques[M]. Beijing: China Machine Press, 2007.

[6] Jiangping Chen, Zhongliang Fu, Zhihong Xu. An improved algorithm of Apriori [J]. Journal of Wuhan University (Information Science Edition), 2003, (2).

[7] Jingliang Lin. Association rules mining algorithms and its application [J]. Journal of Xiamen University, 2007, (5).

