

Abstract?Most existing techniques work on hiding association rules in Boolean data. Based on analyzing fuzzy correlation, we have introduced a new scheme for privacy-preservation in fuzzy association rules mining, named PPM-Scheme, which is able to achieve complete hiding of sensitive rules mined in quantitative data by using improved technique in which we replace the highest value of fuzzy item with zero. Experimental results show that the proposed scheme hides more sensitive rules with minimum number of modifications and maintains quality of the released data than those previous techniques.

Association rules; PPM-Scheme; privacy preservation; fuzzy correlation

I.  INTRODUCTION Association rules mining is an important research area in  data mining, which indicates relations among item sets in database, With the accumulation of the data, association rule mining in large data set attracts more and more attention. It is widely used in many domains, such as business promotion decisions. The existing association rule mining methods are very useful on binary data, but they can not work on the kind of data of quantitative nature. This important fact about classical association rules, led to invention of quantitative association rules. To overcome the limitation of classical methods, the approach of fuzzy association rules has been developed, which allows the interval to overlap, making fuzzy sets [1].

As we know, alone with an advantage of extracting useful information, data mining also poses threat of revealing sensitive information at the same time. The concept introduced by Literature [2] privacy preservation in data mining, is the process by using which we can hide sensitive association rules. These rules are important for decisions and require remaining private. Presently there are many techniques to solve the privacy preservation problem, but most of those concentrate on hiding Boolean sensitive association rules.

Literature [3] highlighted the concept of limiting disclosure of sensitive rules and put their efforts to hide some frequent item set. For hiding purpose, it modifies the database in a way that support of a given set of sensitive rules decreases below the minimum support value. Literature [4] investigated confidentiality issues of association rules and developed a method for removing individual values from data to prevent sensitive rules. Literature [5] proposed an algorithm which only removes information from database, rather than  modifying the existing information. Literature [6] proposed an algorithm which converged to the maximum likelihood estimate of original distribution. This technique provides a quantification and measurement of privacy and information loss. Literature [7] tried to identify the highly predictive fuzzy weighted non-sensitive and to extract fuzzy weighted frequent and then hide them in combination of sensitive items.

Now we have proposed a new scheme (PPM-Scheme) for privacy preservation of sensitive fuzzy association rules in quantitative data. It is able to hide sensitive fuzzy association rules and generate less ghost rules and perform minimum numbers of modifications in transactions. It is applicable in many different domains, such as medical diagnosis, temperature controls, predicting travel time and predicting genetic behavior.



II. RIVACY-PRESERVATION IN FUZZY ASSOCIATION RULES MINING  Firstly we state the Problem of hiding sensitive fuzzy association rules. Let D  be a source database, FAR  is a set of relevant fuzzy association rules  )}),......((),{( Nizxx fFFFFyF ??? that could be mined from D, and the SFAR is a set of sensitive fuzzy association rule )}(),{( ZXYX SFSFSFSF ?? , By transforming D  into another database D? , the sensitive fuzzy association rules (SFAR) are hidden. Thus D?  becomes the released database.

Secondly we are required handling the quantitative data by using the membership function illustrated by Fig. 1.

Figure 1.  Membership function  Then we can obtain fuzzy item sets after this performing process, then apply the fuzzy correlation rule mining  Supported by the Youth Science Foundation of Education Department  of Jiangxi Province, NO. GJJ11128  0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9   0 2.5 5 7.5 Quantity  )(X?     algorithm[8] to find the fuzzy association rules. Fuzzy Correlation of each rule represents the correlated set of Sensitive Association Rule (SAR), and on the basis of this correlation we hide the sensitive fuzzy association rule by applying PPM-Scheme. The PPM-Scheme consists of the following steps. The flow of PPM-Scheme is shown in Fig. 2.

Figure 2.  The flow of PPM-Scheme  Step 1: Fuzzification of Quantitative Data  Fuzzy sets may be viewed as an extension of the classical crisp sets, and generalize the function by assigning values that fall in a particular range of 0 to 1. X is the crisp universal set and the function A?  is the membership function which defines set A. Formally, it can be represented as ]1,0[: ?XA? .

The membership function that we use in the PPM-Scheme is defined in Fig.1. This function is used to assign a membership degree to each of the elements in crisp set X. While fuzzifying, that concepts should be kept in mind that the support of fuzzy set A is given by crisp set containing all of the elements whose membership degree in A is not 0.

}0)(|{)( >?= xXxASup A?    (1)  Step 2: Fuzzy Association Rule Mining  we use the Apriori[9] algorithm for fuzzy association rules mining process. This process formally can be defined as: let  },........,{ 21 mfffF =  is a set of fuzzy items, },.......,{ 21, ntttT =  is a  set of fuzzy records, while each record it  is represented as a vector with m values, ))(),........(),(( 2211 im tftftf  and )( ii tf  is  membership degree that it  belongs to fuzzy item ]1,0[)( ?ij tf .

A fuzzy association rule is in a form of implication like yx FF ? , where FFF yx ?, are fuzzy itemsets. A fuzzy association rule yx FF ? , holds in fuzzy dataset T with fuzzy support }),sup({ yx FFf  and it can be calculated as shown in (2).

}),sup( yx FFf = n  FFftfMin yxj  n  i ij }),{|)((   ?? =    (2)  If }),sup({ yx FFf  is greater than or equal to the user-defined minimum fuzzy support )( fS , then fuzzy association rule  )( yx FF ?  is considered as an interesting fuzzy association rule, and it means that xF  and yF  frequently occur together.

We calculate the fuzzy correlation for finding the interesting fuzzy association rules.

Step 2.1: Fuzzy Correlation Analysis  Suppose there are two fuzzy itemsets FBA ?, , where F is a fuzzy space. A and B are defined on a crisp universal set X with membership functions A?  and B? , and thus the fuzzy itemsets A and B can be represented mathematically as follows in (3) and (4).

)|))(,( XxxxA A ?= ?     (3)  )|))(,( XxxxB B ?= ?     (4)  Where XBA ??? , , with sequence of paired data, }....1|))(),(,{( nixxx iBiAi =?? , and it refers to the grades of membership functions of fuzzy itemsets A and B defined on crisp universal value X. To calculate fuzzy correlation coefficient between the fuzzy itemsets A and B, BACor ,  is calculated as shown in (5).

,  , , BA  BA BA  SS  S Cor =     (5)  The range of the values which obtain from Equation (5) lies between -1 to 1. The linguistic variables for proposed scheme are given:  1) If, || ,BACor is close to 1, means > 0.5 -1 then it is highly positively correlated.

2) If, || ,BACor is close to 0, means < 0.5 - 0 then it is low correlated.

3) If, || ,BACor is 0, means no correlation.

4) If, || ,BACor is less then 0 it means negatively correlated.

Step 2.2: Algorithm for fuzzy Correlation Rules Mining  Assume that },........,{ 21 mfffF =  is a set of Fuzzy items, },.......,{ 21, ntttT = is a set of fuzzy data records, and each record  it  stands for a vector with m values, ))(),.......((),(( 21 tiftftf mii where )( ij tf is membership degree that  it  belongs to fuzzy item jf , means that )),()( titf fjij ?= ]1,0[)( ?ij tf ; fS is the user-defined fuzzy support; ? : A user Specified fuzzy Correlation threshold.

Step 3: Identification of Sensitive Fuzzy Association Rules  After performing the coefficient correlation analysis and fuzzy association rule generation step, we will get the interesting fuzzy association rules whose value is maximum than specified ?  (Fuzzy correlation threshold) and supf (User     defined fuzzy support threshold). We consider these interesting rules as sensitive fuzzy association rules.

Step 4: Pruning Technique:  Sensitive fuzzy association rules are selected by performing the step of fuzzy support and fuzzy correlation analysis. After selection of a sensitive fuzzy association rule, we modify those specific fuzzy items, which are highly correlated to each other by replacing higher value of fuzzy item with 0 in the transactions of dataset. This step will lower down certain threshold values of respective sensitive fuzzy association rules. This process is continued until all of the sensitive fuzzy association rules have their certain threshold value below the specified values. At the end of this step we obtain the released and modified dataset.



III. MINING ALGORITHM BASED ON PPM-SCHEME                                   Figure 3.  Algorithm based on PPM-Scheme  By using the notation from TABLE I, the mining algorithm based on PPM-Scheme illustrated by Fig. 3.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION In this section some experiments are performed to assess  the performance of the PPM-scheme by using some datasets [8][10][11][12]. The performance of scheme is measured according to following criteria: 1) the number of new rules generated after modifications, 2) the number of modifications in fuzzy transaction of datasets. Fig. 4 shows the relationship between numbers of new rules generated (ghost rules) as a side effect by hiding process and number of transactions. To determine new rules, we computed the difference between the numbers of rules mined from the source database. The results are given  TABLE I.  NOTATION USED IN MINING ALGORITHM    in Fig. 4. It can be clearly seen that PPM-Scheme generated less ghost rules, while in comparison with existing techniques [10] [11].

Figure 4.  Comparison results  Fig. 5 shows the relationship between number of modifications after the hiding process and total number of transactions. We select some different datasets. The dataset for experiment has 5 transactions with 5 fuzzy items. After applying the fuzzy support and fuzzy correlation analysis we get 2 interesting items which are considered as sensitive. For hiding purpose, we perform just one modification and we achieve complete hiding. In the second experiment, we have dataset with 10 transactions with 5 fuzzy items. In this dataset we get 3 interesting /sensitive rules. We analyze which fuzzy item are highly correlated with other and occurs most frequently. We directly target that fuzzy item for modification.

In this experiment, with just 2 modifications we get complete sensitive fuzzy rule hiding. In third experiment, we have dataset with 721 transactions and 11 quantitative attributes which are fuzzified in 3 regions. After applying fuzzy support  D Original Dataset  D?  Modified Dataset / Released dataset  TD Transaction Code N Total number of transaction  Ant/ FX Tail  Con/FY Head FAR Fuzzy Association rule  FSAR Set of Sensitive Association  Cor Correlation  iF  Fuzzy Itemset F Itemset }....,,,{ 321 mffff S Set of candidate combination  )sup( iff  Fuzzy Support  fS  Minimum Fuzzy Support  Input Dataset D (Fuzzified dataset) ? : A user Specified fuzzy Correlation threshold  fS :A minimum fuzzy support value Output  Dataset D?  (Modified  Released database ) RFA ? ( Set of  Fuzzy Association rules without SAR)  Step 1: Fuzzification of dataset using membership function.

Step 2: Finding Fuzzy Correlation )( ,BACor  and minimum Fuzzy support fS  1)  For each fuzzy item Ffi ? , )sup( iff is calculated.

2)  Let 1S = { })sup(,| fiii SFffFF ??  is the frequent fuzzy item sets.

3)  let 2CA = )},{( BA FF   is the set of candidate combinations of two fuzzy item sets of 1S , where 1, SFF BA ?  and BA FF ? .( 2CA  is generated  by 1S joint with 2S , because AF  and BF  are the elements of 1S ) 4) For each element of 2CA , ),( BA FF  the fuzzy support  })),sup({( BA FFf  and the fuzzy Correlation AF and BF  )( ,BACor  are computed. If fBA SFFf ?})),sup({(  and ??)( ,BACor , than the  combination ),( BA FF is an element of 2S 5)  Next kCA , if 3?k  then kCA  is computed by 1?kS  joint with itself.

Step 3: Apply Modification Technique (Replace 1 with 0) until the certain threshold  is not below the specified value.

Step 4: go to Step 2.

50 100 150 200  No. of Transactions  N o.

o f G  ho st  ru le  (Berberoglu and Kaya, 2008)  (Gupta and Joshi, 2009)  Proposed Scheme     and fuzzy correlation analysis, we got 12 sensitive fuzzy association rules. After applying 242 modifications we get complete hiding.  The results are shown in Fig. 5.

Figure 5.  Comparison of number of modifications and Transactions  The main reason for less number of modifications in PPM-Scheme is that it targets those fuzzy items which are highly correlated with other fuzzy items and occurs most frequently. Modification is performed in those fuzzy items by using the proposed scheme. Therefore, we can maintain higher quality of data of the released dataset. While those existing techniques[10][11] use conventional support and confidence criteria for selection of transactions and modify all possible transactions of a rule, thus, generate more side effects and reduces the data quality of released database.



V. CONCLUSIONS In this paper we have proposed the new scheme (PPM-  Scheme) for privacy preservation of sensitive fuzzy association rules in quantitative data. It is able to hide sensitive fuzzy association rules and generate less ghost rules and perform minimum numbers of modifications in transactions. Experimental results show that the proposed scheme hides more sensitive rules with minimum number of modifications and maintains quality of the released data than those previous techniques. So it is applicable in many different domains, such as medical diagnosis, temperature controls, predicting travel time and predicting genetic behavior.

