Improved Recommendation Algorithm Based on Clustering and Association Rule

Abstract-Recommender systems apply knowledge  discovery techniques to the problem of making products recommendations during a live customer interaction and  they are achieving widespread success in e-commerce  nowadays. But the traditional recommendation algorithm makes the quality of system decreased  dramatically. In particular, we present an improved  recommendation algorithm based on clustering and association rule to calculate the customer's nearest  neighbor, and then provide the most appropriate products to meet his needs. The experimental results  show the efficiency of our method.

Keywords-recommendation algorithm; clustering; Associate rule style  1. INTRODUCTION  E-commerce provides customers with ways to access necessary information without any restriction. However, most of the current E-commerce platforms only provide users simple, 2D image-based and text-based interfaces or some flash animations to access the products.

Recommendation systems using all kinds of tools to respond to customer needs, understand customer behavior, and best use the limited available customer attention.

The nearest collaborative filtering recommendation system is one of the most successful techniques in E? commerce. Collaborative filtering works by building a database of preference for products by customers. However, there remain important research questions in overcoming two fundamental challenges for collaborative filtering recommender systems [1]. The traditional similarity measure methods have their deficiency in this situation. All of them cannot find the nearest neighbor accurately leads to the quality of recommender system decreasing dramatically [2].

In this paper, we present a improved algorithm which based on clustering and association rule to calculate the customer's nearest neighbor and then provide the appropriate products to meet customers' needs.

In this paper, we research the new and existing algorithms that have the potential to improve both scalability and quality of recommender systems. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a briefly review the previous work related our work. The section following that provides detailed describe of a improved   JianPing Ma School of Computer Science  Zhejiang University of Technology Hangzhou, P.R.China  majp@Zjut.edu.cn  recommendation algorithm based on clustering and association rule. Section 4 describes experiment results, evaluation and discussion of the results. The final section provides the concluding remarks.



II. RELATED WORK  Various learning approaches have been applied to construct customer profiles and to discover customer preferences to make recommendation.

In recent years, with the advent of E-commerce the need for personalized services has been emphasized. Business researchers have advocated the need for one-to-one marketing [3]. Schafer present a detailed taxonomy and examples of recommender systems used in E-commerce and how they can provide one-to-one personalization and can capture customer loyalty [4]. The earliest approach used nearest-neighbor collaborative filtering algorithms [5, 6].

Nearest neighbor algorithm is a rather lazy algorithm. A new customer is generally associated to a target customer, the algorithm chooses the nearest customers from computing the distances between different customers and then recommends the products to the customers. One of the best known data mining techniques of recommendation algorithm is the association rule. The main goal of the rule is to find association between two sets of products in the transaction database such that the presence of products in one set implies the presence of the products from the other set. Tree projection algorithm is some of the well-known algorithm for finding association rule from databases [7]. Another method, the Bayesian networks create a model based on a training set with a decision tree at each node and edges representing customer information. The model can be built off-line very quickly, from a few hours to a few days. The resulting model is very economic, fast, and essentially as accurate as the nearest neighbor methods. IdentifYing groups of customers appearing to have similar preferences also uses clustering techniques.

In some cases, clustering techniques usually less accuracy than the nearest neighbor algorithms [8]. For this reason, clustering techniques can be applied as a "first step" of nearest neighbor algorithms.



III. IMPROVED RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHM  In commercial recommender system, many approaches based on nearest neighbor algorithm have been very successful. But the widespread use revealed some potential     challenges. The weakness of nearest neighbor algorithm for large, sparse database leads us to explore alternative recommendation algorithm. The data mining technologies, especially association rule mining algorithm, have been adopted to target marketing or personalized recommendation service within the e-commerce area. In this section, we propose the improved recommendation algorithm, which combing clustering and association rule to address these challenges.

The customers' similarity module in our algorithm is constructed based on the following four general shopping steps modified from works of Yoon ho cho. [9]:  a) Text: the texts inputted by the customer reflects the customer's requirement.

b) Click-through: the click on the products and the view of the relative products.

c) Purchasel: the purchase of the product-completion of a transaction.

d) Purchase2: We also add both not purchase products.

We believe that the customers who don't buy some products have the similar habit, as in (1).

simiZaril)fJ,j) = CLIclii.j) + TEX1(i.j) + REALl(i.j) + BN0l(i.j) (1) Where CLICK (i,j) represents the similarity of click,  TEXTCi,j) represents the similarity of text input, REALP(i,j) represents the similarity of purchase 1 , and BNOPCi,j) represents the similarity of purchase2, as in (2),(3),(4),(5) and (6).

CLIClii.j) = n  n  ?)CikIl.Cjk) k-j  ?)Cik + Cjk -(CikIl.Cjk)) k=l click  TEX1(i.j) = n  n  L(CikIl.Cjk) k-j  L(Cik +cjk -(cikIl.Cjk)) k?j text  n  L(CikIl.Cjk) REALl(i.j) = -n ---'.k"'-'--j ---?  L(Cik +cjk -(cikIl.Cjk)) k?j real_purchase  (2)  (3)  (4)  {?)CikIl.Cjk) (5) BN0l(i.j) = k-j  L k bothnotpUlchase  ? l iij-j!;" ?&ij  ) J Iij= L. rnax(?Frnin(? ) (6) i=l Lj?N r.J Lj?N r.J (clicktex?reaCpurchasf  Where iik represents the number of the i -Th customer who bought the k item.

Clustering technique can be applied as a first step for shrinking the candidate set in a nearest neighbor algorithm.

While dividing the population into clusters may hurt the   accuracy or recommendations to users near the fringes of their assigned clusters. To offset the drawback, we add some indirect relevant customers to the cluster. Consider the target user a, assume that customers a and b are direct relevant, that means the similarity between a and b is higher than the threshold. b and c is also direct relevant, while customers a and c are not direct relevant. In this case, we call customer a and c is indirect relevant. We should add c to the customer. The benefit then, is the possibility of identifying larger group of users that are relevant to the target user and thus provide a richer recommendation base, as in (7)  k  Sa,j = L c(a, i)x i,j + c(a, a)xa,j (7) i=l Where x. . represents the preference between 1,]  customer i and product j ; c( a, i) represents the similarity between customer a and customer i ; S a,j represents the preference between customer a and product j computed by  the similar customers.

After above task-clustering, all customers have their own  nearest neighbors. We use these nearest neighbors' transaction database to generate products association rules that are specific to each customer. As soon as customer i logins the web site, customer i specific association rule is activated and according to these rules and customer session information, personalized service is provided. According to the current customer input, we can get the current user's association rules. If the rule satisfies a specified confidence threshold requirement, then the candidate object is added to the recommendation set. Finally, all the recommendation set is listed to the pop-up windows.

Group l: Pants :::::}  dress; dress :::::}  pants  group 1 group 1  Group 2: Sports clothes :::::}  jeans; jeans :::::}  sports  group 2 group 2  clothes Group 3: Women dress :::::} Underwear; Underwear  group 3 :::::} Cosmetics; Women dress :::::} Cosmetics; cosmetics  group3i group 3  :::::} underwear  group 3

IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND ANALYSIS  We adopt MAE (Mean Absolute Error) as the evaluated standard.

The definition is as in (8):  MAE = L:j lpi -qi l N  (8)  Where Pi represents the degree of satisfaction that the customer assess the product, qi represents the degree of the satisfaction that recommendation algorithm assess the product, and N represents the total customers. MAE     represents the mean absolute error between the real ratings items and the predicable rating items. The more decreased the MAE is, the more the quality of recommendation is increased.

According to experiment, the improved recommendation algorithm based on clustering and association rule can obtain better result than the traditional method. So, the improved recommendation algorithm based on clustering and association rule is chosen as the measure for our experiment.

The experiment result is shows in Fig.l .

? ? 3 1.4   1.5  o. 5 o 0  3 5 Number of Neighbors  ? cosine-based algorithm 0 corre-based algorithm o improved algorithm  Figure I. The comparison of accuracy of recommendation algorithms

V. CONCLUSION  E-commerce is becoming an important component of modem business transactions. Recommender systems benefit customers by enabling them to find products they like. New technologies are needed that can dramatically improve the scalability of recommender systems.

In this paper we presented a improved recommendation algorithm based on clustering and association rule. This method uses the characters of the products as well as the rated products that can be regarded as the classified data.

This method can solve the problem that exists in traditional similarity measure method effectively and get the more accurate neighbors of the target customers. Our results show   that the proposed method can greatly increase the quality of the recommender system.

