Electronic Medical Referral System: Decision Support and  Recommendation Approach

ABSTRACT  In the medical practice in countries like Canada, it is common that a general practitioner (GP) refers a patient to a specialist (SP) to complete the patients? medical treatment. This patients? transfer is termed medical referral process. Recently, many researchers have been focussing on reducing the wait time spent on the medical referrals which is mainly caused by the long time spent in finding the proper SP. In this paper, we describe a framework that involves a fully implemented and running web-based electronic referral system, including a standard referral form, to enhance the process of identifying the proper specialists using decision support and recommendation techniques.  The outcome is promising and demonstrates the power of automated intelligent systems in serving the health care domain.

Keywords: Medical Referral, Health Informatics, Decision Support, Recommendation, Association rules, E-referral System  1. INTRODUCTION Healthcare systems improvement is an ongoing task in both the developed and developing countries [1]. Medical referral process is defined as the transfer of the patient?s care from one physician to another [2]. A referral is requested when a consultation with a specialist is necessary to diagnose the patient?s health problem.

Patients are referred by a general practitioner to a specialist or by a specialist to another specialist [3]. As shown in Fig.1, if a person is sick, he/she visits a medical practice to see a general practitioner (GP). This leads to two possibilities: one is that the GP is able to solve the problem of the patient which leads the patient to recover.

The other possibility will require the GP to send the patient to another physician known as Specialist (SP) who is more knowledgeable about the patients? disease.

Referring a patient to a SP has been recognized as a serious issue in many of the healthcare systems in the world due to the unacceptable delay in the referral process.

Most referrals rely on paper-based systems [4]. The paper- based referral systems cause unacceptable delay to complete the referral process. Fig.2, shows the basic paper-based referral system used by some physicians in Calgary, AB, Canada; if a GP decided to refer a patient to a SP, the task of the GP is to find the proper SP. If the GP does not know which SP to refer the patient to, then the GP consults with another GP to help him/her to find a proper SP.  Once the GP finds a proper SP to refer the patient to, he/she contacts the SP for the referral by fax and/or phone with the required referral forms. The SP office then responds back to the sending physician. The SP may accept or reject the referral. Some reasons for referral rejection may include: ? The SP is too busy to accept any new referrals ? The SP is out of town ? The SP may reject a referral request because he/she is  not the right SP If the SP rejected the referral, the process of finding  the proper SP begins again. On the other side of the process, if the SP accepts the referral, then the patient waits till the scheduled appointment to see the SP.

This paper-based referral process consumes too much time and effort which causes unacceptable wait time. In order to improve the referral process, we have implemented an electronic referral system to move the referral process into an electronic form.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses our contributions on this work. Section 3 summarizes the related work in the area of e-referral systems, decision support, and recommendation approaches. Section 4 presents the proposed application followed by the summary, conclusions and future work in Section 5.

572IEEE IRI 2012, August 8-10, 2012, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA       Figure 1: General overview of patient handling in Canadian system  Figure 2: Identifying the most appropriate specialist for a referral process  2. CONTRIBUTIONS In this paper, we implement an electronic referral application to be used as a recommendation tool to find the proper SP for patients in Calgary, AB, Canada (see Figure 1 and Figure 2). The tool will recommend different SPs based on some inputs from the user such as symptoms of the patients, specialty of the specialist, sub-speciality of the specialist, and the location of the specialist office. In addition, we are proposing a standard referral form to be used by the participating GPs to have a standard referral form between the physicians. Moreover, our application records referral feedback to track the stages of the referral process including any challenges that may occur. One main  feature of this application that differs from the other existing e-referral applications is that it uses data mining techniques (association rules) that allow the system to learn from the historical referral transactions and the referral feedback. For example, if a certain SP is away every January, then the system will assign the lowest recommendation score with a notification to indicate the association rule.

We believe that Implementing this system will provide: ? Faster response time ? More accurate data ? Electronic referring forms ? Easy backups        Internet  Referral Form  Decision Support System (DSS)  Recommendation System (RS)`  Computer  DSS Result Send  Recommendation Result to User  Enter Referral Feedback   Figure 3: block diagram of the proposed electronic referral system  3. RELATED WORK Many countries have introduced the application of electronic referral system which has recently received a considerable attention for its importance in replacing the manual referral process and to reduce the time spent in finding the proper SP [5, 6]. Denmark adopted the e-referral system in 1995, Netherlands in 2001, Australia in 2009, and New Zealand (Hutt Valley) in 2007 [7, 8, 9,10].

A study of the patient electronic referral system has been conducted by [11] and concluded that healthcare organizations are highly recommended to implement the electronic medical referral system.

San Francisco general hospital has implemented an electronic referral system that creates direct communication between primary care providers and specialist reviewers.

This system requires the provider to submit the referral request to be reviewed and responded by clinicians. This system also allows specialists to communicate back to the referring physician to address the patient?s issue [12].

There are a number of different approaches have been proposed for the electronic referral systems; [13] has proposed a forum-based referral system that provides a common communication medium for healthcare professionals involved in the referral process.

Our proposed electronic referral system is based on decision support and recommendation techniques. Decision support is defined by [14,15] as ?A computer based system designed to help decision makers use data, knowledge and communications technology to identify problems and make decisions to solve those problem?. Decision support systems serve users by returning a choice of one or more among a number of alternatives. Recommendation systems are applications act as guides to users based on historical transaction behaviour [16, 17, 18].

Most of the existing medical referral systems are designed for a specific medical clinics or diseases. Our goal is to create a universal electronic system to be used by all GPs and SPs in Calgary. Another unique feature of our proposed electronic referral system is to take advantage of  the decision making and recommendation guidelines so the system can learn from previous referral transactions. These guidelines are updated and generated based on the new referral records.

4. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK  4.1 System Framework The framework of the proposed electronic referral system is shown in Figure.3. When a physician decided to send a referral to a specialist, he/she logs into our web-based application and enters the medical referral search criteria.

The decision support system runs a query based on the criteria and returns a list of potential specialists. The result received from the decision support system is processed by the recommendation system to generate association rules to rank the list of the potential specialists. After that, the result is sent to the referring physician to select a specialist to send the referral to using a standard electronic form stored in the database. The receiving physician will either accept or reject this referral. In both cases the referring physician will enter a feedback on how successful the referral is and enter some referral data we require to feed the recommendation system for future recommendation ranking.

4.1.1 DSS and RS The decision support system (DSS) adopted in our application is to serve as a guide for the referral requester to return the potential specialists based on the referral criteria entered by the user. It contains a relational database that is designed based on the business rules of the healthcare system we are proposing this work for.

On the other hand, the recommendation system (RS) uses data mining technique (association rules) to process and rank the potential specialists to be displayed to the referring physician. For example, a general practitioner performed a specialist search. Specialist A and Specialist B were returned as potential specialists by DSS. The R        processed these two specialists with the association rules generated by the system based on historical referral data.

An association rule might be ?95% of the referrals sent to Specialist A in January are rejected?. This will assign a lower recommendation score to Specialist A. The higher the negative association rule percentage is, the lower the score is assigned to potential specialist indicated in the rule.  We believe that this feature will be valuable to for future recommendation decision.

Figure 4: Specialist search page  Figure 5: Result from the decision support System ordered by recommendation score  Figure 6: detailed information about selected specialists        Figure 7: Form for entering feedback about the referral  Figure 8: Form for updating specialists information  4.2 Electronic Referral Application Figures 4-8 show some screen shots of our web-based electronic referral application. We have deleted any identification fields for confidentiality purposes. Figure 4 shows specialist search page where the referring physician selects multiple search criteria (Specialty, Interests, Time Requirement, and Location).   Figure 5 shows the result returned by DSS and RS ordered based on the recommendation scores where the specialist listed first has a higher recommendation score. Once the user clicks on a specialist name on the list, a general information page will be displayed as shown in Figure 6 which contains detailed information about the selected specialist.  The general information page displays phone/fax numbers, office hours, area of specialty and sub-specialty, medical staff site,  waiting period, referral documents required, etc of the selected specialist.

The referring physician then fills the referral form and sends it to the selected specialist. Fig 7 shows a form to be used to enter feedback about the referral. We collect some referral information including specialty name, whether the referral was successful or no, the time it took the specialist office to get back to the patient, the time it took till the patient sees the specialist, and any additional note that would be helpful for the future referral decision. Since specialist information change from time to time, we have designed a form to be used to record any specialist information updates as shown in Fig 8. The form allows users to add/remove specialists or to update information about the existing specialists.

5. SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  The health care system in Canada is expected to be effective. However, there are main obstacles that prevent the patients from receiving the proper timely treatment. It is mostly the manual system that causes all the delay. Both GPs and specialists agree that one of the main causes of the referral delay is the long time spent in finding the proper specialist by using the paper-based referral process which relies on fax and telephone transmissions as the primary communication methods. We believe that an electronic referral system structured as a web-based application will increase the quality and efficiency of the referral process.

Web-based applications using a DSS and RS are considered as effective intelligent tool to find proper specialists.  The combination has been demonstrated effective in various domains. For example, amazon.com uses the recommendation techniques to recommend items based on the users? taste. This feature makes it convenient to some buyers to save time spent in navigating through the website.

Our electronic referral application will benefit the GPs to speed up the search for and choose appropriate specialist, electronically by using a standard referral form, and receive status and feedback about the referral. We believe that this new development in the referral process will significantly reduce the referral wait time.

We have developed a web-based electronic referral application. We are currently in the testing and documentation phase. We are planning to see our application is tested at medical centres in Calgary, Alberta, Canada.  We will incorporate further feedback from domain experts though domain experts have been heavily consulted during the development of the current phase of the framework. Once the testing and evaluation of the system is done, we will publish and share our results with international professionals.

