Automated Vibration Analysis in Loaded  Condition of Hydro Turbine Generator Sets

Abstract?Vibration analysis can reveal rich health condition information of hydro turbine generator sets. And it is still performed by the experts manually through tests. Besides, the accuracy of the analysis results is affected due to lack of experts with rich experience and domain knowledge. And manual tests increase downtime of the units. To address these issues, an automated analysis approach in the loaded condition based on the operation condition association rules (OCARs) is presented.

It simulates the analysis process of the experts and makes the process automated, like automated operation condition classification, automated operation performance indicators calculation, automated health condition assessment and automated fault analysis. And it has advantages in automated vibration performance degradation detection, fault analysis and operation laws discovery in normal operation of the units instead of tests. The approach has been applied successfully in the vibration analysis of the 22 units in Gezhouba Hydropower Plant. The application shows that it has good prospects.

Keywords- hydro turbine generator sets; vibration; operation condition association rule; automated; fault detection; fault analysis

I. INTRODUCTION Vibration analysis is a condition monitoring technique used  commonly to ensure the operation safety, stability and reliability for the hydro turbine generator sets. The field of the vibration monitoring and analysis has been active during the past decade, and several diagnostic platforms have been proposed as expert systems [1-3], which play a great important role in vibration monitoring and diagnosis. However, actually fault diagnosis could not be done automatically by the systems and the experts? involvement is required. Therefore, fault diagnosis is still generally performed by the experts with rich experience and domain knowledge by means of rotate speed test, load test and excitation test currently.

Nowadays, many power plants are facing the problem of lack of experts with years of experience, who have gained sufficient background knowledge about their plants to keep equipment failure risk to a minimum and are familiar with the expert systems. In addition, when those experts retire or go to another position for personnel rotation, the problem is more serious. Therefore the vibration analysis results which rely on the experts will be affected. Besides, vibration analysis tests usually results in the occurrence of downtime, which will affect the economic efficiency of the power plants. In order to address these issues, two choices could be made. Firstly, the  automation level of the expert systems for analysis and diagnosis should be enhanced further to complete the fault diagnosis as automatically as possible and with experts? intervention as little as possible. Secondly, the approaches of vibration analysis during normal operation period of the hydro turbine generator sets should be studied so that the downtime will be reduced.

In this study, an automated vibration analysis approach in loaded condition of hydro turbine generator sets based on Operation Condition Association Rules(OCARs) is presented in Hydropower plant Optimal Maintenance Information System (HOMIS) [4]. Combined to the operation condition and relevant states of vibration, the operation condition is classified and the performance indicators of the vibration are calculated. Then the OCARs are stored. The vibration health condition is assessed and the operation laws are discovered as well as fault analysis is realized automatically during normal operation period of the unit based on the OCARs. And the analysis process simulating the experts is automated by the machines. Finally, the application notes in Gezhouba Hydropower Plant are demonstrated.



II. VIBRATION MONITORING IN HOMIS  A Characteristic of Vibration  The vibration of hydro turbine generator sets is closely related to mechanical, electromagnetic, hydraulic and other factors [5]. For instances, the amplitudes of the vibration due to mechanical excitation, such as the unbalance of generator rotors or turbine runners, friction or impact between rotating and fixed parts, are related to the rotation speed of the unit while those of the vibration caused by electromagnetic excitation change significantly with the excitation current of the generator. And the amplitudes of the vibration result by the hydraulic factors, such as low-frequency vortex in the draft tube, uneven opening of the guide vane or wheel blade, vary with different load and water head.

In addition, the vibration characteristic in the transient process (such as start-up operation, shut down operation and load rejection) is different with that in the steady process (such steady un-synchronized condition and steady synchronized condition). The analysis methods for the two processes are different. In this study, the vibration analysis in the steady process of loaded condition is studied.

Due to that the vibration of hydro turbine generator sets has a very close relationship with the operation conditions of the unit and the relevant states, these factors should be considered in vibration analysis to improve the reliability and accuracy of the analysis results.

B Framework of HOMIS  HOMIS consists of an on-line Condition Monitoring and Diagnosis System (CMDS) and enterprise WAN information platform. CMDS, as shown in Fig.1, is composed of 3 specialized Data Acquisition and Analysis Units(DAAU)[6-8] for mechanical facility(such as vibrations, air-gaps, cavitation), electric facility(such as partial discharge in stator winding of the generator, partial discharge of the transformer), control systems(such as governor, excitation system) and an Integrated Monitoring and Diagnosis Unit(IMDU).

The mechanical DAAU, in which the vibration monitoring is integrated, acquires the operation conditions of the unit and the relevant states of vibration (seen in Table.1) from the other DAAUs and the IMDU via the CAN bus. HOMIS provides a superior platform for the automated vibration analysis associated with the operation conditions and relevant states.



III. OPERATION CONDITION ASSOCIATION RULES Production rules [9] are often used to represent the causal  knowledge. The rule is depicted in the following form.

IF   P   THEN   Q (1) P stands for a group of preconditions or states while Q is  on behalf of a number of conclusions or actions. If the precondition P to be satisfied is true, then the conclusion Q or action Q can be made. The production rule can be expressed using the formula as follow.

1 1 : ( )  n m  k ijk ki j R OR AND E C  = = ?  (2)  Where m, n>1?k=1,2?...r. Rk is the k-th rule while Ck is the conclusion of the k-th rule. Eijk is the precondition.

Control systems DAAU Governor  Excitation Regulator  Integrated monitoring and diagnosis unit  LCU Fault  recorder  Expert workstation  Sensors added  CMDS  Maintenance WAN  Electric facility DAAU  Mechanical facility DAAU   Figure 1 On-line condition monitoring and diagnosis system    TABLE 1 Operations states relevant to vibration obtained by HOMIS  Vibration parameters and relevant states Source  Operation condition, active power, rotation speed, etc. Control DAAU  Stator current, excitation current, air-gaps, etc. Electric DAAU  The stator temperature, bearing temperature, etc. LCU  Vibration, water pressure, key phase Mechanical DAAU  In this work, operation conditions and the relevant states of the vibration are employed as the preconditions and the vibration performance indicators are adopted as the conclusions. Then the production OCARs are established, which is well-suited for representing the close relationship during the vibration performance and the operation conditions and relevant states intuitively.



IV. AUTOMATED VIBRATION ANALYSIS BASED ON OCARS  An automated vibration analysis approach in the loaded condition is proposed based on the OCARs in HOMIS, as shown in Fig.2.

A Automated Operation Conditions Classification  1) Automated operation condition identification The operation conditions should be identified to assess the  vibration performance. The control DAAU identifies the operation conditions automatically according to the operating states, such as active power, reactive power, rotation speed, water head and voltage every 50 milliseconds. And then transmits the operation conditions information to the other DAAU[10]. Generally, these operation conditions are identified: Start-up operation, steady un-synchronized condition, synchronization operation, steady synchronized condition, power increase or decrease operation, shut down operation, emergency shutdown operation and load rejection operation. Each kind of the operation conditions is assigned with an ID, named OCID, i.e., the OCID of steady synchronized condition is 51 while that of steady un-synchronized condition is 35.

Figure 2 Automated analysis approach of vibration in HOMIS      2) Automated operation condition classification The steady operation conditions of the unit can be  characterized by a set of operating states. According to the vibration characteristic, the OCID, the active power P and the water head H of the unit are adopted to express the operation condition. In order to describe different operation conditions in the loaded condition, the operation condition is classified based on the operation condition grids, which are obtained by the discretization of the operating states. The discretization criterion is as follow:  a) Equal interval dividing for the water head H. The interval ?H is not less than 5% of the design water head (Hm) of the unit, that is ?H ? Hm*5%. In this work, ?H =1m.

b) Equal interval dividing for the active power P. Take that the interval ?P equals 5% of the rated active power (Pe), that is ?P=Pe*5%.

The operation condition grids are shown in Fig.3. When the water head and active power are in the range of ( H(a)? H(a+1)),( P(b)?P(b+1)) respectively, the operation condition is classified into the grid (Ha, Pb). In a grid, the operating states are considered to be similar. Because the influence of the operation condition and relevant states to vibration are similar, therefore the variation trend of the vibration performance in the grid can reflect the health conditions of the unit. Each grid is assigned with an ID, named GID. The OCID and the operating states compose the operation condition vector [OCID, Ha, Pb], all of which constitute the operation condition pattern space.

B Automated Performance Indicators Calculation  1) Stable operation condition interval When the unit operates in the loaded condition, it always  stays in the same operation condition grid for a long time and the vibrations of the unit usually change a little due to that the vibrations are usually slowly varying states. Therefore, the vibration states in this time period (called stable operation condition interval) are used to describe the vibration characteristics of the operation condition grid.

The vibration monitoring data are saved in the database with the information of time, peak to peak value of vibrations, water head, active power and some other relative states of vibration as well as OCID every 2 seconds. And the automated identification process of the stable operation condition intervals according to the monitoring data is as follow:  a) Select the initial monitoring data record R1, if the OCID1 of R1 equals 51 or 35 , take the time of R1 as the start time Stime1 and make the end time Etime1 = Stime1 initially.

Then GID1 of R1 is calculated according to the active power P and the water head H.

b) Then OCID2 and GID2 of the next data record R2 are calculated. If OCID2 = OCID1 and GID1=GID2, set that Etime1 equals the time of R2 and go the step b again. Otherwise, go to the step c.

Figure 3 Operation condition grids  c) Calculate the last time of the stable operation condition T with the following equation:  1 1T Etime Stime= ?  (3) Then verify whether T ? T?. where T? depends on the  operation experience and the data laws on site. If yes, the stable operation condition interval [Stime1 ? Etime1] is preserved. If not, give up the record because the last time of the interval is too short to describe the vibration characteristic of the unit.

d) Regard R2 as the initial record R1 and go to step a.

Then the next stable operation condition interval [Stimek ? Etimek] is identified until the operation condition is over.

2) Automated performance indicators calculation  The performance indicators reflect equipment condition well. After the stable operation condition interval identification, the operation process of the unit is divided into a series of stable intervals, whose time interval is [Stimek, Etimek]. Then the vibration performance indicators of each stable operation condition interval can be used to reflect the current health condition of the unit in the operation condition grid.

The vibration performance indicators are calculated according to the vibration monitoring data. And the time domain analysis method is adopted. The indicators include the peak to peak values of the vibration parameters, such as the vibrations of the upper guide bearing of the unit(X, Y directions), those of the turbine guide bearing of the unit(X, Y directions).

Define the performance indicators Ijk(j=1,2,...n, k=1,2,..m), where n and m are the counts of the indicators and the stable operation condition intervals, respectively. Ijk denotes to the j-th performance indicator in the k-th operation condition interval [Stimek ? Etimek], and is calculated using the following formula:   C  i i  jk  Vpp I  C == ?  (4)  Where Vppi is the peak to peak value of the vibration parameter of the i-th data record, C is the total number of the data records in the operation condition interval [Stimek ? Etimek].

The performance indicators are stored with the operation condition vector as the OCARs. The OCAR is composed of      the time mark, operation condition vector and the vibration indicators Ijk , which can be expressed as follow:  Rtimek ,OCID, Ha, Pb ?  I1k, I2k?..., Ink   (5) Where Rtimek is the day of the Stimek , k=1,2,...m. And the  OCAR means that on the day of Rtimek , IF the unit operates in the loaded condition, the water head and active power are in the range of (H(a)?H(a+1)), (P(b), P(b+1)), respectively, THEN the indicators of the vibrations are I1k?I2k?...?Ink .

In order to express simply, the vibrations of the upper guide bearing(X, Y directions) and the turbine guide bearing (X, Y directions) are selected only for Ink . The OCAR can be expressed by a table, as shown in Table.2.

A series of OCARs will be stored according to the classified operation condition clusters and the vibration performance indicators. Then the rules for high reliability can be obtained through the association rules data mining algorithms [11].

C Automated Fault Detection and Laws Discovery  The automated fault detection and indicators variation laws discovery can be realized according to the OCARs. Once performance degradation or a fault is detected, an alarm is issued automatically to remind the operators of taking actions.

The detection and laws discovery methods mainly include the following:  a) Limit checking of the performance indicators. The performance indicators must remain within set points. Limit checking can be performed on the indicators by:  min maxjkI I I? ?  (6) If Ijk oversteps the specified range, there must be something  wrong in the unit. It should be emphasized that the limits usually vary with the operating conditions. And the threshold parameters Imin and Imax are typically based on the component design parameters and historical plant operating data.

b) Comparative analysis for the indicators of the same operation condition vector. As the operating time increases, the equipment performance usually declines. The performance degradation can be detected through the indicators comparative analysis. Supposed that there are two operation conditions OCID1 and OCID2, if H1, H2 ?  (H(a), H(a+1)), P1, P2 ? (P(b), P(b+1)) and OCID1= OCID2, then the indicator deviation ?I is expressed as below:  1 2I I I? = ?  (7) Where I1, I2  are the indicators of the two operation  conditions. Then the magnitude and trend analysis of ?I can detect whether the performance degradation exists.

c) Comparative analysis for the indicators in different operation conditions. For example, the indicators contrast analysis between steady un-synchronized condition and steady synchronized condition, then the variation laws with the operation conditions can be discovered.

d) Indicators variation laws analysis with a fixed operating state. In the same operation condition, the analysis of that the indicators vary with the active power (or water  head) is performed when the water head (or active power) is assigned a fixed value. And then the variation laws of the vibration with the relevant states can be discovered.

D Automated Fault Analysis  On the basis of the results of the fault detection, it can be verified whether faults occur. If the vibration performance is in the normal condition, the OCAR will be preserved into the standard operating base as a reference operation model. Else if the performance degradation or fault is detected, the fault symptoms will be extracted, such as frequency spectrum based on fast Fourier transform (FFT) and wavelet transform, axis orbit, and the automated fault diagnosis program will be triggered.

The fault tree analysis is employed to analysis the fault and to browse the possible causes. The possible trouble equipment will be listed. Then the OCAR will be stored into the fault knowledge base as a reference for fault analysis. And a fault analysis report is provided automatically to the maintenance personnel. The reports include the symptomatic information recognition and analysis, the root cause of the failure identification and location, the fault development trend analysis, the remaining lifetime prediction of the equipment and the advices for equipment maintenance.



V. APPLICATION NOTES Currently the automated analysis approach based on the  OCARs is applied for the vibration analysis in loaded condition of the 22 units in Gezhouba Power Plant. The indicators trend analysis with the same operation condition vector is performed to detect performance degradation every month. And the OCARs are searched with a fixed state(such as H or P) to discover the indicators variation laws half a year.

A Performance Degradation Detection  Two OCARs of a unit in Gezhouba Power Plant are as shown in Table.2. It can be found that in the steady synchronized condition with 16~17m water head and 140~145MW active power, the corresponding performance indicators all increased on Aug. 6 compared to those on July 15, and were close to the alarm threshold, therefore it could be inferred that the performance of the unit declined.

Then the time domain curve and the spectrum of the vibration raw data were inquired, as shown in Fig.4 and Fig.5, respectively. It can be seen that there were 4 times rotation frequency obviously in vibration signals of the upper guide bearing X, Y (a and b in Fig.4.) and the turbine guide bearing X, Y (c and d in Fig.4.). Based on the domain knowledge and fault detection results, a preliminary conclusion that the degradation was caused by the unbalance inflow water of the turbine was made, because the number of the wheel blades of the unit is 4, which equals the dominant frequency of the vibration signals. Then the unit shut down and a check was performed. It was found that there was a tree root blocked in the guide vane of X direction of the unit, which caused the disorder water flow and the vibration performance degradation.

TABLE 2 Operation condition association rules of the unit  Rtime OCID Active power /MW Water Head  /m 2010-07-15 51 140 16  2010-08-06 51 140 16 Upper guide bearing Vpp  X /?m  Upper guide bearing Vpp  Y/?m  Turbine guide bearing Vpp  X/?m  Turbine guide bearing Vpp  Y/?m 325 264 247 312  445 315 351 327   Figure 4 Curve of vibration raw data   Figure 5 Spectrum analysis of vibration raw data  B Vibration Variation Laws Discovery  The history OCARs with a fixed water head (or active power) of the unit is searched and the vibration variation laws with the active power (or water head) are discovered, which can optimize the operation of the unit. The vibrations of the upper guide bearing X, Y and the turbine guide bearing X, Y of a unit in Gezhouba Power Plant changed with the water head within the 135~140MW active power is shown in Fig.6.

It can be seen that when the water head is less than 21m, the vibrations of the upper guide bearings and the turbine guide bearings both decreased gradually with the increasing of the water head. However when the water head exceeds 21m, the vibration of the upper guide bearings increased as the water   Figure 6 Performance indicators with the variation of the water head  head increased, while the vibrations of the turbine guide bearings were steady and changed a little.



VI. CONCLUSIONS The vibration characteristic of the hydro turbine generator  sets was analyzed and the relationship among the vibration performance, the operation conditions of the units and the relevant states was studied. Then an automated vibration analysis approach in the loaded condition based on the OCARs was presented in HOMIS. And the realization of the approach was introduced in detail. With the successful implementation of this approach, the vibration analysis can be automated with the little intervention of the experts. And equipment performance degradation can be detected before it become critical or catastrophic. The vibration variation laws with the relevant states (H and P) used to optimize the operation of the unit can also be discovered in normal operation of the units. So some tests can be canceled to reduce the downtime. The application notes of the analysis approach for the units in Gezhouba Power Plant have shown its good prospects.

Further efforts will be made on the automated vibration analysis in the transient process. Then the vibration variation laws with rotate speed and excitation current can be discovered.

And vibration analysis can be completely automated in the normal operation of the units instead of manual tests. Then downtime can be reduced more effectively.

