Classification Based on Distribution of Average Matching Degree and Gaussian Function and Its Application to Intrusion Detection

Abstract?With the rapid development of the Internet, In- ternet security is becoming an important problem recently.

Therefore, many techniques for intrusion detection have been proposed to protect networks effectively. In this paper, a new classification model, named classification with average matching degree and gaussian function, is proposed and combined with the class association rule mining of Genetic Network Pro- gramming (GNP). The proposed classification algorithm can efficiently classify a new access data into a class of normal, misuse or anomaly. The simulations are based on NSL-KDD data set.



I. INTRODUCTION As Internet plays increasingly important role in modern  society, it has become the target of many criminals. An intrusion detection system (IDS) [1] is one kind of systems to prevent the network attacks and keep the network safety.

Generally, IDS is used to monitor network traffic, check for suspicious activities and notify the network administrator or the system of them. Traditionally, two main intrusion detection techniques in IDS are misuse detection [2] and anomaly detection [3]. Misuse detection uses patterns of well-known attacks of the system to match and identify known intrusions. Misuse detection can effectively detect well-known intrusions, but not effective enough against novel attacks. While anomaly detection tries to match a new access data with normal patterns, and if the new data does not match with these normal patterns perfectly, it will be regarded as an anomaly data. So, anomaly detection is good at detecting novel attacks.

In the proposed method, firstly important class association rules are extracted from training database of IDS by Genetic Network Programming (GNP) [4][5]. GNP is an extension of Genetic Algorithm [6] and Genetic Programming (GP) [7].

GNP is applied to many fields such as traffics prediction, stocks prediction, elevator control and GNP-based data min- ing algorithm has been already applied to IDS [8] to extract many important association rules because the directed graph structure of GNP has distinguished representation abilities which contribute to find a lot of good rules. When the rules are obtained, the average matching degree is used to establish the relationship between the rules and data which is mapped to a two-dimensional space. Then, in the proposed method gaussian functions are used to create the classification model.

Finally, detection rate (DR), accuracy (AC), positive false rate (PFR) and negative false rate (NFR) are used to e- valuate the performance of the proposed classifier for IDS,  [9][10][11]. DR is the rate of data which are correctly classified into normal and intrusion classes, AC is the rate of data which are correctly classified into normal, misuse and anomaly classes, PFR is the rate of normal data which are not classified into normal class and NFR is the rate of intrusion data which are not classified into intrusion class.

In this paper, NSL-KDD data set is used instead of KDD?99 data set to solve some of the inherent problems of KDD?99 data set which are mentioned in [12].

The paper is organized as follows: The background of Genetic Network Programming (GNP) and GNP-based Class Association Rule Mining is summarized in section 2. The proposed classification model is explained in section 3.

Then, simulations results using NSL-KDD data set and their comparison with other approaches are described in section 4. Finally, conclusion and future work are given in section 5.



II. GNP AND GNP-BASED CLASS ASSOCIATION RULE MINING  A. GNP Structure  In this section, Genetic Network Programming(GNP) and its class association rule mining are briefly reviewed [8].

GNP is an evolutionary optimization algorithm, which uses the directed graph structures as solutions. The basic structure of GNP is shown in Fig.1. The graph structure of GNP includes three kinds of nodes: start node, judgment nodes and processing nodes. Judgment nodes are the set of J1,J2,..., which work as if-then type logical decision making functions and return judgement results so as to determine the next node.

On the other hand, processing nodes are the set of P1,P2,..., which work as a certain kind of action/processsing functions.

The concrete roles of these nodes are predefined and stored in the library. Once GNP is started up, firstly the execution starts from a start node; consequently the next node to execute is determined according to the node connections and if-then type judgment result of the current judgment node. GNP uses the above process to imitate the human brain realizing if-then type judgement process.

The basic expression of GNP is shown in Fig.2. It describes the gene of node i and the set of these genes represents the genotype of GNP individuals. NTi describe the node type, that is, NTi = 0 means node i is the start node, NTi = 1 represents node i is a judgment node and NTi = 2 represents node i is a processing node. IDi is an  SICE Annual Conference 2012    August 20-23, 2012, Akita University, Akita, Japan    PR0001/12/0000-    ?    400 ?2012 SICE    1778-1778-      identification number, for example, NTi = 1 and IDi = 1 means node i is J1(Judgment node with ID 1). Ci1, Ci2,..., denote the nodes connected from node i. di and dij are the delay time required to execute the processing of node i and transition from node i to node Cij .

S tart  P 1  P 2P 3  J 1 J 2 J 5  J 3  :Sta r t Node  : Pr ocessing Node  P 4 J 4  P 5 : J udgemen t Node  Fig. 1. Basic structure of GNP node  NTi IDi d i Ci1 d i1 Cij d ij......

n ode  gen e  con n ection  gen e  n ode i  Fig. 2. Gene structure of GNP node  B. Class Association Rule Mining  Association rules which have the form like X ? Y can be used for the association relationships or correlations among a set of attributes in a database. Whereas, class association rule is a kind of association rule whose consequent part is a given class attribute. Let Ai be an attribute in a database with the value of 1 or 0, and k be the class label. Class association rule can be represented by (Am = 1)  ? . . .

? (An = 1) ? (C = k) as a case  of association rule X ? Y with the fixed consequent k, where C = k means its class is k. Here, X and Y are called antecedent and consequent part of the rule. If the number of tuples contain X in the database equals n, and the total number of tuples is N , then support(X) = n/N .

Confidence is used to measure the strength of one rule, which is defined as suport(X  ? Y )/suport(X).

Assume support(X) = x, support(Y ) = y and support (X  ? Y ) = z, then we can calculate ?2 by  ?2 = N(z ? xy)2  xy(1? x)(1? y) . (1)  ?2 shows the significance of the association rule. If ?2 is higher than a cutoff value(3.84 at the 95% significance level or 6.64 at the 99% significance level), we should reject the assumption that X and Y are independent.

C. Representation of Class Association Rules using GNP  One judgment node in GNP is corresponding to an at- tribute of data tuple. Therefore, class association rules can be represented as the connections of judgment nodes [8]. Fig.3 shows an example of the representation for class association rule using GNP. P1 is a processing node representing a starting point of association rules. A1 = 1, A2 = 1 and A3 = 1 denote the functions of judgment nodes. If a tuple satisfies the condition of the judgment function, Yes-side branch will be selected, then it is connected to the next judgment node to make the rules. If the current condition of the judgment function is not satisfied, No-side branch will be selected, then it is connected to another processing node P2 to examine other rules.

Fig. 3. Class association rule represented by GNP  For example, the class association rules such as (A1 = 1) ? (C = k), (A1 = 1)  ? (A2 = 1) ? (C = k),  (A1 = 1) ? (A2 = 1)  ? (A2 = 1) ? (C = k) are examined  by the structure of GNP show in Fig.3, where k is a class label.

When the examination is finished, the proposed method inspects whether the rules are good or not. The proposed method defines association rules satisfying the following as important: ?2 > ?2min, Support ? Supportmin, Confidence ? Confidencemin where, ?2min, Supportmin and Confidencemin are the minimum threshold of ?2, Support and Confidence value set by users depending on the problems.



III. CLASSIFICATION MODEL  After class association rule mining using GNP, a large number of rules of normal and intrusion are extracted. Then, a new classifier based on the average matching degree and gaussian functions is proposed to classify the new data into normal, known intrusion or unknown intrusion classes.

-1779-      A. Average Matching Degree  The matching degree of data d with rule r in class k is defined as follows:  Matchk(d, r) = Nk(d, r)  Nk(r) , (2)  where, Nk(d, r) is the number of matched attributes in the antecedent part of rule r in class k with data d. Nk(r) is the number of attributes of rule r in class k. Based on the definition of the matching degree of data with one rule, the average matching degree of data d with all the rules in class k can be defined as follows:  mk(d) =  |Rk| ? r?Rk  Matchk(d, r), (3)  where, Rk is the set of suffixes of rules in class k. Using average matching degree we can measure the relations of data d with different classes. In this paper, the two-dimensional space is used to represent data d according to the average matching degree of data d with normal rules and intrusion rules. Therefore, data d from three different classes (normal, known, unknown) can be represented as (mN (d),mI(d)).

Here, mN (d) means the average matching degree of data d with the rules in normal class, while mI(d) means the average matching degree of data d with the rules in known intrusion class. Because we don?t have the rules in unknown class, we can?t use the average matching degree of data d with the rules in unknown class. Fig.4 shows us an example of access data represented by the two-dimensional space.

Fig. 4. 2-dimensional average matching degree space  B. Network Behaviors based on Average Matching Degree  When the validation data for determining of the parameters of the gaussian functions are represented by the average matching degree in the two-dimensional space, we can see that these data are distributed in the space. Two data points close to each other in the two-dimensional space means that the attributes of the two data have almost the same values, since the two data have the similar behaviors. In fact, these groups of data represent different network behaviors, for example, normal access data may be log in to a website, download by ftp; known intrusion data may be spoofed broadcast, neptune attack; unknown intrusion data may be password guess, DoS attack, UDP packet storm and so on.

Based on the different network behaviors, we can further divide the normal, known intrusion and unknown intrusion classes into subclasses, respectively. In fact, each subclass represents one network behavior. Fig.5 shows an example of subclasses for three kinds of data.

Fig. 5. Subclasses for three kinds of data  C. Gaussian Function Classification Model  A classification model approximating the boundary for each subclasses is proposed in order to build up all the sub- classes using two-dimensional gaussian functions as shown in Fig.6. We can see from Fig.6 that we can determine the central point, length, width and shape of a gaussian function for each subclass, so that it can classify the data correctly.

Actually, if we set proper threshold ? and a data has a value of the gaussian function smaller than threshold ?, then the data can?t be considered to belong to this subclass. Thus, it is feasible to use gaussian functions to represent all the subclasses in the two-dimensional space.

Fig. 6. 2-dimensional Gaussian function  As mentioned before, gaussian functions can be used to represent subclasses of IDS, and subclasses are regarded as certain network behaviors. Therefore, the shape of the gaussian functions needs to be determined, which means we should use a suitable parameter set to obtain the optimal boundary for each subclass and to build the optimal classifi- cation model. In this paper, Genetic Algorithm (GA) is used to find the optimal parameter set.

1) Basic Structure based on GA: In this paper, individuals are evolved from generation to generation as Fig.7 shows :  -1780-      This new proposed GA structure tries not only to guarantee the balance between exploitation and exploration, but also to alleviate the premature convergence. The Genetic Operators are defined as follows:  1 Preserve several elite individuals 2 Duplicate elites n times (n is determined depending  on the problem). Duplicates will be mutated without crossover.

3 Crossover with mutation.

Fig. 7. Genetic operator  2) Non-uniform Mutation: In this paper, Non-uniform Mutation is adopted as a genetic operator to improve the classification accuracy and to preserve the convergency for the solutions. This operator is defined as follow.

For each individual Xti = {x1, x2, ..., xm}, where t means the generation, Xt+1i = {x  ?  1, x ?  2, ..., x ?  m} will be generated as follows: x  ?  k= xk + ?(t, UB ? xk), if a random variable ? is 0 x  ?  k= xk - ?(t, xk ? LB), if a random variable ? is 1 where, LB and UB are the lower and upper bounds of gene  xk. The function ?(t, y) returns a value from [0, y] such that ?(t, y) approaches to zero as t increases. In this paper, we use the following function: ?(t, y) = y ? (1? r1? tT ), where, r is a uniform random number with the range of  [0, 1], T is the maximal generation number.

3) Blend Crossover BLX-?: In order to ensure proper  exploration rate, Blend Crossover BLX-? [13] is adopted as a genetic operator in this paper.

4) Fitness Function Of GA: Proper fitness function needs to be defined to ensure proper evolution process, the fitness function is defined as follows:  Fitness(i) = AC(i) where, i represents GA individual, AC is classification  accuracy in validation phase.

D. Classification  In the validation phase for determining the optimal pa- rameters of the gaussian functions, the classification model is built up only using normal data and known intrusion data, which generate only normal and known intrusion subclasses.

Thus, if a data is far away from the center of the subclass, which means the value of the gaussian function is low, this data will be considered to be an unknown intrusion data. As we mentioned in the previous part of this paper, threshold ? is needed to judge whether a data belongs to a subclass.

In this paper, the value of ? is set at 0.98 based on the experiments. If the value of the highest gaussian function is  higher than ?, then this data is regarded as belonging to the subclass which has the value of the highest gaussian function.

If this subclass is a normal subclass, then we will consider that this data is a normal data, while if this subclass is a known intrusion class, then this data will be considered to be a known intrusion class. On the other hand, if the value of the highest gaussian function is lower than ?, this data will be regarded as unknown intrusion class, since it dose not match with any behavior of normal subclasses and known intrusion subclasses.

Now, a classification model has already been built up.

We will use the classifier to classify the new data to three classes. Firstly, the average matching degree of the new data is calculated, then the data will be mapped into a point of the two-dimensional space. As a result, the subclass whose gaussian function has the highest value at the point is selected, which means that the new data is closest to this subclass. Next, we will judge which class this new data belongs to.



IV. SIMULATIONS In this paper, the proposed classification model is applied  to the intrusion detection system, and it is evaluated by carrying out the simulations with NSL-KDD database and consists of selected records of the complete KDD data set and does not suffer from any of the mentioned shortcomings.

In the training phase, 4, 000 training data are used for rule extraction, GNP-based class association rule mining is applied and its parameter settings are listed in Table I.

TABLE I PARAMETER SETTING FOR GNP-BASED RULE  MINING Population Size 120  Generation 1,000 Process Node 10  Judgment Node 100 Crossover Rate 1/5  Mutation Rate11 1/3 Mutation Rate22 1/3  ?2min 6.64 supportmin 0.1  confidencemin 0.8 1 Mutation Rate1 for chang-  ing the connection of judg- ment nodes.

2 Mutation Rate2 for chang- ing the function of judg- ment nodes  In the validation phase, 4, 000 validation data are used with the rules extracted in the training phase to build the proposed classification model.

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed classifica- tion model, the 22, 544 test data are used, which contains 9, 711 normal data, 5, 322 known intrusion data and 7, 511 unknown intrusion data. The classification result of the test dataset is shown in Table II. Normal(C), Known(C) and Unknown(C) indicate the total numbers of normal, intrusion and abnormal class labeled by the classification  -1781-      model, respectively. While Normal(A), Known(A) and Unkown(A) indicate actual numbers of normal, intrusion and abnormal class, respectively.

TABLE II TESTING RESULT OF PROPOSED CLASSIFICATION MODEL  Normal(C) Known(C) Unknown(C) Total Normal(A) 8,569 49 1,093 9,711 Known(A) 0 5,071 251 5,322 Unkown(A) 770 125 6,616 7,511  Total 9,339 5,245 7,960 22,544  In this paper, four criteria are used to evaluate the test- ing result, that is, DR(detection rate), AC(Accuracy), PFR(positive false rate), NFR(negative false rate).

DR, PFR, NFR and Accuracy of the simulations are as follows:  DR=(8569 + 5071 + 251 + 125 + 6616)/22544=91.52% PFR=(49 + 1093)/9711=11.76% NFR=(0 + 770)/(5322 + 7511)=6.00% AC=(8569 + 5071 + 6616)/22544=89.85% From the statistics in Table II, we can see that the  proposed classification model classifies three kinds of data very accurately. Fig.8 shows the comparison of the proposed classification model with distance-based method [14] which has been proved to be a good classification model in IDS.

For the four criteria, the higher DR and AC the model has, the better the model is. While the lower PFR and NFR the model has, the better the model is. From Fig.8 we can see that the proposed method has a significantly improvement compared with the distance-based method.

Fig. 8. Comparison between the proposed method and distance-based method

V. CONCLUSION  In this paper, a novel classification model with the average matching degree and gaussian functions is proposed, and combined with the class association rule mining of GNP.

It is clarified from simulations that the proposed method can classify the network data to normal, intrusion and abnormal classes efficiently and effectively. Basically, the proposed classification model solves the overlapping problem which a lot of methods have. We are now studying further improve- ments of the proposed method in terms of more accurate classification to classes.

