Studies on the Application of Rough set Analysis in Mining of Association Rules and  the Realization in Provincial Road Transportation Management Information

Abstract?Application of rough set analysis in mining of association rule can predigest the operation of traditional mining association rules, and avoid redundant rules effectively.

This paper presented the theory, question and resolution of application of rough set in mining association rules. And it presented resolve the relation of support, confidence and the amount of rules by rough set analysis originally. All the conclusion were proved in data mining in provincial road transportation management information System.

Keywords-association rule mining; rough set; road transportation management information System;

I.  INTRODUCTION Data mining process is also called knowledge discovery  process [1]. Data association is an important class of knowledge that can be found in the database. If the values of two or more variables exist some regularity, it is called association. Association rule mining has been extensively studied since it was proposed by R. Agrawal and others in 1993 [2], of which its algorithm has been optimized based on the original algorithm, making the efficiency of association rule mining continue to increase. But there are still many problems that can not be solved by using algorithms. For example, it is not planned clearly between the decision- making objectives and associated database attributes, making the result of association rule mining operation is very large, as support and confidence to set parameters such as inappropriate and produce large amounts of useless rules, and so on. Therefore, not only efficient algorithms are necessary, but also pretreatment of accurate planning mining goals and data reduction, appropriate pre-configured parameters are also very important.

Rough set theory is a mathematical tool proposed by Professor Pawlak in 1982 which can make quantitative analysis on imprecise, inconsistent, incomplete information and knowledge [3]. The basic idea is forming concepts and classification rules by grouping the relational database and achieving knowledge discovery through the classification of equivalence relations and classification for similar goals. As a new data analysis theory, rough set can support multiple steps of knowledge acquisition, such as data preprocessing, data reduction, rule generation and achievement to dependencies. However, it is unnecessary to provide any priori information that out of the data sets required to deal  with, so it can be said to be objective to the uncertain description or solving of the problem [4].Therefore, the association rule based on the discrete data mining has a unique effect. This article first described the association rules and rough set theory, then analyzed the problem of association with traditional rules theory and application of rough set theory, introducing various aspects of the solution, and verified the method based on data of the provincial road transport management information system finally.



II. RELATED KNOWLEDGE OF ASSOCIATION RULE  Let I={ ,, 21 II ... mI, }is the text attributes, known as the item. Given a trading transaction database D, where each transaction T is a collection of items, meeting IT ? . Every thing has an identifier, known as TID. If the item set meets IX ? , IY ?  , and ?=YX ?  ,then the implication of the form of  YX ?                                         (1)  is called the association rules. If there are s%  matters contained in D meet with YX ?  , then the support of the rule YX ?  is  s% , the calculation expression is:  s% = ( ) ( )YXPYXSupport ?=?                    (2)  If the transaction contained X also contains Y, then the confidence of the rule YX ?  is c% ,the calculation expression is:  c% = ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )X/PYXP ?==? YXPYXSupport      (3)  Set the minimum support minsup and the minimum confidence minconf, if s%  minsup and c%  minconf, it is strong association rule.



III. RELATED KNOWLEDGE OF ROUGH SET This article applied to the following rough set knowledge.

DOI 10.1109/ICICEE.2012.364     A. Abstract of the information system According to [4], rough set theory abstracts the objective  world as an information system. An information system S is a four-tuple,  S = U A V f .                        (4)  Where U is a finite set to the object (or instance), U={ nxxx ,...,, 21  }, which is also known as the domain. A is a finite set to object properties, denoted by A={ naaa ,...,, 21  }.

Usually A is divided into two sets C and D, that is A= DC ? .

C is called condition attribute set. D is called decision attribute set. The information system with condition attributes and decision attributes is called decision table. V is the range set, of the property, denoted V= iV?  , iV  is the range of ia . f  is the information function. That is f : ( ) iii VaxfVAU ??? ,, which gives a value to each  object for each property.

B. Indiscernibility relation Set B={ nbbb ,...,, 21 } ? A ,then it can define an  indiscernibility  relation on B:  ( )Bind ={ ( ) BbbyfbxfUUyx mmm ?=?? ),,(,),( }  (5)  C. Equivalence class and division For each Ux ? , it can use  [ ]bx ={ ( ) ( )BindyxUy ?? , }  to represent the equivalence class contained the element x .All the equivalence classes received from ( )Bind  form the division of the domain U, which is denoted by  )(/ BindU , and it is also known as basic knowledge or concepts of U.

D. Reduction If the attribute reduction set AB ? meets the following  conditions: )()( AindBind =   and for any  { }( )bBindBindBb ??? )(:                         (6)  then, B is a reduction of A, denoted by ( )AB RED= .The intersection of all reductions of A constitutes the core of A's property reduction, denoted by ( ) ( )AA REDCORE ?= .



IV. THE APPLICATION RESEARCH OF ROUGH SET IN EACH STEP OF MINING ASSOCIATION RULE  A. Basic ideas and issues proposing According to [5], the traditional association rule mining  has four important steps.

Step one, the data pre-processing.

Step two, according to the minimum support to find out  all the frequent item sets of the data set.

Step three, produce association rules based on frequent item sets and the smallest confidence.

Step four, evaluate the rules.

Traditional association rule mining research focuses on  the algorithm and improvement of generating association rules. This paper considered that the data preprocessing of the association rule mining is critical. Rough set theory has a unique role on describing the data system and simplifying the associated question of the mining data system. What?s more, if the two key thresholds of the minimum support and the minimum confidence are set improperly, it will produce a large number of frequent item sets and redundant rules, affecting the user's decision-making, which is the key issue of the rule evaluation. Similarly, the relationship of the number of rules, the minimum support and minimum confidence can also try to apply the rough set theory and methods to solve.

B. Solution 1)   Summarized the problem of mining association  rules by the rough set theory According to the information systems abstracting  methods of the rough set, most association rule mining problem can be reduced to the problem of association rules between the key making data items to solve the goals and the data items to be proofed  Definition 1: Let the other two variables to express the association rules of (1): DC?  .It defines D as the decision-making data item, which is the most critical decision attributes got by the target, and also called decision attribute. C is the data item set to be proven that indicates whether it is associated with the decision-making data items, and it is also called conditional attributes. An association rule item of data database can be expressed with the associated problem of information systems properties in rough set. It is summarized as the study on the question of DC?  in (4) S = U A V f ADC =?  ?=DC ?  .U is the set of all records associated with the database.

2) Reducting the conditions attribute set C by rough set The typical reduction algorithm is based on (6).

Reference [6] describes the approach of reducing condition attribute set C by constructing the difference matrix. The difference matrix E of the method is a matrix UU ? ,in which each element Ceij ? . The specific definition of E is:   ( ) ( ){ } ( ) ( )   :  ij ? ? ? ???  = ?  jiji xDxDxaxaAae             (7)  Where E is a symmetric diagonal matrix which the main diagonal is ?  .In practice, it only calculates the triangular matrix. The course of reduction is to carry out "or" calculation for each element of ije    , then carry out "and" calculation for all the ije  , and the final result is a combination of C reduction.

3) Solve the associated rules by the combination of rough set and Apriori algorithm  Definition 2: Suppose the set F is a subset of conditions attribute set C, it gets the characteristic set from the equivalence classes of F, denoted by [ ]X  . Where X is the description of the feature set [ ]X . If F has k elements, then is called the k-ary feature set, denoted by [ ]kX  , and  [ ]kX  is called k-ary characterization.

( ) ( ) )(...2211 kkk CCCX ??? =??=?== .       (8)  Any equation of kX  )( iiC ?= is known as a sub-clause.

Definition 3: Suppose ?  is the smallest support of  association rule. If the support of  YX k ?  is greater than ? , then the k-ary feature set determined by kX is called frequent k-item sets . Suppose kL  express the set of frequent k-items and kR  is a collection of k-ary feature set, then there is  kk LR ? , where kR  is called a k-ary candidate set.

The main method is described in the following Algorithm 1.

After the mining data database dealt by the rough set approach, it summarizes a decision table S, S = 1U  1A  1V  1f  and ( 1ADC =?  ?=DC ?  ).Where 1C  is the reduction of the condition attributes set C  , D is  the decision attribute. Set ?  is the minimum support, ?  is the minimum confidence. According to the Apriori-new [7] algorithm, it gets the association rules DC1 ? , which is shown in Fig.1:     Figure 1.  The process of rough set algorithms used in association rule mining  4) Study on the relationship of the number of rules and parameters applied with rough set  During the above method, the minimum support and the minimum confidence have a significant impact on the generation of the number of association rules. By setting a range of the minimum support and the minimum confidence, we can get a certain number of rules, which the number of rule and their relationship may also exists certain rules.

Reference [8] studied the relationship by regression analysis methods. But this article thought that such a relationship is an uncertain relationship. According to domain-specific application, we can try to use rough set method to solve their relationship.

According to rough set theory, we get another decision table P, P = 2U  2A  2V  2f  and  22D AC2 =?  ?=DC ?  . 2U  is a set of records associated with a regular expression, ?  is the minimum support and ?  is the minimum confidence. Then  2C=?? ?   . 2D is the number of the rule. Through this method, we can get the available form of association rules like 22 DC ? .



V. APPLICATIONS This method has been verified in reputation quality  assessment database of highway passenger company of road transport administration and management information systems in Guangdong Province.

A. Establish the decision-making table and select decision property based on the data mining target There are four elements in the reputation for quality  assessment score table of passenger transport companies: transportation security, business activities, service quality and social responsibility. Each element corresponds to their grade scores. Road transport authorities experts scoring each element according to the sheet for each enterprise and then integrate the various elements of scores, combined with expert advice to get the final assessment conclusions. It can be seen, what the management needs to know is which elements have  more closely combination with the assessment results ,while which elements can be ignored in practice. Therefore, the decision attribute can be set is the assessment result, assessment factor is the condition attribute and the assessment record is the domain. To facilitate the description of the problem, we selected nine records to set up of the decision table, which is shown in Table     TABLE I.  QUALITY CREDIT ASSESSMENT DECISION TABLE OF ROAD TRANSPORT ENTERPRISE  B. Data Preprocessing In order to reduce decision table by using different matrix,  we use letters edcba ,,,, to displace the property. And in order to facilitate the description of this calculation process, the combined property value is divided into two grades, 1 and 0  respectively, such as merger low-level for a grade, as shown in Table .

TABLE II.  THE DECISION TABLE AFTER GENERALIZED  U a b c d e  1 1 0 0 0 3  2 0 1 0 0 2  3 1 1 0 0 1  4 1 1 0 0 1  5 1 1 0 1 1  6 1 0 1 0 2  7 0 0 0 0 3  8 1 1 0 1 1  9 1 1 1 0 1  C. Attributes set of reduction condition According to the aforementioned method of differences  matrix reduction, we get the following difference matrix E first.

? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ?                  ?  =  ? ??  ? ?  ??? ???? ?????  ?? ??  abcabd bbcdac  abdbcd acbc abbc  acadaadaa bcbdcbdbbab  E   (9)    Then mak an computing of various elements of  the matrix, we get cba ?? finally, which got the reduction { }cba ,,  .It is shown in Table .

TABLE III.  THE DECISION TABLE AFTER REDUCED                  D. get the association rules Suppose 30%=?  and 80%=?  , we can get the four  association rules:  ? 1e1ba =?=?= 1  ? 1eca =?=?= 01  ? 211 =?=?= ecb  ? 300 =?=?= ecb  Practical significance is that the transport safety and the business behavior is good, then quality reputation is good; security is good and quality of service is medium, then the quality reputation is good ; business behavior and the service quality is good ,then quality reputation is moderate; business behavior and quality of service is poor, quality reputation is poor.

NO. Transportation security  Business behavior  Service quality  Social responsibility  Assessment results  1 good general general general A  2 general good general poor AA  3 good good poor poor AAA  4 good good poor poor AAA  5 good good poor good AAA  6 good poor good poor AA  7 general general general general A  8 good good poor good AAA  9 good good good poor AAA  U a b c e  1 1 0 0 3  2 0 1 0 2  3 1 1 0 1  4 1 1 0 1  5 1 1 0 1  6 1 0 1 2  7 0 0 0 3  8 1 1 0 1  9 1 1 1 1     E. Test with the relationship between the minimum support, the minimum confidence and the number of rules by the rough set approach.

Using the decision table P and algorithm1, we can get the  relationship of the minimum support, the minimum confidence   and the number of the rule:  5390%70%50%30% 2 ???????? D??

VI. CONCLUSION  This article made the rough set theory and methods applied to the classic integrated data mining association rules, and used real examples to prove the method is effective. It have some subjective judgments to use rough set into association rules, such as getting the selection of the decision attribute is according to the decision target, so there are some limitations in the applications of digging data mining which the target is not obvious. The experiments show that the method is more suitable for data mining association rules between the relationship of assessing the results and speculating assessment indexes.

