Data Association for a Hybrid Metric Map Representation

Abstract? This paper presents an approach to solve the data association problem for a hybrid metric map representation.

The hybrid metric map representation uses Voronoi diagram to partition the global map space into a series of local subregions, and then a local dense map is built in each subregion. Finally the global feature map and the local maps make up of the hybrid metric map, which can represent all the observed environment.

In the proposed map representation, there exists an important property that global feature map and local maps have clear one-to-one correspondence. Benefited from this property, an identifying rule of the data association based on compatibility testing is proposed. The identifying rule can efficiently reject the wrong data association hypothesis in the application of dense environment. Two experiments validated the efficiency of data association approach and also demonstrated the feasibility of the hybrid metric map presentation.



I. INTRODUCTION SLAM solves the problem that a robot simultaneously  constructs a map of its nearby environment and localizes itself in this map, while it explores an unknown environment.

In 1987 Smith, Self and Cheeseman [1] firstly explained the need for simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and presented a solution based on extended Kalman filter (EKF).

Since then, SLAM has obtained wide interest and a number of achievements have been published [2]?[6]. Currently, dense map representations have been adopted widely in the field of SLAM, and they can be classified into two categories: unitary metric map representations and hybrid map represen- tations. The former includes grid map [6], sampled environ- ment map (SEM) adopted in SLAMSEM [7] and BS-SLAM [8]. Grid map can describe the complex environment, but it lacks an explicit meaning of the environment. In SLASEM and BS-SLAM the sensor?s observation and features stored in map have not a clear one-to-one correspondence. Compared with the unitary metric map representation, Hybrid map representations extract obvious environment features and store the rest information of environment in local maps. This map structure is compact and efficient. Blanco thus proposed a hybrid metric-topological map based SLAM algorithm [9]. The map consists of nodes and local maps. Slightly differently, DenseSLAM [10] adopted a hybrid metric map.

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (60905058)  Shugen Ma is with Department of Robotics, Ritsumeikan University, 1-1-1 Noji-Higashi, Kusatsu-Shi, Shiga 525-8577, Japan and he is also with the State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Au- tomation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 1110016, China.

shugen@se.ritsumei.ac.jp  Shuai Guo, Minghui Wang and Bin Li are with the State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110016, China. {guoshuai, mhwang, libin}@sia.cn. Shuai Guo is also with the Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, China.

The map consists of a global metric feature map and metric local maps. Our interest in hybrid map representations is the aspect of data association. In the hybrid metric-topological map, nodes are not real environment?s contour. They are not specific geometry elements, and thus cannot be used to solve the data association problem without help of local maps. The problem of the DenseSLAM is that the multi- to-multi correspondence between features and local maps prevents any benefit brought to data association from local maps. In our previous works [11] [12] we proposed a hybrid metric map representation and introduced the preliminary implementation. In this paper we propose an identifying rule benefited from the structure of the proposed hybrid metric map. The proposed identifying rule can efficiently increase the accuracy and robustness of data association.

Moreover, the data association (DA) is an important part of SLAM algorithms. Most DA algorithms are based only on the Mahalanobis distance. The classic DA algorithms include NN (Nearest Neighbor) algorithm [13] and JCBB (Joint Compatibility and Branch and Bound) algorithm [14].

NN computes the Mahalanobis distance between one feature stored in feature map and one current observed feature (individual compatibility). The experiment results in section V show that NN is not adequate to solve the DA problem.

JCBB computes the Mahalanobis distance between a group features stored in the feature map and a group current observed features (joint compatibility). As an advantage of JCBB, it can reject the ambiguous DA hypothesis in the application of cluster environments. However, JCBB algorithm does not guarantee to solve our DA problem if two features or only one feature have been observed at many time instants. It has been proven that our proposed map representation could represent all the observed environment.

An important property of this representation is a clear one-to- one corresponding relationship between global feature map and local maps. Local maps contain rich information of environment. Furthermore each local map is an invariant of its corresponding feature. Benefited from this property, an identifying rule based on compatibility testing is proposed to increas DA?s accuracy.



II. A HYBRID METRIC MAP In the proposed hybrid metric map representation [11],  the global map Mf consists of ?corner? features (fi i = 1, 2, ? ? ? ), which contain both position and orientation infor- mation fi = [xi, yi, ?i]T . By operating Voronoi diagram on the feature map (only the position is used), the map space (R2 for 2D case) is partitioned into a series of subregions  VD(Mf ) ? Voronoi(Mf ) (1)  Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems (MFI) September 13-15, 2012. Hamburg, Germany     Each subregion contains only one feature. We define  VPi ? gVoronoi(Mf , fi) (2)  It denotes the subregion that includes feature fi. The property of Voronoi diagram is  ?q, fi? ? ?q, fj?, j ?= i ?q ? VPi (3) where ?a, b? denotes the Euclidean distance between points a and b.

Voronoi diagram is a fundamental technique in SLAM area. In [15], [16] the generalized Voronoi graph (GVG) was built as a topological map of the environment. GVG contains edges and nodes. They together indicate the accessibility, connectivity and departability of the environment. In our work, the standard Voronoi diagram is adopted to partition the global map into subregions. Voronoi is not a map but is just a tool to partition global map into local maps.

Voronoi diagram allots a subregion VPi to each feature fi.

On each feature a local coordinate system Li is fixed. A local map mi is built in each Li and it describes the environment in VPi. Finally the global feature maps and the set of local maps make up of the hybrid metric map M = {Mf ,M l} = {[fi,mi]|i = 1, ? ? ? , n}. Figure 1 is a schematic drawing of the hybrid metric map representation. The feature map consists of corners Mf = {C1, C2, ? ? ? , C6}, which are used to partition the map space into six subregions by the Voronoi diagram (green lines). The local map m1 (blue dashed lines) is represented in coordinate system L1 (the red arrows) and it describes the detailed environment in VP1.

The other five coordinate systems and local maps are built in the same way.

C3C4  Y  O C1  C5  C2  C6  X  Fig. 1. The hybrid metric map representation of environment. Wall corners C1, ? ? ? , C6 make up of the global feature map. Voronoi diagram (green lines) partitions the map space into six subregion according to these corners.

Blue dashed curves denote the local map built in the red coordinate system.

The hybrid metric map representation needs that ?corner? features indeed exist in the environment. Except this require- ment there is no limitation to the environment. So the local maps can describe complexity environment. This ability is verified by the experiment in section V. The clear one-to- one correspondence exists between features and local maps.

This brings benefits to data association process. Compared with other hybrid map representations, this is an advantage of this hybrid metric map representation.

gj  Lj zgjl  Feature extration  Coordinate transformation  Sensor data Z0  zgj  Lj  Data segmentation  (a) (b)  (c)(d)  Fig. 2. The preprocessing steps. (a) A frame sensor data Z0. (b) Three corners have been extracted from Z0. (c) Z0 has been segmented into three parts by operating Voronoi (grey lines) on the set of observed features. zgj represents the data in gVoronoi(S, gj). On each gj a local coordinate system Lj is built. (d) z  gj l is z  gj represented in Lj .



III. SLAM USING THE HYBRID METRIC MAP  First, the implementation of the SLAM algorithm using the hybrid metric map is introduced in this section. Then, a theorem proves that the local map is intact and the set of local maps can describe all the observed environment in feature-rich environment.

A. Preprocessing of Raw Sensor Data  The preprocessing of raw sensor data includes feature extraction, data segmentation and coordinate transformation of raw sensor data.

1) Feature Extraction: In this work the feature is a corner, which is defined as a point of intersection of two adjacent lines. The iterative end point fit (IEPF) algorithm [17] is used to extract lines from raw sensor data Z0. If both of the two adjacent lines are long enough, a corner gj (unknown data association results) is extracted. Its direction parallels with the angular bisector of the two adjacent lines.

Sg = {gj |j = 1 : k} feature extraction????????????? (Z0) (4) 2) Data Segmentation: Once features Sg = {gj |j = 1 :  k} have been extracted, Voronoi partitions the observation plane into subregions. The sensor data in each subregion is segmented from Z0  zgj = {d|d ? Z0 & d ? gVoronoi(Sg, gj)} (5) where d is a 2D point, d = [x, y]T .

3) Coordinate Transformation: Each time a feature gj is extracted, a local coordinate system Lj is inherently built.

Lj locates on gj and its X axis parallels with the direction of gj .

Currently zgj is represented in sensor?s coordinate system.

Its equivalent representation in Lj is1  z gj l = ?gj ? zgj (6)  1?: icompound operator, ?: compound operator. See reference [1]     After the above preprocessing of raw sensor data, feature gj and sensor data z  gj l constitute a one-to-one correspon-  dence. Figure 2 shows the above processes.

B. Procedures of the SLAM Algorithm  The SLAM algorithm includes the process of global map?s building and process of local maps? building. The global feature map is built through standard EKF-SLAM. Local maps building is the important part of this algorithm.

1) Global Feature Map?s Building: In EKF-SLAM, the robot?s pose Xr = [xr, yr, ?r]T and the feature map Mf = {fi|i = 1, ? ? ? , n} make up of the state of EKF  X = [XTr , f T 1 , f  T 2 , ? ? ? , fTn ]  T (7)  The covariance matrix is  P =  ? ??????  pr prf1 prf2 ? ? ? prfn pf1r pf1 pf1f2 ? ? ? pf1fn pf2r pf2f1 pf2 ? ? ? pf2fn  ...

...

...

. . .

...

pfnr pfnf1 pfnf2 ? ? ? pfn  ? ?????? (8)  EKF estimates the state by two step: observation update and motion predict. They update the state X and its covari- ance matrix P , while considering a frame of sensor data and robot?s one-step-movement respectively.

The update of global feature map is relatively independent from local maps. However, the feature?s calibration discussed in section IV shows that it is interactive with the update of local maps.

2) Local Dense Map?s Building: Local maps? generation and their update are simultaneous with features? generation and their update. The process is described as follows.

a) Generating of a new local map If gj has not been represented in feature map Mf , a new  feature fi is added into Mf . At the same time, a new local map mi is generated:?????  ????  z gj l 	? mi Lj 	? Li  zsi .Zl = ?gj ? Z0 zsi .Xl = ?gj  (9)  where zsi saves the current sensor data Z 0 and robot?s relative  pose in coordinate system Li. It is not a part of the hybrid metric map, but it will be used in the data association process.

b) Update of a local map If gj is an environment corner fi represented already in  Mf , the feature map Mf is updated through the observation update step in EKF. At the same time, the local map mi is updated through fusing the current sensor data zgjl into mi,  mi = f(mi, z gj l ) (10)  Adding zgjl directly to mi is the most simple implemen- tation of function f . However, the error occurred in the feature extraction will make the final mi be inconsistency with the environment. This problem will be discussed in the data association step.

C. Proof of the Hybrid Metric Map  In the procedures above, because Voronoi operates only on the current observed features Sg = {gj |j = 1, 2, ? ? ? , k} rather than on the whole global feature map Mf = {fi|i = 1, 2, ? ? ? , n}, the final hybrid metric map is not exactly the same as the one described in section II. However, with a rea- sonable precondition, the theorem presented below ensures that the final hybrid metric can represent all the observed environment in feature-rich environment.

Theorem. Local map mi can describe all the observed environment in gVoronoi(Mf , fi).

Proof. At a time instant fi is observed, feature map Mf  will be updated through the observation-update step of EKF- SLAM and all the current observed features Sg = {gj |j = 1, 2, ? ? ? , k} will be represented in Mf . This process means that after feature map?s update Sg ?Mf .

Sg is re-formulared as Sg = {fi, f?|? ? [1, 2, ? ? ? , n]}. mi  is updated by fusing the segmented data zfil into local map mi. z  fi l contains all the sensor data d that has the following  property:  ||d? fi|| ? ||d? f?|| ? ? [1, 2, ? ? ? , n] ? ?= i (11) A local map m  ? i is assumed. It represents the observed  environment that is limited in gVoronoi(Mf , fi) exactly.

?d ? m?i, it has:  ||d, fi|| ? ||d, fj || j = 1, 2, ? ? ? , n j ?= i (12) Because S ? Mf , it is deduced that the sensor data  d satisfying equation (12) must satisfy equation (11). This conclusion means that zfil contains at least the observation of the environment limited in gVoronoi(Mf , fi).

Local map mi has fused all the z fi l s which are produced  when feature fi is observed. If all the environment contour in gVoronoi(Mf , fi) and feature fi can be observed at the same time, at least one time. mi will represent the observed environment in gVoronoi(Mf , fi) completely. ?  The precondition in the proof is not satisfied in some en- vironments, however, there are no sensor data been deserted in the generating and update of local maps. This character consequentially makes the hybrid metric map capable of representing all the observed environments.



IV. DATA ASSOCIATION Equation (13) shows the structure of the hybrid metric  map. The map representation keeps clear one-to-one corre- spondence between features and local maps. In the hybrid metric map, mi represents the nearby environment of fi. mi will not change its position and shape, since it is represented in coordinate system Li. Similarly, z  gj l is represented in Lj  and it represents gj?s nearby environment. So the one-to-one corresponding relationship between features and local maps (between mi and fi / between gj and z  gj l ) straightforwardly  brings benefits to data association.

M =  ? ?  ?  Mf = {f1 f2 f3 ? ? ? fn} + ? ? ? ? ? M l = {m1 m2 m3 ? ? ? mn}  (13)     Assuming that there are no errors in features? extraction process, mi and z  gj l are compatible in some sense if fi and  gj represent one of the same environment feature.

Benefited from the one-to-one corresponding relationship  between features and local maps, we present an identifying rule of data association based on compatibility testing.

A. Feature Calibration  For each potential DA hypothesis [fi, gj ], the error oc- curred in gj?s extraction process is calibrated by iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm [18].

? = argmin ??  ? q  ?dq(mi)? ( R(??) ? dq(zgjl ) + t(??)  ) ?2 (14)  where [dq(mi), dq(z gj l )] is a pair of closest points in ICP  algorithm, R(??) and t(??) are the equivalent rotation matrix and translation vector of ?.

im  jg  lz  i L  jL  ( )  i  j  L L  jg  l z  im  Fig. 3. The principle of feature calibration. After feature calibration, the error of feature extraction decreases greatly. The calibration procedure brings benefits to the compatibility testing, because it prevents the right DA hypothesis from obtaining a big Ru and ?u. It also increases the accuracy of both feature map and local maps? building.

Figure 3 illustrates the principle of the calibration process.

Compared with mi, zsi .Z can be regarded as the initial map of mi and it does not contain the error accumulated from the fusion step of equation (10). So zsi .Z is chosen as the reference of calibration.

? = argmin ??  ? q  ?dq(zsi .Z)? ( R(??) ? dq(zgjl ) + t(??)  ) ?2 (15)  If [fi, gj ] is finally determined as a right DA hypothesis, gj and z  gj l are calibrated as well.{  gj = gj ? (??) z gj l = ? ? zgjl  (16)  In the observation update of EKF-SLAM, gj is the obser- vation of feature fi. This calibration increases the accuracy of features? observation and furthermore increases the accuracy of feature map Mf . Similarly the calibrated zgjl increases the accuracy of local maps? fusion step in equation (10).

B. Compatibility Testing  Feature calibration decreases the error of feature extraction greatly. After aligning Lj with Li, mi and z  gj l should overlap  together if [fi, gj ] is a right DA hypothesis. Figure 4 is an example of wrong DA hypothesis.

z gj l is observed from current robot?s pose ?gj . zgjl and  ?gj together determines a part of free area (white color) of  the environment (grey color for unknown area). In the testing process of DA hypothesis [fi, gj ], a part of local map mi appears in the free area. This part of mi should shadow the visual line of sensor and prevent the sensor from exploring the free area at a father distance. Areas A and B in figure 4 are two examples of this incompatible phenomenon. Area C  ( . ) s  i i l m z Z  White color: free area  Grey color: unknow area  .

s  i lz X  A  B  C  ( ) i j  L L Rang limit  of sensor  j g  ( )j  g  l j z g Z  Fig. 4. The principle of the compatibility testing. Green data represents the current sensor data z  gj l (?gj?Z0, Z0 represented in Lj ). z  gj l (?gj?Z0)  has determined the free area (white color) of the environment (grey color for unknown environment). When Li is aligned with Lj , in areas A and B, a part of mi (zsi .Zl) appear in the free area, z  gj l and mi (?gj ? Z0 and  zsi .Zl) are incompatible in this area. Similarly in area C, a part of ?gj?Z0 appears in the free area determined by zsi .Zl and z  s i .Xl.

is also a sample of this incompatible phenomenon. However, area C cannot be recognized from the knowledge of zgjl , ?gj and mi, because this part of mi does not appear in the free area discussed above. The final solution is to test the compatibility between (?gj , ?gj ? Z0) and (zsi .Xl, zsi .Zl).

As shown in figure 4, in the area C a part of ?gj ? Z0 appears in the free area determined by zsi .Xl and z  s i .Zl.

Two indexes are adopted to represent the incompatibility.

They are the shadowed area Ru  ??? ??  Ru1 = g(?gj ,?gj ? Z0, zsi .Zl) Ru2 = g(z  s i .Xl, z  s i .Zl,?gj ? Z0)  Ru = Ru1 +Ru2  (17)  and shadowed angle ?u:  ??? ??  ?u1 = h(?gj ,?gj ? Z0, zsi .Zl) ?u2 = h(z  s i .Xl, z  s i .Zl,?gj ? Z0)  ?u = ?u1 + ?u2  (18)  where ?u1 and ?u2 are calculated by treating currently obser- vation Z0 and saved history observation zsi .Zl as exploring free area of the environment respectively.

The function g and h are implemented by splitting the shadowed area as sum of small sectors. The angle of each sector equals the resolution of laser range finder. The long radius is the distance between the sensor and boundary of free area, and the short radius is the distance between the sensor and shadowing obstacle. The sum of areas and angles     of these small sectors are Ru and ?u.???? ???  Ru1 = ? ?  0.5 ? (r21 ? r22) ? ?/512  ?u1 = ? ?  ?/512 (19)  where ? is the area existing the incompatibility. r1 is the observed distance directly from Z0. r2 is predicted from zsi .Zl and ?gj . Similarly Ru2 and ?u2 are calculated.

If fi and gj describe one of the same environment corner, Ru and ?u need to stay in a low level. When Ru and ?u exceed a threshold, [fi, gj ] is supposed wrong.

C. DA Approach  The proposed DA approach is a union of relaxation of NN and the identifying rule based on the compatibility testing.

1) Relaxation of NN: For each observed gj , if the maha- lanobis distance between fi and gj is smaller than a threshold and smaller than the distance between gj and any other features stored in Mf , the standard NN algorithm chooses [fi, gj ] as a right DA hypothesis,  [fi, gj ] ={fi|dm(fi, gj) < dthreshold, & dm(f?, gj) > dm(fi, gj), ?? ?= i}  (20)  where dm(fi, gj) represents the mahalanobis distance be- tween fi and gj . To overcome the limitation of the NN algorithm, the strict conditions of NN are relaxed. A group of potential DA hypothesis is produced,  H = [{fi}, gj ] = {fi|dm(fi, gj) < dthreshold} (21)  2) Feature Calibration for Each Potential DA Hypothesis: For each [fi, gj ] ? H , gj and zgjl are calibrated through the process in section IV-A. The calibration brings benefits to the compatibility testing, because it will prevent the correct DA hypothesis from obtaining a big Ru and ?u. Currently the calibrated gj and z  gj l are regarded as a group of intermediate  temporary data.

3) Identifying Rule based on Compatibility Testing: After  calibration, each [fi, gj ] ? H is checked by the identifying rule based on compatibility testing in section IV-B. The hypothesis with the smallest Ru and ?u is supposed as the final DA hypothesis. At the same time, the correspondingly calibrated gj and z  gj l are ascertained to increase the accura-  cies of both of feature map Mf and local map mi?s building.

The identifying rule based on compatibility testing utilizes  the particular property of the one-to-one corresponding rela- tionship between features and local maps.



V. EXPERIMENTS  To validate the proposed data association approach, two experiments have been carried out.

Fig. 5. The built hybrid metric map. Black points denote locations of corners, blue points denote the local dense maps, and the green curve denote the estimated trajectory of the handcart.

A. Experiment I This experiment setup was described in detail in [7]. The  built hybrid metric map is shown in figure 5. All the local maps represented in global coordinate system have described all the observed dense environment successfully. The grey lines represent the boundaries of VD(Mf ).

The proposed DA approach has been compared with the standard NN algorithm. For each observed gj , NN searches the nearest feature fi in Mf . Figure 6a is an example of DA hypothesis produced by NN algorithm. The mahalanobis distance of this DA hypothesis is 3.5595. In the proposed DA approach, we have relaxed the NN algorithm by search- ing a group of potential DA hypothesis, and then chosen the correct hypothesis by using the identifying rule based on compatibility testing. Another possible DA hypothesis is plotted in figure 6b. It has a larger mahalanobis dis- tance (3.7096), but the smaller shadowed area and angle (Ru = 0.0069452, ?u = 0.073631 for figure 6b and Ru = 0.59353, ?u = 1.1536 for figure 6a) show that NN has made a mistake and the correct DA hypothesis is the one shown in figure 6b.

-2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 -2  -1.5  -1  -0.5   0.5   1.5  maha = 3.5595;  u =1.1536; R  u =0.59353  X/meter  Y /m  e te  r  Sensor pose  Sensor data  Sensor bean  Local map  Corner feature  -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 -2  -1.5  -1  -0.5   0.5   1.5  maha = 3.7096;  u =0.073631; R  u =0.0069452  X/meter  Y /m  e te  r  Sensor pose  Sensor data  Sensor bean  Local map  Corner feature  (a) (b)  Fig. 6. An example that shows the advantage of the proposed DA approach.

(a) A wrong DA hypothesis produced by standard NN algorithm. (b) The right DA hypothesis produced by our DA approach.

B. Experiment II Figure 7 is the schematic diagram of the environment.

A shape-shifting robot, AMOEBA-I [19], equipped with URG-04LX, started from position A, then explored the environment clockwise along the annular path shown by the red curve, and finally returned to position A.

Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of the environment. The red curve shows the loop of the trajectory. AMOEBA-I started from A, then moved along the path denoted by the red curved path clockwise, and finally returned to A.

As shown in figure 8, we know that the proposed DA approach has successfully made AMOEBA-I return its start position. The feature map is updated greatly. Global positions of local maps have been updated equally. The experiment of  Fig. 8. The result by the proposed DA approach, where the loop of robot?s path is closed in the 1014th iteration.

loop closure shows that the DA approach proposed for the hybrid metric map is efficient.

Based on the settlement of DA problem, the experiment shows the advantage of the proposed hybrid metric map.



VI. CONCLUSIONS We have proposed a data association approach for a  hybrid metric map representation. In this hybrid metric map representation, there is an important one-to-one correspond- ing relationship between features and local maps. Each local map is represented in a local coordinate system that is inherently generated from the corresponding feature, so the local map represents its corresponding feature?s nearby environment. Utilizing this property we have proposed an identifying rule based on compatibility testing. The principle  of compatibility testing is independent from principle of Mahalanobis distance, and the final data association approach is a combination of the relaxation of NN algorithm and the compatibility testing.

Two experiments have validated the efficiency of the proposed DA approach. The feasibility and advantage of the proposed hybrid metric map representation has been also validated in the experiments.

