A NOVEL APPROACH TO HIGH FREQUENCY RADAR SHIP TRACKING EXPLOITING ASPECT DIVERSITY

ABSTRACT  Low-power High-Frequency Surface-Wave (HFSW) radars, designed for oceanic applications, are promising tools also for long-range surveillance in open-water Multi-Target Track- ing (MTT) applications. This paper focuses on the fusion of multiple aspects over single-perspective systems. The single- sensor tracking steps, made up by the Joint Probabilistic Data Association (JPDA) rule and the Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF), are followed by a Track-to-Track association and Fu- sion (T2TF) strategy. Tracking performance improvements are investigated using real data collected by two simultane- ously operated HFSW-radars.

Index Terms? HFSW radar, MTT, multi-sensor data fu- sion, JPDA, UKF.

1. INTRODUCTION  The broad range of applications in maritime surveillance (e.g.

law enforcement, search&rescue, environmental protection and resource management) continuously demands for new re- search activities aimed to capitalize existing sensor systems, data processing algorithms and to develop new solutions.

Recently, great attention has been paid to low-power HFSW radars, which are typically exploited for remote sensing appli- cations, e.g. ocean surface current and wave measurements.

Their over-the-horizon (OTH) capability, together with a continuous-time mode of operation is ideally suited to oper- ate the system for the purpose of ship detection and tracking.

The Wellen Radar (WERA), developed at the University of Hamburg (Germany), is one such system [1]. Unfortunately, HFSW-radars suffer from poor azimuth resolution, high non- linearity and significant false-alarm rate. These issues have been partially solved by a simple MTT algorithm, which uses a Nearest Neighbor (NN) data association rule [2].

Many data association approaches exist which outperform the NN rule. They can be roughly divided into enumerative and non-enumerative. The former approaches include Multi- Hypothesis Tracking (MHT), Joint Probabilistic Data Asso- ciation (JPDA), 0 ? 1 integer programming and assignment algorithms. They entail the explicit evaluation of data asso- ciation hypotheses [3, 4]. The latter include instead Proba-  bilistic MHT (PMHT), the Symmetric Measurement Equation (SME), event-averaged mean field and Markov random field methods [3,4]. Random Finite Set (RFS) theory has been suc- cessfully applied to MTT [5], leading, in recent times, to the Probability Hypothesis Density (PHD) filter [5].

The fusion of data collected by HFSW systems separated by very long baselines enables spatial diversity to improve tracking capabilities beyond the clear sensitivity combination and coverage extension benefits. The overlap of the two sep- arated radar setups enables to significantly improve the track- ing performance compared to a single system. Moreover, illu- minating the same region with multiple angles can help over- coming the problems concerning the Doppler shifts and the Radar Cross Section (RCS) of the targets. Since ship detec- tion is here implemented in the frequency domain, missed de- tections may happen when the vessel velocity vector leads to a return in the proximity of Bragg lines due to the first-order resonant scattering by ocean waves. Separated acquisition ge- ometries allow to measure different radial velocity compo- nents, yielding a reduction of missed detections and tracks.

The aspect diversity also allows the reduction of RCS vari- ability due to the target orientation. Additional performance limiting factors related to single aspect HFSW systems are represented by shadowing effects, measurement noise, and re- duced antenna gain due to non-uniform patterns [2].

In this paper, preliminary results from the NATO Under- sea Research Centre (NURC) Battlespace Preparation 2009 HF-radar experiment are reported and discussed. The applica- tion of the JPDA with the UKF [6] and a T2TF strategy [3] are proposed to improve the MTT performance. The Automatic Identification System (AIS) on-board of ships as ground-truth data has been exploited for assessing ship classification and tracking performances. The outline is as follows. In Sec- tion 2 the experiment is described. In Sections 3 and 4, the MTT and T2TF are briefly described, respectively. Exper- imental results are reported in Section 5, while conclusions and guidelines about future work are drawn in Section 6.

2. THE HFSW-RADAR EXPERIMENT  Two WERA systems were installed on the Italian coast of the Ligurian Sea (Mediterranean Sea), one on Palmaria Island in     Fig. 1. Main central plot, at the current time-scan validation gates of confirmed tracks, projected in the Cartesian plane, and detections (dots) for the radar in Palmaria (green) and San Rossore (red). Plot (a)-(b)-(c)-(d), state estimates and related covariances: Palmaria (green), San Rossore (red), fused-tracks (black); AIS records (blue).

the Gulf of La Spezia (44? 2? 30?? N, 9? 50? 36?? E) and the other one at San Rossore Park, near Pisa (43? 40? 53?? N, 10?  16? 52?? E). Both WERA radars were transmitting about at 12 MHz with approximately 32 W and operated on a con- tinuous basis. The two systems used the same operating fre- quency, with orthogonal modulating waveforms. Range res- olution was 1.5 km (with bandwidth 100 kHz). The angles w.r.t. North of the two array installations were ?1 = 296.2?  and ?2 = 12.0?, respectively. The azimuth information is ex- tracted via beamforming of the received data, using an Ham- ming window. Target detection was performed in the Fourier domain by a 3D (azimuth-range-Doppler) Ordered Statistics (OS) Constant False Alarm (CFAR) algorithm, developed at the Institute of Technology of the University of Hamburg [2].

Coherent processing intervals of 512 samples, with an over- lap of 75% each (i.e. a detection occurs every 33.28 sec) were chosen. Further information about WERA and its on- site setup can be found in [1].

3. MULTI-TARGET TRACKING  3.1. Target dynamic and measurement model  Let us define with xk = [xk, x?k, yk, y?k] T the state of the tar-  get at time Tk, where xk, yk and x?k, y?k depict its position and velocity components in the Cartesian plane. Typically, the motion of large vessels is described using the constant veloc- ity model [3]:  xk = F kxk?1 + ?kvk, (1)  where F k = diag ( F  ? k,F  ? k  ) and ?k = diag  ( ?  ? k,?  ? k  ) are  the state update matrices, with:  F ? k =  [ 1 Tk 0 1  ] ,?  ? k =  [ T 2k /2 Tk  ] . (2)  The target-originated measurement vector zk = [ zrk, z  b k, z  r? k  ]T is:  zk = h (xk) + nk, (3)  with:  h (xk) =  [? x2k + y  k, arctan  ( yk xk  ) , xkx?k + yky?k?  x2k + y k  ]T , (4)  where zrk, z b k, z  r? k are the range, bearing and range-rate mea-  surements, respectively. We define with vk and nk the state process and measurement noise vectors. Both are as- sumed Gaussian with zero-mean and covariance matrices Qk = diag  ( ?2vx? , ?  vy?  ) and Rk = diag  ( ?2r , ?  b , ?  r?  ) , respec-  tively.

3.2. Track Management  Valid tracks are established applying the M/N rule [3]. The following logic is considered: ? Every unassociated measurement yields a tentative track, named initiator.

? At the sampling time following the detection of an initiator, a gate is set up based on: i) the assumed maximum (mini- mum) target dynamic, ii) the measurement noise intensities.

Following a detection, this track becomes a preliminary track.

Otherwise, it is dropped.

? For each preliminary track, the UKF can be initialized and used to set up a gate for the next sampling time.

? Starting from the third scan, a logic of M/N scans is used for the subsequent gates.

? If at scan N + 2 the logic requirement is satisfied, the track becomes a confirmed track. Otherwise, it is dropped.

A confirmed track is terminated if no detections have been validated for the past N most recent sampling times; the track uncertainty (state covariance matrix) has grown beyond a cer- tain threshold; the target has reached a maximum velocity.

3.3. Data Association  The data association rule adopted is the JPDA [3]. It can be described by the following steps: ? A validation matrix is set up, accounting for all the mea- surements falling inside a validation gate (confirmed and preliminary), namely j = 1, . . . , J .

? All the feasible joint association events are constructed according to assumptions: i) each measurement is originated from one target or it is a false alarm, ii) one target can only generate one measurement, with a detection probability Pd.

? The probabilities of the joint events are evaluated ac- cording to: i) target-originated measurements are Gaussian- distributed around the predicted measurement locations, ii) false alarms are distributed according to a Poisson point pro- cess model with ? representing clutter density.

? Clutter returns are assumed to be uniformly distributed in the validation regions.

? Marginal (measurement to target) association probabilities are obtained from the joint association probabilities.

? The target states are estimated by averaging the UKF up- dates, using these marginal probabilities.

3.4. JPDA-UKF update and prediction  The state update of the jth target xjk|k is given by [3]:  xjk|k = ?0jx j k|k?1 +  mj(k)? i=1  ?ijx j k|k(i), (5)  where mj(k) is the number of validated measurements for the jth target, xjk|k?1 is the state prediction, x  j k|k(i) is the UKF  update using the ith validated measurement, while ?ij is the related association probability [3]:  ?0j = P {  no meas. are originated by jth targ.

} ,  ?ij = P { ith meas. is originated by jth targ.

} .

For brevity, the UKF prediction/update steps are not reported [3]. Let us instead focus on the validation gate, set-up from  Fig. 2. Surveyed area. Palmaria: detections (green), tracks (bold-faced green); San Rossore: detections (red), tracks (bold-faced red); AIS records (blue); fused-tracks (black).

the predicted measurement zjk|k?1 and its covariance S j k,  given by the following ellipsoid [3]:  Gj(k, ?) = { z :  ( z ? zjk|k?1  ) (Sjk)  ?1 ( z ? zjk|k?1  ) < ?  } .

Gate probability is determined by threshold ?. In the spher- ical domain the validation gate has an elliptical shape while, projected into the Cartesian plane, it assumes a ?banana?- shape [7].

4. DATA FUSION  A decentralized configuration for the system architecture is considered, in which a single sensor tracking stage (cfr. Sec- tion 3) is followed by the T2TF stage [3]. Let us consider the state estimates and their associated covariances coming from the two sites at the same time instant. The T2T associa- tion rule is given by a constrained optimization, which can be solved by standard technique, e.g. JVC algorithm, and linear programming [3]. If the association report indicates that the two objects are the same, then we can combine (fuse) the esti- mates by using their covariances and cross-covariances. The accuracy of the resulting fused information is higher than that of the individual estimates.

5. EXPERIMENT RESULTS  Data collected from the WERA installations at Palmaria and San Rossore WERA have been processed separately us- ing the 3D OS-CFAR detection algorithm described in [2].

Detections are provided to the MTT system proposed in Sections 4, 5. Both single-sensor and fused-sensors tracks have been analyzed w.r.t. AIS ship reports, used as ground- truth data. Fig. 2 shows preliminary results of 200 radar scans (almost two hours) on May 10, 2009. CFAR detec- tions at Palmaria and San Rossore are depicted by green and red dots, respectively. MTT single-sensor tracks are in- stead bold-faced. AIS contacts are depicted by blue dots, while fused-sensor tracks are represented by black bold-faced dots. A qualitative analysis of the results evidences a good agreement between the radars tracks, both single-sensor and fused-sensors, with AIS reports. An interesting aspect is the track fragmentation, well visible for single-sensor tracks. It is not infrequent to observe consecutive track-losses of the same target, i.e. the vessel seems to ?disappear?. A decrease of the radar cross section (e.g. different target angulation), or the signal-to-clutter ratio (e.g. vessel is in the Bragg scatter- ing region of the range-Doppler map) can be possible causes.

Interestingly, such losses do not occur at the same time at both radar sites. The MTT fusion strategy proposed in Sec- tion 5 produced promising results. In fact, the two HFSW radars point to almost perpendicular directions, leading to di- versity maximization over a wide illuminated area. Not only track-fragmentation problem is overcome (Fig. 3), but track estimates are far more accurate than single-sensor ones, as demonstrated by the analysis of uncertainty regions (Fig. 1).

Uncertainty ellipsoids of fused-tracks contacts are signifi- cantly smaller than single-sensor ones and the corresponding AIS contacts fall inside them in almost all the cases. More- over, the presence of high-confidence tracks without AIS confirmation, as depicted in Fig. 2, is of great relevance for the problem of the AIS spoofing. This means that the HFSW system can detect and track large vessels, independently of the AIS.

6. SUMMARY  Low-power/cost HFSW radars have demonstrated to be reli- able long-range early-warning tools for maritime situational awareness applications. To overcome poor azimuth resolu- tion, high non-linearity, and significant false alarm rate, the JPDA-UKF tracking algorithm has been proposed and inves- tigated by a comparison between the single sensor tracks and AIS ship reports, obtaining a good trade-off in terms of per- formance and complexity. A T2TF strategy has been pre- sented and its effectiveness demonstrated with respect to sin-  gle sensor results.

Fig. 3. Sample target trajectory. Palmaria track (green); San Rossore track (red); AIS records (blue); fused-tracks (black).

7. REFERENCES  [1] K.-W. Gurgel, G. Antonischki, H.-H. Essen, and T. Schlick, ?Wellen radar (WERA), a new ground-wave based HF radar for ocean remote sensing,? Coastal Engi- neering, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 219?234, Aug. 1999.

[2] A. Dzvonkovskaya and H. Rohling, ?HF radar perfor- mance analysis based on AIS ship information,? in Proc.

of the IEEE Radar Conference, Washington, USA, 2010.

[3] Y. Bar-Shalom, P. Willett, and X. Tian, Tracking and Data Fusion: A Handbook of Algorithm, YBS Publish- ing, Storrs, CT, 2011.

[4] G. W. Pulford, ?Taxonomy of multiple target tracking methods,? Proc. of IEE Radar Sonar Navig., vol. 152, no. 5, pp. 291?304, Oct. 2005.

[5] R. Mahler, Statistical Multisource-Multitarget Informa- tion Fusion, Artech House, 2007.

[6] P. Braca, R. Grasso, M. Vespe, S. Maresca, and J. Horstmann, ?Application of the JPDA-UKF to HFSW radars for maritime situational awareness,? in Proc. of (FUSION), Singapore, 2012.

[7] S. J. Julier and J. K. Uhlmann, ?Unscented filtering and nonlinear estimation,? vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 401?422, Mar.

2004.

