

Abstract ? In the age of information technology it has given more and more scope of using available technology for various applications, which has give rise to information volume and database size. With the enormous amount of data stored in the form of files (text and images), video and multimedia it is required to have some advanced techniques to explore the database. Data mining is the method of extracting valuable information from the enormous amount of data saved in the database and files. At that time basically two important reasons that are used in data mining. first our capacity to accumulate and store the large amount of data is fast increase day by day, and second but the most imperative basis is the need to turn such data into useful information and knowledge. Association rule mining is a vital procedure to find out hidden interaction with items in the transaction. This paper describes   new technique cluster based Master-Slave architecture. It uses Hybrid technique, the grouping of bottom up and top down technique    for   search   repetitive   item sets. It reduces the time in use to get out the support count of the item sets. The Prime number show present offers the give for verify rules and provides decrease in   the data complexity  Keywords: Association rule mining, database, master-slave  I INTRODUCTION  Data mining refers to extract or ?mining?, ?knowledge from large amounts of data?. Data mining should have been more suitably named knowledge mining from data. [1]There are many other terms carrying a similar or slightly different meaning to data mining, such as knowledge mining from databases, knowledge extraction, data/pattern analysis, data archaeology, and data dredging. Data mining is a widely-used technique for discovering information from large databases, within which ?association rules discovery?, is one of the most popular technologies. It was first formulated in 1993 by Agrawal et al. [1]. A year later, Apriori, one of the most noticeable algorithms, was proposed by the same authors.

Over the next few years, studies on improvements or extensions of Apriori have been extensive. Many modifications to Apriori have been done. Cluster-based technique creates cluster tables by scanning the database once in a time. [2]. The algorithm?s support count is performed on the cluster table and it need not scan all transactions stored in the cluster table.

II PROBLEM DEFINITION AND RELATED WORK  Data mining normally involves four classes of task classification, clustering, regression, and association rule learning. This algorithm finds the frequent itemsets or patterns by partitioning the database transactions into clusters. Clusters are designed based on the comparison measurement among the communication. Then after find out the frequent itemsets. With the transactions in t h e clusters and items openly v i a  improved Apriori algorithm which supplementary reduces the number of amount s c a n s  in the database and that's why improve the proficiency. When buy the product when another product is buy presents to the association rules. [7] The Apriori algorithm perform only find out the frequent itemsets. The Apriori algorithm is the base for association rules.

These  technique have  been  planned  to  consider  and recognize  the executive  implications of a spectrum of trade- offs between calculation, conversation, usage of memory, synchronizing, and the use of particular problem-specific information   data mining in parallel. [3]  The problem of mining association rules could be decomposed into two sub problems:  ? Find out all large itemsets or patterns and their support counts. A large itemset or patterns is a set of items which are contained in a sufficiently large number of transactions, with respect to a support threshold minimum support.

?  The set of greatest itemsets or patterns catch, find it all there association rules that have a confidence value beyond a confidence threshold value lowest .

Since the solution of the second sub problem is basic, here we are concentrating only on the first sub problem.

Clustering is a data mining technique used to position data elements into related groups without advance knowledge of the group definitions. Clustering can be consider the most essential unsupervised learning problem; so, as every further problem of this kind, it deals with finding a structure in a collection of unlabeled data. A cluster is therefore a collection of objects which are ?similar? between them and are ?dissimilar? to the objects belonging to other clusters.

This example demonstrates the clustering of balls of the same mark. Figure 1 show a total of ten balls which are  An Efficient Technique on Cluster Based Master Slave Architecture Design   Neha Saxena                 Niket Bhargava M.Tech (C.S.E.)                        Dept. of CSE.                                        .

B.I.S.T., Bhopal(MP)-INDIA                                   B.I.S.T., Bhopal(MP)-INDIA Email:saxenaneha07@gmail.com                Email: niket.bhargava@rediffmail.com   Urmila Mahor                   Nitin Dixit  Dept. of CSE          Dept. of CSE B.I.S.T., Bhopal(MP)-INDIA            IITM, Gwalior(MP)-INDIA Email:urrmila.mahor@gmail.com        Email: nitty_222@rediffmail.com   DOI 10.1109/CICN.2012.44     of three different marks. [5]   Figure 1 Balls with marks in random order   We are interested in grouping the balls into three  clusters by their marks as shown in figure 2     Figure2.  Ba l l s  in groups The partition algorithm is based in the study that the frequent sets are normally very few in number compared to the set of all item sets. By  using  partitioning,  cluster  based and/or  distributed  technique can  be  easily  created,  where each partitioning might be handle by a separate machine In order to find the Largest item set it is enough to go through the transactions with in the clusters.[6]  The cluster that has the full amount  of transactions smaller than some threshold cost will be deleted. For finding the greatest item sets it is sufficient to go through the transactions with  the clusters.

There is no need to go through the entire database again.

Hence it compresses the unnecessary database scan and better the efficiency. If we apply the master slave architecture after portioning it will further reduces the number of scans and improves efficiency. [7]   III MASTER SLAVE ARCHITECTURE DESIGN  This technique is based on Cluster based Master-Slave structural design using candidate division technique.

Candidate  division technique reduces the communication overhead between master and slave nodes.

Candidate division technique assigns the candidate item sets generated from different parts of database to different processors   and   each   processor   is   assigned disjoint candidates, independent of further processors.[8] The Master node prunes the transactions by removing 1- infrequent itemsets and stores the Prime number multiple for each transaction in mutual memory. It finds the maximal length transaction size Maxlength and puts in mutual memory. It divides the transactions equally to each node for candidate generation. Though horizontal partition, Vertical partition techniques can be used to divide a division the transactions, horizontal partitioning technique is adopted, as it demands minimum communication. [4]If  there are S number of slaves and T number of transactions, then T/S number of transactions are assigned to each slave if T is a integral  multiple of S. Otherwise, S-1 slaves will be  assigned T/S transactions and Sth slave will be assigned (T/S + mod (T/S)) transactions.  Master connects to each slave node and initiates the process of finding the frequent itemset. Finally, the master node shows the global frequent itemsets after gathering the local frequent itemsets. After the  Master node initiates the slave node, it reads the allotted number of transactions and Maximal length transaction size Maxlength[9]     Fig.3 Master Slave structural design  Figure 4 is shows the flow chart of this proposed technique ,first that are used in the data set then after assign prim no.

then modulo division operation ,then the result is non zero the item is not found and the result is zero the item is present.

Then last process is interrupt.

Fig.4.Flow chart on proposed method   IV PROPOSED TECHNIQUE  A new approach for Frequent Item sets using cluster based master slave structural design efficient approach is being proposed. This technique integrates both the bottom up explore as well as the top-down explore. This technique is suitable for itemsets data base. The top down technique u s e d  to find the frequent subsets of itemsets and this bottom up technique to find the supersets of the frequent itemsets. Most of the technique for mining the frequent     items is based on bottom-up search technique. In this approach, the technique starts from 1 itemsets and extends one stage in each pass until all maximum frequent item sets are found. These techniques perform fit if the length of the maximum itemset is short. If the maximum itemset is longer, top down technique is suitable for a transaction with a normal sized assigned a   exclusive prime number as shown in table 1 maximum frequent set; a combination of both these techniques performs fit. This technique adopts Candidate partition technique to allocate the candidates among all nodes. The Prime number illustration reduces the memory needed for store the items of the transactions by conveying an exclusive prime number for each item. This technique uses prime numbers correspond to the items in this transaction. Each item is specify a exclusive prime number.

Each Transaction of data base is   the product of the corresponding prime number of specific items in the transaction, while the product of the prime number is exclusive, modulo division operation of a transaction?s prime product.  The prime product result of the item set can assure the occurrence or nonexistence of the item set in any transaction. If the residue is zero, then the item set is event in the transaction. If the residue is Non-zero, then the item set is nonexistence in the transaction Step 1: Consider a example of database and equivalent prime number as shown in table1.

TABLE 1:  DATABASE EXAMPLE EQUIVALENT PRIME NUMBER   Step2:  In this technique each item is assigned a  unique prime number and product of the corresponding prime numbers of the item set shown in table 2.

TABLE 2: ASSIGN PRIME NUMBER AND ITS MULTIPLICATION     Step3:   To find the support count in given data base using modulo division operation, support count of item set {D(7), E(11)}  is that  77 mode, The support count of itemset {D,E} as the modulo division operation of the five transactions with 77 gives zero remainder and the modulo operation with other transactions resulted in a Non-zero remainder. As shown in table 3  TABLE3: FIND OUT SUPPORT COUNT   S.No  T id Modulo Division Remainder Item?s Presence  1 I1 1938 mod 77 Non-zero no  2 I2 30 mod 77 Non-zero no  3 I3 1642342273 mod  Non-zero no  4 I4 770 mod 77 Zero yes  5 I5 53751 mod 77 Non-zero no  6 I6 66526 mod 77 Non-zero no  7 I7 2618 mod 77 Zero yes  8 I8 49742 mod 77 Zero yes  9 I9 1705 mod 77 Non-zero no  10 I10 154 mod 77 Zero yes  11 I11 6 mod 77 Non-zero no  12 I12 34034 mod 77 Zero yes   V    EXPERIMENTATION AND PERFORMANCE EVOLUTION  We have implemented the proposed approach using cluster based master slave structural design. The results of this  S.No Items Equivalent Prime  1 A 2  2 B 3  3 C 5  4 D 7  5 E 11  6 F 13  7 G 17  8 H 19  9 I 23  1`0 J 29  11 K 31  12 L 37  13 M 41  S.No Transaction id Transact ion  Transaction Multiple Result  1 I1 ABGH 2*3*17*19 1938  2 I2 ABC 2*3*5 30  3 I3 EFGHKL 11*13*17*19*31* 37 1642342273  4 I4 ACDE 2*5*7*11 770  5 I5 BHIM 3*19*23*41 53751  6 I6 AJKL 2*29*31*37 66526  7 I7 ADEG 2*7*11*17 2618  8 I8 ADEGH 2*7*11*17*19 49742  9 I9 CEK 5*11*31 1705  10 I10 ADE 2*7*11 154  11 I11 AB 2*3 6  12 I12 ADEFG 2*7*11*13*17 34034     technique are given in this style. There are two conditions occurs, are as follows:  If the support count is larger than or equal to the support count(minimum), it is treat as the maximum frequent item set and the process terminated. If the support count for the itemsets of  time slave  A is  smaller  than  the    support count(minimum),  the subsets of time-slave equal to P=A/2 is produce and their support count is recognize .

Experimental result: If the modulo division operation gives a zero residue, it indicates that the items or item pattern is in the transaction. If the residue is non-zero, it indicates that the items or item pattern is not there in the transaction. In this  representation, support count of item set {D,E} can be found by execution the modulo division of each transaction?s prime number by the product ?77? of item ?D?s equivalent prime number ?7? and item ?E?s equivalent prime number ?11? as shown in table 1 The support count of item set {D,E} is found to be ?5? as the modulo  division  operation  of  the  four  transactions with 77 gives zero residue and the modulo operation with other transactions resulted in a Non-zero residue. The study of the proposed technique cluster based   master slave structural design we have taken a database of 2000 transaction of 13 items. In this systematic process we considered 2000 transactions to generate the frequent itemset pattern with the support count 25% .We have repetitive the similar process by increasing the transaction, after the testing on both technique, so find the finalized this result, we have designed a graph and summarized a result in the following table 4 .

TABLE 4: EXPERIMENTAL RESULT WITH TIME     Results are shown in figures. Performance is Shown in the comparisons graph and result with time & transaction figure no. 5.

Fig.5: performance evolution with time & transaction   For the comparative study of clustering and cluster based master slave structure design, we have taken a database of 1000 transaction of 13 items. In this systematic process we considered 1000 transactions to generate the All frequent itemset and pattern with the support count 25%.shown in the table 5and figure 6  TABLE5: EXPERIMENTAL RESULT WITH ALL FREQUENT ITEMSET   Show the compression graph with itemset and transaction with clustering technique, the result show in flowing graph    Fig.6: performance evolution with Transaction & all frequent itemset.

