

Processing Massive Data Streams to Achieve Anomaly Intrusion Prevention C. Kavitha1, M. Suresh2,a  1Department of Computer Applications, KSR College of Engineering, Thiruchengode, Tamil Nadu, India 2Reaserch Scholar, Anna University of Technology? Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India  asureshmadhesan@gmail.com   Abstract?Intrusion prevention system is an important technique in the network security architecture. Most of the modern intrusion detection systems lack the ability to process massive data streams to achieve anomaly detection. Instead of Intrusion detection, Intrusion prevention system can be used for both servers and end-hosts to handle the dual challenges of accuracy and performance which the former lacks. Intrusion prevention can be done by processing the data stream on fly. It is a difficult issue since the streaming data have some tough characteristics, such as unknown or unbound size, possibly a variable arrival rate, lack of ability to backtrack over previously arrived transactions, and a lack of system control over the order in which the data arrive. Many applications rely directly or indirectly on finding the frequent items, and implementations are in use in large scale industrial systems.

This paper will find a network model which is more suitable for high speed processing of massive data streams in real-time from various data sources by considering the frequency property of events. An Intrusion prevention system have been built with online mining of frequent item sets over a stream with Time-sensitive sliding window, which is one of the most important technique in stream data mining with broad applications. Our method is employed to prevent the system with high efficiency and low use of system resources  Keywords: Intrusion Prevention, Data Stream, Frequent Pattern Mining

I. INTRODUCTION  The recent advances in hardware technology have facilitated the ability to collect data continuously. Simple transactions of everyday life such as using a credit card, a phone or browsing the web lead to automated data storage.

Similarly, advances in information technology have lead to large flows of data across IP networks. In many cases, these large volumes of data can be mined for interesting and relevant information in a wide variety of applications. It may be desirable to perform in-network processing of data stream with limited processing and memory [11]. This paper illustrates about stream data mining technique can be used for an Anomaly Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) which aims to evade a wide range of security violations ranging from attempted break-ins by outsiders to system penetrations and maltreatment done by insiders. Intrusion prevention is a vital system in the defence-in-depth network security framework. Currently we have detection models  which lack the ability to prevent the intrusion through processing massive data streams. In general, the techniques for intrusion prevention fall into two major categories depending upon the modelling methods used: misuse detection and anomaly detection. Since anomaly detection can be effective against new attacks, it has become a hot topic in research of computer security. Anomaly detection has been an active research area for more than a decade since it was originally proposed by Denning [1]. In recent years, IPS has been widely implemented to prevent from suspicious threat. Unlike traditional Intrusion Detection System (IDS), IPS has additional features to secure computer network system. The additional features identifying and distinguish suspicious threat trigger alarm, event notification, through responsible response.

Network-borne attacks are currently major threats to information security.

A. Data Stream Management System  Emerging applications, such as network traffic monitoring, Web mining and sensor network data analysis call for study of a new kind of data, called stream data, where data takes the form of continuous, most significantly infinite data streams, as opposed to finite, statically stored data sets. Stream data management system and querying data stream are under popular research and development.

Besides querying data streams, another vital task is to mine data streams for interesting patterns. However, it is hard to mine frequent patterns in data streams because computation for any item-set cannot complete before seeing the historic and future data sets. As one can only maintain a limited size window due to the huge amount of stream data as a single window or single item-set, it is complicate to mine and update frequent patterns in a dynamic, data stream environment. Online mining of frequent items over data streams for knowledge discovery has become a novel and rapidly growing research direction and has posed new challenges. First, each data element over data streams should be examined at least once. Second, the memory usage in the process of mining data streams is restricted even though new data elements are continuously generated from the stream. Third, each data element in the stream should be processed at quick as possible. Fourth, the analytical results produced by the algorithms should be immediately available when user requested. Finally, the   DOI 10.1109/CICN.2012.167     errors of results should be restricted to as small as possible [12].  Therefore, the continuous nature of data streams makes it essential to use the algorithms which require only single scan over the stream for knowledge discovery. The boundless nature makes it unfeasible to store all the data into main memory or even secondary storage. This inspires the design of the in-memory summary data structure with small footprints that can support both one-time and continuous queries. In other words, single-pass data stream mining algorithms have to give up the correctness of its analytical results by allowing some counting errors. So, conventional multiple-pass data mining algorithms deployed for static datasets cannot be easily used in such a streaming environment. Change mining on static datasets has been studied in the last ten years [7][8][10].  It has become one of the core sub-areas of data mining. The studies are focused on the effects of data changes on data mining models and algorithms, whereas the paper is focus on the problem of measuring and understanding the changes of data directly rather than measuring the effects on data mining models.

Landmark sliding window model, which mines frequent patterns in data streams by assuming that patterns are measured from the start of the stream up to the current moment will be used to find the packet arrival changes in the network system. In network monitoring, the changes of the frequent patterns in the past several minutes are valuable and can be used for detection and prevention of network intrusions [5].

B. Intrusion Detection System  Intrusion detection is a technology for detecting aggressive attacks against computer network systems, both from outside and inside. In general, the techniques for intrusion detection fall into two major categories depending on the modelling methods used: signature-based detection and anomaly detection. Signature-based detection spots malicious behaviour by matching it against predefined description of attacks, or signatures. Although signature- based detection is effective against known intrusion types, it cannot detect new attacks that were not predefined.

Anomaly detection, on the other hand, defines a normal profile of a subject?s normal activities and attempt to identify any unacceptable deviation as possibly the result of an attack [2]. Anomaly detection may be able to detect new attacks. However, it may also cause a considerable number of false alarms because the normal behaviour varies generally and obtaining complete descriptions of normal behaviour is very much difficult. Although existing efforts in anomaly detection have made remarkable progress, there are still lots of issues to be resolved. First, a computer system in daily operation can produce massive data streams from various data sources. Moreover, these sources of data  are typically high dimensional. The network data is high dimensional as each network connection contains many features. Given these figures, high speed processing of high dimensional massive audit data in most cases is essential for practical IDS so that actions for response can be taken as soon as possible. However, many current anomaly detection models make the implicit assumption that data is relatively low dimensional, or only a small amount of data is used.

This oversimplification limits the effectiveness of these models [3].



II. MODEL OF INTRUSION  ? Preparation phase: Before the commencement of an intrusion attacking, thousands of zombie computers and proxies had to be equipped well in advance. In addition, the vulnerability of the target networking system must be inspected.

? Attacking phase: In this phase we consider an infinite amount of data flow will be overwhelmed on the target host or networking server and the user IP that used for attacking must be spoofed so that to know about the source of a network attacking might be very difficult.

? Covert phase: After attacking, most of the hackers will try to bury their attacking track and cleaning or omit the attacking records.



III. PREVENTION OF NETWORK INTRUSION  This paper proposes a hybrid method of combining both data stream mining algorithm techniques and intrusion detection techniques to achieve intrusion prevention. This new method will be used to achieve intrusion prevention and information security can be achieved by an improved standard. To protect the information system from attacking, some detection mechanism are proposed such as based on the analysis of intruder activity and attack approaches, content classification of header, statistical and spectral analysis, and etc. Moreover, some institute might adopt central management with associated distributed defence systems to detect and prevent from intrusion.

A.  Strategy to prevent intrusion  The goal of anti-intrusion is to protect the information and networking system such as mail servers, database servers, and HTTP servers from paralyzed and ensure the decrease of depletion of bandwidth and decrease the consumption of resource of servers. Some foundations for detecting the intrusion have been proposed, such as entropy based detection, statistical and Unsupervised Neural Network (UNN) based detection, and etc. However, as the networking technique emerging, the hacking techniques and     strategies innovated quickly. Instead of pursuing each potential weakness in every application throughout the site, the web security gateway offers a single location to implement security and screen attacks, through which all traffic must travel. The experimental architecture is established based on the rationale of centralized management. All the recorded information that collected by system will be analysed by the expert system for integrated analysis. After then, all of the timing based information will be examined by a Time-sensitive Stream Mined Access to Network as shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1.  Illustration of Network topology and TISMAN Architecture  TIme-sensitive Stream Mined Access to Network (TISMAN) is a technique hidden inside the intrusion prevention architecture which is implicitly represented in the system. As a physical procedure, all of the factors of the recent pre-state that will control the output result in current state will be taken as input streams. The reason that the TISMAN has been adopted for early alert to against intrusion in the paper is because an initiation of intrusion to be performed must trigger a lot of zombies or proxies that have been setting up in advanced. Besides, before initiate a real attacking, some investigation must be performed.

Therefore, all of the related features that collected in different timing must be integrated for associated analysis.

Instead of allowing all traffic then looking for potential attack signatures, we propose ?Deny All except allowed? strategy. In the following, a multilayer defence mechanism for intrusion has been proposed as the following. In which some modules are included such as:   ? Preliminary defence Module: which can be performed by  rule based or IP based and deployed on each nodes or critical nodes and to monitor all of the possible anomaly activity and traffic packets.

? Access Control Module: establish deny list and allow list for filtering.

? Stream Processing Module: to analyse the stream data and result the frequency of the packets  ? Authority module: in the module, the primary  responsibility is to offer the detecting results of all possible networks attacking packet information, which can be used to send for back tracking [4] or denial of access.

B. Proposal for Intrusion Prevention System  The procedure for packet stream process is shown in Fig.

2.

?  Fig. 2. Stream data analysis and processing procedure  In which, as the system that dispatched on the DMZ which is the first layer of the network face preliminary intrusion prevention, those collected information will be transferred to expert system in order to take properly actions to against the attacking. Within the Intranet, second layer of TISMAN is deployed to collect and analyse the stream with those penetrated intrusion attacking or network attacking which is initiated from insiders. In this proposed architecture, the second layer will have the protection mechanism layer that located inside the Intranet will be enhanced. Stream processing can be done using a novel approach called TISMAN to address the issues as described earlier which have a sliding-window model, as a given window size W, only the latest W transactions are utilized for mining. As a transaction arrives, the oldest transaction in the sliding window is expired. Therefore, under this model, the methods for finding the expired transaction and for discounting the support counts of the item-sets involved are required. First of all, we develop a data structure named the discounting table (DT) to retain the frequent item-sets with their support counts in the individual basic blocks of the current Time sensitive sliding window (TS). Moreover, a data structure named the Potentially Frequent-itemset Pool (PFP) is used to keep the frequent item-sets in TSi and the     frequent ones in Bi. We include the item-sets that are frequent in Bi but not frequent in TSi-1 in PFP because they are possibly frequent in TSi. Four parameters, the support threshold ?, the basic unit of time period for each basic block P, the length of TS |W|, and the output mode M, are given before the system starts. As defined a data stream is divided into blocks with different numbers of transactions according to P. The buffer continuously consumes transactions and pours them block-by-block into our system.

After a basic block triggers these operations and goes through our system, it will be discarded directly.

?  Fig. 3. Data Stream Mining Architecture  As the basic blocks may have different numbers of transactions, we dynamically compute the support count threshold for each basic bock Bi and store it into an entry in the threshold array (TA). The data stream technique which is mounted on network setup as shown in Fig. 3. The below algorithm have been used in this architecture to find the frequent item set stream data and these packet data are send for back tracking or for request denial based on the rule set in the system.

Input: Stream S, Parameters ?, P, |W|, M Output: All the frequent itemsets satisfying M  Let TA, PFP, and DT be empty While Bi comes //from the buffer If (i = 1) New_itemset_insertion DT_maintenance Else If (i ?|W|) New_itemset_insertion Old_itemset_update DT_maintenance Else Itemset_discounting New_itemset_insertion Old_itemset_update DT_maintenance TA_update Frequent_itemset_output  End While  As data streams flow across the network, the sniffer  captures each packet and, if needed, decodes and analyses its content according to the appropriate Request for Comments (RFC). One of the sniffed packets is shown in Fig. 4. The detecting result is tabulated as shown in Table 1.

In which, the rate for a general IDS to successfully detect the intrusion is about 46.3%.

Fig. 4. Illustration of Packet sniffer  As to our proposed Intrusion prevention system, the rate for successfully detecting and prevention of intrusion is about 76.2%.

Table 1. Detection result of Intrusion  General IDS  Proposed IPS  Correct Detection rate  46.3 % 76.2%

IV. CONCLUSION  In this paper, we present an effective anomaly intrusion prevention model based on time-sensitive data stream mining model. The model is more suitable for high speed processing of massive data streams in real-time than use of transition property or correlation property. In the networking topology, server is monitored with the deployment of centralized detectors to establish secured network architecture. All of the attacking information will be collected and transferred to the authority module for analysis. As those nodes dispatched on the DMZ or between the first and second layer of firewall face some attacking similar as the pattern of intrusion, the authority module which dispatched behind the second firewall will take some suitable actions and initiate the defence strategies to protect the information system. There are also disadvantages for the models based on the frequency the system will produce the result slowly which will leads to annoy end user.



V. FUTURE WORK  We see several avenues for future work and describe few that we are actively pursuing. First, the current attack type we use a simple one which is for specific program behaviour; multiple point attack and multi point intrusion prevention should be handled with this same architecture which will produce more and new result which we can compare and know the pros and cons of the architecture used. Second, when an intrusion is observed by the system, the intrusion can be backtracked using the technique proposed by King et al. to obtain the penetration activity sequence automatically. The challenge then is to derive a new malicious activity signature from the specific activity automatically. The system would then use this new signature to monitor a previously unknown vulnerability class.

