Fuzzy Association Rules Mining Algorithm Based on  Equivalence Redundancy of Items

Abstract? In data mining approaches, quantitative attributes should be appropriately dealt with as well as Boolean attributes.

This paper presents an essential improvement for extracting fuzzy association rules from a database. The objective of this paper is to improve the computational time of mining and to prune extracted redundant rules simultaneously for an actual data mining application. In this paper, we define the equivalence redundancy of fuzzy items and related theorems as a new concept for fuzzy data mining. Then, we propose a basic algorithm based on the Apriori algorithm for rule extraction utilizing the equivalence redundancy of the fuzzy items based on redundancy concepts of fuzzy association rules. The essential performance of the algorithm is evaluated through numerical experiments using benchmark data. From the results, the method is found to be promising in terms of computational time and redundant-rule pruning.

Keyword: data mining; association rules; fuzzy association rules; redundancy; equivalence.



I.  INTRODUCTION In data mining approaches, association rules mining  algorithms are promising for actual applications such as marketing problems. However, the association rules mining is essentially based on a database comprised of Boolean attributes. In order to apply a mining algorithm to further various problems, quantitative attributes should also be appropriately dealt with as well as the Boolean attributes.

Especially in manufacturing area, quantitative attributes, such as the states of a process, conditions of manufacturing, and measured quality of products, are necessary for quality control [8], manufacturing management, planning, and decision of the management strategy. In order to deal with the quantitative attributes in mining association rules, algorithms based on generalized association rules that handle continuous attributes as a Boolean vector by partitioning into several intervals have been proposed [1, 2]. Though several methods have also been proposed to improve the computational efficiency and utility [9], the process performed by the algorithms is still time consuming and complicated for the user. Fuzzy association rules mining approaches are proposed to overcome such disadvantages based on the fuzzy set concept [3-6, 10, 11].

These approaches are based on fuzzy extensions of the  classical association rules mining by defining the support and confidence of the fuzzy rule. The fuzzy association rules mining has a good property in terms of the quantization of numerical attributes of a database compared with Boolean quantized generalized association rules mining [12,13].

Though the mining results for fuzzy association rules are easy to understand for corresponding human operators, two drawbacks still remain for applying such fuzzy approaches to actual problems. One is the computational time for mining from a database, and the other is huge redundant rules extraction as a result of the mining. The issue of computational efficiency is critical for fuzzy association rules mining compared with traditional Boolean rules mining, as the number of fuzzy items for mining increases for the quantization of numerical attributes.

In order to deal with such computational efficiency, a memory-based approach, i.e., FP-tree, is proposed, and it shows the significant performance improvements [14].

However, the method occupies the necessary internal computer resource, i.e. memory, for mining calculation. From another point of view, a mining method that extracts association rules with multiple minimal support thresholds of items in a database is proposed [15]. Though the method is also necessary for actual applications, the decision problem of the importance of each item realized as minimal support still remains an indispensable issue.

In this paper, we deal with an improvement of algorithm for extracting fuzzy association rules from a database. The objective of the study is to improve the computational efficiency of data mining and to reduce the redundant rules extracted for an actual application. Firstly, we introduce the redundancy of fuzzy association rules and essential theorems [16]. Secondly, we propose an essential algorithm based on the Apriori algorithm for rule extraction considering equivalence redundancy of fuzzy items. The basic idea is to calculate the confidence of a rule and the equivalence redundancy in the extraction process, instead of the final calculation of the confidence by conventional methods.

Through numerical experiments using benchmark data, ABALONE, the performance of the proposed algorithm is  October 14-17, 2012, COEX, Seoul, Korea     investigated.

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, the  extraction technique of fuzzy association rules is introduced. In section 3, the basic concepts of the redundancy of fuzzy association rules and theorems are described. The algorithm to improve the computational efficiency based on the equivalence redundancy is proposed in section 4. In section 5, the results of numerical examples to evaluate the proposed algorithm are shown. Finally, conclusions are drawn in section 6.



II. EXTRACTION OF FUZZY ASSOCIATION RULES  A. Fuzzy Association Rules Fuzzy association rules are extension of Boolean  association rules based on quantization using fuzzy sets. Fuzzy association rules extraction is performed by the following concepts. Firstly, a fuzzy itemset is defined as an arbitrary set of fuzzy sets defined on the different attribute of the database.

For explanation simplicity, we assume that the number of items in the fuzzy itemset is three in this subsection. Let F = {P, Q, T} denote the fuzzy itemset that consists of fuzzy set labels for different attributes, for example, where P, Q, and T denote the fuzzy sets. The support of the itemset F is defined as  N  xm Fsupp  N  i iF  1)(                                                        (1)  where xi denotes the i-th transaction of the database, N denotes the total number of transactions in the database, and mF(xi) denotes the membership value calculated by an algebraic product operation from each item (Fuzzy Set) in the fuzzy itemset F. In this definition, the membership value is calculated as  iTiQiPiF xxxxm                                     (2)  where ? is the membership function value defined for the corresponding attribute in the database. It is obvious that the definition is equivalent to the well-known ?Boolean mining problem? when the itemsets consist of ?crisp sets.? From the support value, the confidence of the fuzzy association rule  HG  is calculated by:  Gsupp HGsupp  xm  xm HGConf N  i iG  N  i iHG   (3)  where G and H are fuzzy itemsets. It should be noted that the union operation of fuzzy itemsets are calculated as follows:  pHpGpHG xmxmxm                                        (4)  In this study, we assume that the consequent itemset H contains only one fuzzy set. The fuzzy association rule is extracted from the database when these two values of the rule, i.e., the support and confidence, are more than the predefined minimal support and predefined minimal confidence, respectively. The itemset that has a support value greater than the predefined threshold is called ?frequent itemset.? When we apply the mining algorithm to actual huge problems, the support calculation is a critical  calculation concerning the number of queries for the database.

One of the main problems of mining fuzzy association rules is how to efficiently find ?frequent itemsets? from the database.

B. Apriori Algorithm The Apriori algorithm [1, 2] is an essential and effective  method for finding frequent itemsets. The basic idea is that a frequent itemset should contain the subsets of the frequent itemset. Owing to this characteristic, frequent itemsets can be composed from smaller frequent itemsets one after another. Let k-itemset denote an itemset having k items. Let Lk represent the set of frequent k-itemsets, and Ck the set of candidate k- itemsets. The algorithm to generate the frequent itemsets is as follows:  A1) Ck is generated by joining the itemsets in Lk-1.

A2) The itemsets in Ck that have some (k - 1)-subset that is  not in Lk-1 are deleted.

A3) The support of itemsets in Ck is calculated through a  database scan to decide Lk.

It should be noted that the plural fuzzy sets defined for the same attribute cannot be included together in the same itemset.

After L1 is decided first through a database scan, the above A1?A3 procedures are iterated until Lk becomes an empty set.

The association rules are extracted by combining the decided frequent itemsets to calculate the confidence of the association rule by Eq.(3). Finally, the association rules that have values more than the predefined minimal confidence are decided as the mining results.



III. REDUNDANCY OF FUZZY ASSOCIATION RULES In the fuzzy association rules mining based only on the  support and the confidence of the rule, the computation time is huge and many redundant rules are extracted. In order to solve such problems, we need a new criterion to perform the fuzzy association rules mining effectively.

In this paper, as a new criterion for fuzzy association rules mining, we introduce a measure of redundancy of extracted rules [16]. Firstly, the certainty factor (CF) of the rule CA is generally defined as follows:    (C)1 )()()(  supp CsuppCAConf  CACF  )()(; CsuppCAConfif  (C) )()()(  supp CsuppCAConf  CACF  )()(; CsuppCAConfif  1)(;1)( CsuppifCACF  0)(;1)( CsuppifCACF                                   (5)   Then we have the theorems as follows.

Theorem 1: Let YX  and YX '  be two fuzzy association rules.

)'()( )'()(  YXCFYXCFthen YXConfYXConfIf                               (6)   Next, we consider combination of fuzzy association rules.

Theorem 2: Let YA , YB  and  YBA,  be three fuzzy association rules, where A, B and Y are fuzzy itemsets.

If ),())(),(max( YBAConfYBConfYAConf ,  then ),())(),(max( YBACFYBCFYACF .       (7)   Theorem 3: Let YX  be a fuzzy association rule, where X and Y are fuzzy itemsets. Let fuzzy itemset family Q, i.e. set of fuzzy itemsets, be XQ X2 , where 2X is the power set of X and  is the empty set.

If )()(max YXConfYZConf QZ  ,  then )()(max YXCFYZCF QZ  (8)  For proofs of these theorems, see [16].

Then, we define a redundant rule and a non-redundant rule  of fuzzy association rules in terms of combination of fuzzy association rules. Let k-rule denote the rule that has k attributes(items) including the consequent part, and the ?subset rule? denote that itemset corresponding to the rule is subset of the itemset of larger rule and the consequent parts of both rules are the same set (sole item).

Definition 1: Let YX  be a fuzzy association rule, where X and Y are fuzzy itemsets. Let Q be XQ X2 , where 2X is the power set of X and  is the empty set.

If )()(max YXConfYZConf QZ  ,  then we call the rule YX  redundant rule.

If )()(max YXConfYZConf QZ  ,  then we call the rule YX  non-redundant rule.              (9)   The redundant rule has never maximum value of CF among the subset fuzzy association rules. On the contrary, the non- redundant rule has maximum value of CF among the subset fuzzy association rules from Theorem 3.

Clearly we can calculate the redundancy and prune the redundant rules after mining procedures. Our motivation in this study is to utilize the redundancy for extracting algorithm of fuzzy association rules.



IV. IMPROVEMENT OF APRIORI ALGORITHM BASED ON EQUIVALENCE REDUNDANCY OF ITEMS  The necessary point in the Apriori algorithm for extracting fuzzy association rules is to generate the frequent itemsets efficiently. Though the confidence of the association rules is calculated finally after all decision of frequent itemsets in the traditional Apriori algorithm, the basic idea of our proposal is that the confidence of rules can be calculated after each step A3 in the Apriori algorithm and used for pruning simultaneously.

In this study, we propose an equivalence concept of fuzzy association rules, to prevent generating redundant rules and to prune extracted redundant fuzzy association rules. We introduce the following two definitions for the equivalence concepts.

Definition 2: Let mBBBF ,,, 21  be a fuzzy itemset, where B is a fuzzy item (label) defined on a different attribute and m is the number of items (m > 1). Assume that the parameter q is defined larger than the minimal confidence and set in advance.

If  ,,,2,1,)( msqBBConf s si  i (10)  then we call the generated rules equivalent rules, the fuzzy itemset F equivalence itemset, and q the equivalence threshold.

Definition 3: Let mBBBF ,,, 21  be an equivalence fuzzy itemset, nBBBG ,,, 21  be a fuzzy itemset ( FG ), where B is a fuzzy item (label) defined on a different attribute and m and n are the number of items, respectively (m>1, n>1, n>m). Assume that the parameter q is an equivalence threshold.

Let RF and RG be generated association rules from F and G, respectively as:  ,,,2,1,: msBBR s m  si iF  ,: s n  si iG BBR   (11)  We define  If  qRConfqRConf GF )(,)(  then we call the rule RG ?apparent rule.?   From these definitions, the rules generated from any equivalence itemset and any additional items would be a redundant rule, an apparent rule, or an omissible rule. Then we delete the equivalence itemset through the mining process.

Fig.1 shows the conceptual diagram of equivalent itemsets and apparent rules. Let itemset {A, B} be an equivalent itemset that rules have enough high confidence value over q. In the following mining process, the additionally generated rule ?A, C->B? will be trivial and redundant compared with ?A->B.? Also, generated rule ?B,C->A? will be redundant from Definition 1. In this way the rules generated additionally from the equivalent itemset will be redundant. In order to prevent generating such apparent rules, for computational efficiency, we delete the equivalence itemsets at the process when k=2.

Then we modify the Apriori algorithm to reflect the equivalence concepts. In addition to the basic Apriori algorithm, we propose that the following procedures are employed for k>1 as:   A4) The association rules are decided by calculating the  confidence of k-rule based on Lk and Lk-1.

A5)  The equivalence k-itemsets in Lk are deleted.

The concept of the procedure is that the equivalent items can be omitted through the fuzzy association rules mining process.

This can lead performance improvement of the mining.



V. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS We develop the fuzzy association rules mining evaluation  system based on the equivalence pruning and evaluate the proposed algorithms through numerical examples. We apply the evaluation system to the benchmark data ?ABALONE? from UCI Machine Learning Repository [7]. The ABALONE data set consists of 4177 measured data with 1 nominal attribute and 8 numerical attributes. In the experiments, the nominal attribute is transformed to the continuous attribute such as ?Male?(M) to 0, ?Infant(I)? to 1, and ?Female?(F) to 2.

The database is prepared as shown in Table I. Table II also shows the fuzzy partition information of attributes. We use two types of fuzzy sets with different width, i.e. triangle type and trapezoid type. Firstly, we define empirically finer triangular fuzzy sets having even width. Then, the higher level trapezoidal fuzzy sets are generated by combining the adjacent defined finer fuzzy sets as shown in Fig.2. The applied results of the proposed algorithm are compared with the conventional Apriori algorithm. The minimal support is set as 0.2.

The results by standard Apriori algorithm for fuzzy association rules mining are shown in Fig.3. At around 4th itemset calculation, much waste computation is fulfilled. From the results, it can be seen that the waste computation should be reduced. Fig.4 shows the number of extracted rules by the conventional Apriori algorithm. Many redundant rules are extracted as well as the necessary non-redundant rules. Our issue is to restrain the extraction of the redundant rules.

Confidence  Itemset Size  1.0  2 3 4  A  B B,C  A   B  A A,C  B  Minimal Confidence  q Redundant  Rule  Redundant Rule  Equivalence Itemsets  Apparent Rules  Figure 1. Conceptual Diagram of Equivalent Itemsets and Apparent Rules  TABLE I.  ABALONE data set  Attr. Name Data Type Description x1 Sex nominal M, F, and I (infant) x2 Length [mm] continuous Longest shell measurement x3 Diameter [mm] continuous Perpendicular to length x4 Height [mm] continuous With meat in shell x5 Whole weight [g] continuous Whole abalone x6 Shucked weight [g] continuous Weight of meat x7 Viscera weight [g] continuous Gut weight (after bleeding) x8 Shell weight [g] continuous After being dried x9 Rings integer +1.5 gives the age in years  x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 x8 x9 1 0 0.455 0.365 0.095 0.5140 0.2245 0.1010 0.150 15 2 0 0.350 0.265 0.090 0.2255 0.0995 0.0485 0.070 7 3 2 0.530 0.420 0.135 0.6770 0.2565 0.1415 0.210 9  4177 0 0.710 0.555 0.195 1.9485 0.9455 0.3765 0.495 12  TransactionNo  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  (a) Attributes of ABALONE Data  (b) Transferred ABALONE Data Set  x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 x8 x9 Min 0 0.075 0.055 0.00 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.002 1 Max 2 0.815 0.650 1.13 2.826 1.488 0.760 1.005 29  x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 x8 x9 Mininum center of fuzzy set 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  Maximum center of fuzzy set 2 2 2 5 5 2 2 2 30  Number of 3 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 16partitions  (a) Range of ABALONE Data  (b) Fuzzy Sets Settings  TABLE II.  Statistical Information and Fuzzy Sets Settings   0 x  Membership Value  Higher level fuzzy sets  Finer fuzzy sets (11sets)   0 x  Membership Value  10 Fuzzy Sets are Generated  Figure 2. Fuzzy sets definition                                          We varied the equivalence parameter (equivalence  threshold) q, in order to evaluate the essential performance of the proposed algorithm. Fig.5 shows the deleted equivalence itemsets. Some itemsets are deleted successfully based on the equivalence concept. Fig.6 shows the frequent itemsets extraction under the condition that q is set as 0.8, compared with the conventional Apriori algorithm. It should be noted that the mining processes are drastically improved, because the two database scans were reduced.

Fig.7 shows the results of extracted fuzzy association rules compared with the conventional Apriori algorithm. In the experiments, we set the minimal confidence and the equivalence threshold as the same value. Although the setting of the lower value of the parameters has never realistic meaning in fact, the rule extractions are successfully performed. The redundant rules or apparent rules are successfully deleted by the proposed algorithm based on the equivalence concept for fuzzy association rules mining. It should be noted that the number of deleted rules are large whereas the number of deleted itemsets is small.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Itemset Size  Th e  N um  be r o  f I te  m se  ts  Calculated Set Frequent Set  Figure 3.  Results by Apriori Algorithm         0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1  Extracted Rules  Non-Redundant Rules  Minimal Confidence(Threshold)  Th e n  um be  r o f e  xt ra  ct ed  ru le  s  Figure 4. The number of extracted rules by the conventional algorithm         0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85  Th e n  um be  r o f e  xt ra  ct ed  ru le  s  Equivalence threshold Minimal confidence  Apriori  Proposed  Figure 7. Results of extracted fuzzy association rules          0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85  Th e n  um be  r o f d  el et  ed it  em se  ts  Equivalence threshold  Figure 5. Results of deleted equivalent itemsets    1 3 5 7 9  Th e n  um be  r o f f  re qu  en t i  te m  se ts  The number of items in itemset  Apriori  Proposed  Figure 6. Results of extracted frequent itemsets (q=0.8)

VI. CONCLUSION In this paper, we defined equivalence redundancy of fuzzy  association rules and related theorems as a new concept for fuzzy data mining. Then, we proposed a basic algorithm based on the Apriori algorithm for rule extraction utilizing equivalence redundancy of the extracted rules based on redundancy concepts of fuzzy association rules. The essential performance of the algorithm was evaluated through numerical experiments using benchmark data. From the results, the method was found to be promising in terms of computational time and redundant rule pruning.

Our future plan includes sophistication of the proposed algorithm based on redundancy and equivalence, application to the huge data mining problem, and further improvement of fuzzy association rules mining.

