Association Rules Mining for Academic Cooperation Based on   Time Extension and Duration Accumulation

Abstract?Academic relations originated from academic activities are of particular temporal features. The academic activities which happen more recently, last longer period and have more occurrence will be more possible to form valuable academic relationships and more meaningful to be analyzed.

For the characteristics of the accumulated time and vague boundaries of valid time with academic cooperation, the strategy of time extension and duration accumulation is introduced into the algorithm of progressive partition association rules mining. In the proposed method, the time attribute of academic activities transaction records are mapped and extended on time series, and the duration period is marked according to time partition. Through progressive partition processing, the academic association rules mining with continuous time accumulation is realized. This paper presents basic principle and realization process in details, and takes information about research projects and co-published papers as cases to mine academic relationships. The experimental comparison and results analysis show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

Keywords-academic cooperation relations; time extension; duration partition accumulation; association rules mining

I.  INTRODUCTION Academic Relation Network (ARN) is a kind of Social  Networks (SN). In scientific research and academic activities, academic relationships, such as co-authoring who published paper, participating in research projects, attending in seminars and joining academic associations together, form academic relation networks. It has an important significance to analysis ARN in the evaluation of science and technology, especially in the peer-reviewed. For which, we propose an extraction method of academic relationships based on association rules mining. We can get the potential relationships between researchers by using the academic relationship association rule mining, which is a foundation for building the academic relation networks. It not only helps to look for collaborators in some new cross-disciplinary, but also provides a reference to hunt for technology professionals for research institutions or companies, while provides decision support for selecting technology assessment experts.

Since the traditional association rule mining does not describe the time properties of each item, and lacks of the support calculate methods with time restraint, the traditional  algorithm does not suit to the association rule mining with time attribution [1-2]. As the academic partnership will change over time, it has obvious temporal features. In the traditional method, the counting occurrence of itemsets is a unique factor to calculate frequency set, which will result in missing some important association rules in a specific time period, so that it is unable to get valuable academic cooperation relationships. Therefore, the results of association rules mining with time constraint are more meaningful for the description of academic relationship.

Chang-Hung Lee proposed a Progressive Partition Mining (PPM) algorithm [3] based on temporal itemsets to calculate the support, which solves the problem of association rules mining with time gradual change. Generally, there are two types about the occurrence time of academic activities. The first category is which happens at some time point, such as cooperating publishing papers. The second is which occurs within certain time period, such as cooperating research project. Since the beginning, continuation and ending of academic partnership is a gradual process, its boundary of the valid cooperative period is usually vague and uncertain.

But the PPM does not consider above the two problems. In this paper, for the gradual changes characteristics, the proposed method of Time Extension and Duration Accumulation (TEDA) are introduced into PPM in order to obtain valuable academic relationship. The results of mining will be more effective on academic relationship analysis.



II. ANALYSIS OF ASSOCIATION RULES MINING FOR ACADEMIC COOPERATION  Some special cooperation between researchers, such as co-authoring papers, participating in research projects, joining academic community and so on, formed academic relations. The first two are the most common academic partnerships. Usually, the two kinds of cooperation information have the most complete records and also it is the most representative of academic cooperation. So we take academic paper and research project as a case to analyze the association rules mining of academic relationship by using the traditional Apriori algorithm. We collected data from project application as original database, which are provided by the information service platform of science and technology assessment, and the records of publishing papers and participating projects are used as transaction database.

The samples of academic activities transaction database are   DOI 10.1109/CSSS.2012.500       TABLE I.  SAMPLES OF ACADEMIC ACTIVITIES TRANSACTION  TID Itemsets Start_time End_time  t1 B, C 2007-03 2007-03  t2 A, C 2007-07 2007-07  t3 A, B, C 2007-08 2008-07  t4 C, D 2007-10 2007-10  t5 A, B, C 2007-12 2007-12  t6 A, D, E 2008-01 2009-12  t7 A, B, D 2008-03 2008-03  t8 C, E 2008-04 2008-04  t9 A, C, E 2008-06 2008-06  t10 A, B, E 2008-10 2008-10  t11 C, D 2009-03 2009-03  t12 E, F 2009-08 2009-08  t13 A, C, F 2009-10 2009-10  t14 A, B, C, E 2009-11 2009-11  t15 A, D, E 2009-12 2009-12   shown in TABLE I., the data record of publishing a paper or participating a project corresponds to a transaction in the table, the participants as "Itemsets" of transaction. "TID" is the transaction number, and ?Start_time? and ?End_time? are respectively known as the beginning and ending time.

Then the academic association rules of participants will be mined from records.

The value 0.3 and 0.75 are respectively taken as the min- support and min-confidence. Through the traditional Apriori mining, the minimum occurrence number of each data item should be S=D*min_Supp=15*0.3=4.5, rounded to 5, where D = 15 is the total number of transactions occurrence, that is total number of records in transaction database. The frequent 1-itemsets {A}, {C}, {E}, {B} are found according to the greater than minimum support threshold, and the numbers of occurrences are 10, 10, 7, 6 respectively. In 2-itemsets, the numbers of occurrences of {A, C}, {A, E}, {A, B} are 6, 5, 5 respectively, which are frequent itemsets according to the minimum number of occurrences. There is no frequents in 3- itemsets because of not meeting the minimum support.

Finally, we can only get the association rule (B=>A), the support Supp=5/15=33% and confidence Conf=5/6=83%.

In academic activities transaction database, since the people who earlier publish their papers or participate research project have more records than later, which is the greater likelihood to be taken as frequent item sets due to meet the minimum support. Thus, the acquired association rules by using Apriori is more from these people who have published their papers or a participated project for a long time. However, as time going by, there are some new association rules produced by the emerging of academic activities, which are more valuable to analyze academic relationship. This new relations will be less possible to be  calculated as frequent itemsets in traditional algorithm. To solve this problem, the Progressive Partition Mining in [3] is employed to mine the association rules of academic relationship. The recent transaction items will be more possible to be calculated as frequent itemsets. However, the simple time partition in PPM cannot deal with the problem that transaction occurrence time is duration and its boundary vague. In TABLE I, t3 and t6 are transaction records of participating projects. These researchers continue to work on the project for a long time will be more possible to be as frequent itemsets. The other transactions except t3 and t6 are the records of publishing papers, and the beginning and ending time are all the same, that is date of publishing papers.

But the academic relationship of co-authoring paper will be extended to the before and after of publishing papers actually.

Therefore, we propose to standardize the date of academic transaction record into time sequence, and we properly extend the occurrence period of transaction according to time sequence, and we also mark the continuous time of transaction to relevant time partition. Finally, mining association rules with progressive partition accumulating is realized.



III. SUPPORT CALCULATION AND PARTITION ACCUMULATION  Since cooperators vary in different years and different academic activities, the cooperation relations are changing over time. Progressive Partition Mining is association rules algorithm based on Apriori. In which, the first appearance time of each data item is used to restrict evaluation of support and confidence, and indexing records by the different earliest time of each item is executed in marked partition transaction database with multiple scanning.

A. Calculation of support and confidence with time constraint Accroding to the characteristics of academic relationship,  the calculation of support and confidence with time constraint are  re-described on the basis of [3] and [4].

Definition 1: When a, b are taken as the earliest and latest occurrence time respectively, X as itemset, the {X (a, b)} is temporal itemset, VCT(X) is Valid Cooperate Time.

Since the earliest occurrence time of academic activities for different researchers is not same, academic cooperate association exists in Valid Cooperate Time, that is to say, there exists the longest time of academic cooperate relationship.

Definition 2: When X={Xi}, VCT(Xi)=(ai, bi), i=1,2,? n, the VCT(X)=(max{ai}, min{bi}).

The support and confidence of the academic relationship association rules follow as:  The support of temporal itemset {X (VCT(X))} is ( )( )  ( )  { | } ( )  VCT X VCT X  VCT X  T X T Supp X db  db ? ?  = (1)  Where XVCT(X) is equivalent to {X (VCT(X))}, the dbVCT(X) is the total number of transactions that X occurrence in the time partition, and the numerator is the number of transaction including X in same partition.

The support of academic cooperate association rule is: ( )( ) ( )( )( )( ) VCT XYVCT XYSupp X Y Supp X Y? = ?                  (2)  It  is support of cooperator X and Y in their common time partitions.

The confidence of academic cooperate association rule is:  ( )( ) ( )( )( ) ( )  ( )  ( )  VCT XY  VCT XY  VCT XY  Supp X Y Conf X Y  Supp X ? =  ?                  (3)  The denominator  is support of cooperator X appears in the common partition of X and Y. Thus, we can get all strong association rules according to above formulas.

B. Partition accumulation process In PPM,  the records of transaction database are indexed  by using the method of progressive time partition. And the partition size corresponds with time granularity. Usually, the week, mouth or year is taken as time granularity depending on different application. All records of transaction database are divided into many partitions by marking P1, P2 ? Pn. The time partition indexing progress for transaction database is shown in Fig. 1. Firstly, the frequent itemsets is produced from the first partition P1, then these frequents are accumulated to partition P2 forming candidate itemsets, which can produce frequent itemsets of P1, P2. This process is repeated until produce frequent itemsets for all partitions P1, P2, ?? , Pn. Using the last frequents can generate a proper subset to build strong association rules. In each partition accumulation, the occurrence numbers of every item in candidate set are re-counted because of accepting frequents from the front partition. The final accumulated result is from the first to current time partition. The mining process is implemented gradually by progressive time, which means to mine academic relationships from some time in the past to now. The purpose of pruning is to put away some items' calculation which doesn't meet the minimum support.



IV. PARTITION MARK WITH TIME EXTENSION AND DURATION  The temporal partition mark of data record is based on the time attribute in the transaction database of academic activities, and the attribute recorded the duration of the transaction. Usually, the academic relationship mining from transactions of academic activities last for a longer time will be more stable. In addition, the beginning and ending time of academic activities cannot fully reflect the duration period of academic relationship. In general, the duration of academic relation existence should be longer than that of transactions.

Therefore, we use the partition mark method based on time extension and duration to solve this problem.

A. Time extension Since the boundary of period is gradual change in  academic relation, the extension and merging [5] are employed in academic association rules mining. The time extension is to expand outward two points of the beginning and ending time. The merging by time partition has an effect on the fuzzy boundaries. After using time extension, it is unavoidable to lose detail information comparing with the previous one. If extending pro rata, the proportion of lost detail information will be consistent. As to guarantee relative accuracy, we extend the time attribute in proportion which is named as extending factor f (0<f<1). Temporal data item X(a,b) can be extended by a certain factor into a new temporal item X (a?, b?), and the calculation formula of the new beginning and ending time is:  ' ( ) ( )  ' ( )  ' 10 ( )  ' 10  a a b a f if a b  b b b a f  a a f if a b  b b f  ?? = ? ? ?? ?? ? ? ?? = + ? ?? ??? ? ?  = ? ??? =	? = + ?    (4)   While expanding time in proportion, with the larger f, the  more detail information will be lost, which bring about the larger influence in temporal data mining. So the value of extended factor depends on the specific application. In generally, we try to determine the value f by experiment exploratory. It?s worth noting that the time attribute of transaction is the actual date of transaction appeared. To deal with convenience, the date of the beginning and ending time should be mapped to uniform time axis before mining temporal data, and its resolution is the smallest unit of the time attribute in transaction database.

B. Duration time partition mark The method of progress partition accumulation is used to  scan academic activities database in PPM. So the transaction records must be marked by time partition. It is real significant to mine academic relations on annual. As shown in TABLE II, we take year as partition granularity. All transaction records are divided to three partitions P1, P2 and P3, corresponding to 2007, 2008 and 2009 respectively. The mapped time range is 1-12, 13-24 and 25-36. The time extension and partition mark are shown in TABLE II. The date of the beginning and ending time is mapped to "Time  Processing of P1  Producing candidates for P1 Frequents of P1 Pruning  Processing of P2  Candidates of P1,P2  Candidates of P2  Frequents of P1Frequents of P1,P2 Pruning  Processing of Pn  Candidates of P1,P2, , Pn  Candidates of Pn  Frequents of P1,P2 ,Pn-1 Frequents of P1,P2, ,Pn  Pruning  Figure 1.  Partition accumulation       range" on time axis. Its resolution unit bases on month and "Extended range" must be limited to 1-36. "Partition" of transaction record should be marked by extended time range, such as t6 is marked in the three partitions P1, P2 and P3 so that the item information of t6 can be accumulated in the three continuous partitions. Thus t6 will be more possible to be frequent itemset.

TABLE II.  TIME EXTENSION AND PARTITION MARK  TID Itemsets Time range Extended range Partition  t1 B, C [3, 3] [2, 4] P1  t2 A, C [7, 7] [6, 8] P1  t3 A, B, C [8, 19] [6, 21] P1, P2  t4 C, D [10, 10] [9, 11] P1  t5 A, B, C [12, 12] [11, 13] P1, P2  t6 A, D, E [13, 36] [10, 36] P1, P2, P3  t7 A, B, D [15, 15] [14, 16] P2  t8 C, E [16, 16] [15, 17] P2  t9 A, C, E [18, 18] [17, 19] P2  t10 A, B, E [22, 22] [21, 23] P2  t11 C, D [27, 27] [26, 28] P3  t12 E, F [32, 32] [31, 33] P3  t13 A, C, F [34, 34] [33, 35] P3  t14 A, B, C, E [35, 35] [34, 36] P3  t15 A, D, E [36, 36] [35, 36] P3

V. PROCESS OF MINING ACADEMIC RELATIONSHIP ASSOCIATION RULES  For the transaction database of academic activities, the time attribute of all records should be firstly mapped to time sequence with resolution unit month. After extending time range, transaction records are marked by time partition with taking a year as partition granularity. Then, candidate 2- itemsets and frequent 2-itemsets are produced due to scan the records of database according to the strategy of time partition progressive accumulating. The frequent 2-itemsets are taken as candidate items in order to produce proper subset and form candidate association rules. Finally, evaluate the support and confidence for each candidate rule to get strong association rule. The mining is started directly from 2- itemsets specialized in improving time cost in this process.

Table III, IV and V present the specific process of producing candidate 2-item and frequent 2-item with the min-support and min-confidence as 0.3 and 0.75 respectively. The first partition P1 is processed as shown in TABLE III, in which, "Itemsets" is candidate 2-itemsets, "Min-cnt" as the minimum number of support threshold, and "Frequent?" as whether frequent itemset. Selecting three frequent 2-items from P1 are accumulated into the processing of second partition P2, which form the candidate itemsets of P1 and P2. As shown in TABLE IV, all the candidates were  divided into two parts. Those items in P1+P2 are appearing in P1 and P2 simultaneously, others are only appearing in P2, and they have different minimum number of support 4 and 3.

So four frequent items are selected and accumulated into processing P3 as candidate itemsets of P1, P2 and P3. In TABLE V, the candidate itemsets are composed of three parts P1, P1+P2 and P1+P2+P3. Finally, six frequent 2-itemsets are generated by using similar statistics process.

TABLE III.  PROCESS P1  Itemsets Count Min_cnt Frequent?

P1  A B 2   yes  A C 3 yes  B C 3 yes  C D 1 no  A D 1 no  A E 1 no  D E 1  no  TABLE IV.  PROCESS P1 AND P2  Itemset Count Min_cnt Frequent?

P1+P2  A B 6   yes  A C 6 yes  B C 5 yes  P2  A D 2   yes  A E 3 yes  B D 1 no  B E 1 no  C E 2 yes D E 1 no  TABLE V.  PROCESS P1, P2 AND P3  Itemset Count Min_cnt Frequent?

P1+P2+P3  A B 7   yes  A C 8 yes  B C 6 yes  P2+P3  A E 6   yes  A D 4 yes  C E 3 no  P3  A F 1   no  B E 1 no  C D 1 no  C F 1 no  D E 2 yes  E F 1 no       The frequent itemsets getting from TABLE V are taken as candidate itemsets of academic relationship association rules. As shown in TABLE VI, C2 includes all candidate 2- itemsets, "Time_ partition" represents partitions where the candidate 2-itemset appeared in. C1 is all 1-itemsets from C2 broken down. The candidate association rules are produced by using proper subset of C2, which are only used to calculate the support and confidence of candidate association rules corresponding in time partitions, and the support value for every item are shown in "Support".

TABLE VI.  CANDIDATE ITEMSETS OF ASSOCIATION RULES  Candidate Time_ partition Support  C2  A B P1 P2 P3 0.41  A C P1 P2 P3 0.47  B C P1 P2 P3 0.35  A E P2 P3 0.5  A D P2 P3 0.33  D E P3 0.33  C1  A P1 P2 P3 0.82  B P1 P2 P3 0.47  C P1 P2 P3 0.7  A P2 P3 0.83  D P2 P3 0.42  E P2 P3 0. 67  D P3 0.67  E P3 0.5   According to co-occurrence partitions of candidate  itemset to generate the temporal association rules, the support and confidence of each rule is calculated and evaluated. Selecting strong association rules which meet threshold are shown in TABLE VII.

TABLE VII.  STRONG ASSOCIATION RULES  Rules Supp Conf  B => A    [1, 3] 0.41 0.87  B => C    [1, 3] 0.35 0.75  E => A    [2, 3] 0.5 0.75  D => A    [2, 3] 0.33 0.8   The strong association rules {B=>A} [1, 3] in TABLE  VII can be explained as follows. B and A have strong partnerships in the time partitions P1, P2 and P3, which indicates that A participated in 85.7% of the activities B in same partitions, and the support is 41%. Other relationships can be analogized. In addition, A, D and E participate in the cooperation projects with longer duration and they recently published paper. So the three partners have strong  cooperation relationship in P2 and P3, which become strong association rules {E=>A} and {D=>A}. If using the traditional Apriori algorithm, only the strong association rules {B=>A} can be obtained, which means A and B have strong relationship but  lost others cooperation relations.



VI. ANALYSIS EXPERIMENT For the database of technology project application 2009,  the proposed time extension and duration accumulation algorithm is used to mine academic cooperation association rules. We developed Java programs to input application reports and transform XML data into SQL statements. Then extract information about all research projects and published papers as transaction record to insert into database MySQL 5.0, which finally formed academic activities transaction database.

Using the two mining algorithms of Apriori and Time Extension and Duration Accumulation, the amount of strong association rules under different supports are compared by using histogram and shown in Fig. 2.

Minimum support  A ss  oc ia  tio n  ru le  s   Figure 2.  Comparing the number of strong association rules  Since the Apriori mining algorithm does not consider the occurrence time of academic activities, the size of strong association rules are less than 10, and no rules to be obtained when min-support more than 0.05. While the number of association rules in the TEDA is more than in the Apriori at same min-support. The results show a lot of valuable association rules are taken out, which lost before. With increasing min-support, the number of rules will decline.

When the min-support rises to 0.05-0.06, it is stable. In this experiment, the support threshold is 0.05 to form the original sets of academic cooperation association rules.

Fig. 3 presents the impact of extending factor of TEDA algorithm. In which, dotted and solid line respectively indicates the amount of change in trends for strong association rules under different extending factors, and the min-support takes as 0.03 and 0.05. Since time extending is on month and partition accumulating is on annual, the extending factor has little effect on the results of strong association rules when f smaller value. The bigger impact will be gradually produced with increasing value more than 0.5. The size of extending factor is usually determined by the time characteristics of academic activities.

As for the running efficiency, when the extending factor f is 0.1 and the minimum support threshold varies from 0.03 to 0.07, the average running time of the TEDA algorithm is 6.8 seconds which is nearly four times faster than that of the Apriori algorithm that is 27.4 seconds in our case.

Extending factor, f  A ss  oc ia  tio n  ru le  s  0.03 0.05   Figure 3.  The impact of extending factor of TEDA

VII. CONCLUSIONS In the association rules mining of academic cooperation,  the strategy of time extending and duration accumulation is introduced into the progressive partition mining. It solves the problem of mining temporal association rules with duration and its boundary fuzziness. We use the proposed method to mine academic activities transaction database with information of research projects and publishing papers. The gained strong association rules shown that academic activities with  higher frequency, longer duration and more recently will be more easily to be stable and valuable academic relationships. In this method, the time extension factor of transaction items is determined through experiment?s tries, which is fully depended on the different  applications. So, to study a method for selecting the extension factor appropriately will be one of future work.

