Graph Based Forecasting for Social Networking Site

Abstract?The Social networking site play an important role in today?s world thereby attracting lots of researchers to take advantage of the user?s information available in these sites.

Mining the database using different algorithms like association rule mining require multiple database scan. In this research forecasting is based on the directed weighted social graph. It deals with visualization of a dataset and prediction of some occurrences based upon this data. The methodology proposed is to generate a social graph of user?s actions and predict the future social activities using graph mining. A dataset from the social networking site is considered and converted to a directed, weighted social graph. This graph is updated dynamically based on the changes in the database of social networking site. By creating some mathematical rules applied on the graph, we could project the future activities of users in terms of community memberships, the strength of a relationship between two users without knowing the content of the discussion. We can also find the most popular community. To find the efficiency of this method, the result interpreted by this experiment will be compared to other methods used for prediction like Apriori etc.

Keywords-visualization; graph mining; dynamic graph; Apriori

I.  INTRODUCTION  Social Networking site has become an important part of social life. As a result data is increasing day by day at a rate which is difficult to control and process. A social networking site connects the people of similar interest and builds some model which consists of data following some pattern. Study of this pattern can be extremely useful to obtain information that can be of interest to different people of different areas. Social mining caters to the need of social analyst, marketing professionals, advertisement purposes and also in security measures to find risky group of people.

Many researches have been carried out in this area on huge datasets using association rule mining. These algorithms require more time for scanning the datasets multiple times for example the algorithms like F-Tree, Apriori require multiple database scans for performing data mining on the databases[1].

The heart of this research lies on forecasting based on the generated social graph. A novel approach for mining consists of visualization of datasets into dynamic, directed, weighted graphs [2]. The dataset can be obtained from the online social networking website and the graph will be constructed using the same dataset. The database consists of static data obtained from the user at the time of profile generation as well as web usage  data [3]. The graph depicts the user?s status in real time using links and the weights on the links. Thus graphs will represent the relationships between different users along with their strength of relationships. The association mining rules will be generated based on the graph and these rules will be used for doing different predictions. Predicting whether a user may someday become a member in a community may be of interest to some organizations or individuals. The predictions can be with respect to friendship strength, community membership of a user, usage of application etc.

Section II is dealing with the need for Visualization and the generation of dynamic graph. Section III is dealing with the proposed system. The exact methodology is discussed in section IV. Section V is dealing with the implementation of the proposed system using social graph mining. Result is analyzed in section V1. We have also discussed the limitations observed while implementing the system.



II. VISUALIZATION  A. Need for Visualization Users are in a hurry and hence require the information  quickly. It should be pleasing, clear & professional.

Social mining based on visualization is a new approach for  exploring very large data sets, combining traditional mining methods and information visualization techniques.

Visualization can simplify the understanding process of complex data available at social networking site. It can be used for different purposes like social awareness, educational improvements etc. The user can understand data more quickly, with clear understanding of relationship with the help of nodes and links in a network graph. It allows viewers to determine facts about nodes.

B. Creation of dynamic graph in a web page  The dynamic graphs created reflect the current database state. The Advanced Graph and Chart Software  is designed to enable Web Developers to easily build dynamically generated graphs and charts into web applications. Once installed on the web server dynamic graphs can be added to any page of a web site with the fair amount of programming knowledge. The dynamic graphs are interconnected with the database through a query language. The data is loaded periodically to generate      dynamic, weighted graph. When a page containing a graphing image is loaded the following will occur:-  a>  Browser issues a request to the graphing software b>  Loading of  data and configuration information c>  The queries will be issued to the database d>  Dynamically construct the image in memory e>  Send the graph image to the browser for display   C. Rules for weighted graph  ? Rule 1 The weight represents the amount of closeness. The weight can be obtained from the activeness of the user.

? Rule 2 Outgoing edges shows the level of activeness. Incoming and outgoing edges have their own weights.

? Rule 3 The links between nodes represent unidirectional relation between users and community and bidirectional relation between the users [2].



III. PROPOSED SYSTEM  We have proposed a social networking site like Facebook.

The mining will be applied on the social networking sites using graph mining for forecasting the future activities of the user. We can also identify the strength of relationship between the users without actually knowing the content of the messages. In the following two sections, we first consider the proposed graph and afterwards the forecasting based on the developed graph will be done using predefined rules.

To generate graph we make use of web-content mining and web-usage mining. Hence data can be collected from two sources i.e. the data entered by the user at the time of profile creation and based on users activities as follows   ? Login of sender and receiver ? Searching a user ?  Developing relation of friendship ? Events  of sending/receiving message ? Events like posting a comment or liking a post ? Chatting ? Joining a community ? Posting a comment in a community   Based on these data we build graph depicting a current  involvement and status of user on social networking site. We formulate set of rules. These generated rules will be evaluated to predict the future activity of the user. We can also find the close group of friends of the user from the rest of the friends.

We can predict whether the user will someday become a member of particular community or not. Based on this forecasting we can find the most popular community among the other communities which will get maximum membership in the future and in which the users are more active.

The results obtained can then be compared with other methods of prediction like Association rule mining using Apriori and F-Tree generation method.

Figure 1: Proposed modules of the system   The proposed application will consists of the modules to be developed as shown in figure 1. Through the user interface we will be able to collect static as well as dynamic data from the user of a social networking site. The dynamic graph will visualized this data thus making it simple for performing mining and forecasting.



IV. METHODOLOGY  The methodology proposed is to generate a social graph of users? actions and predict the future social activities of the users based upon the existing relationships. A dataset from the application developed as a sample of social networking site is considered and converted to a directed, weighted social graph.

This graph is updated dynamically based on the changes in the selected social network. The forecasting performed is based upon some predefined rules applied on the graph.

A. Capture the data of  user?s activities to generate graph  Some users may not be directly connected to a specific community. Such users may be connected to that community through a friend (another user). Also the weight on the edges will represent the count in the database for that specific activity for example if the user p1 visits the profile of p2 the count will be 1. Then if he visits the profile again and sent him a message the count will be 2.This count will go on incrementing each time the user contacts his friend p2 in some      or the other way. Similarly other weights will also be calculated and stored in database.

The count obtain from user?s activities are assigned some points. These points can be used to calculate the strength of relationship between the users as shown in the table below.

TABLE 1: Strength of Relationship     If the count obtained is between 1 and 5 then p1 and p2 are just friends. As this weight goes on increasing the strength of the relationship will also increase between users. If the count of interaction between the users exceeds 25 then the assigned point is 5 and the relationship is of top friend (say p2 top friend of p1). In the same way the weight is captured for the relationship between user and community.

If the user belongs to a community then link exist between the two and the activeness of the user in a community is represented by the weight on the unidirectional link between user and community. As the activeness of the user goes on increasing the weight will increase between the two and will be represented in the graph. If the user is not the member of the community then the link doesn?t exists between the user and community as shown in the figure below.

Thus using the above table we will construct the dynamic graph as shown below in figure 2.

Figure 2: Dynamic graph between user p1 and p2  In the above figure 2 a graph consists of two users say p1  and p2. The count or weight shows that p1 has interacted with user p2 thrice and hence are just friends so the assigned point for their relationship is 1. These values are dynamic and will be taken from the database. Also user P2 is member of community C1 with the weight count of 4.

B. Forecasing  using  rulebased mining  By only creating some mathematical rules applied on the graph, we could easily project the future activities of users in terms of community memberships. This will help us to find the most popular community on the social networking site in which the user is more active. Such community will get maximum membership in the future as well. Consider the user p1 and find whether he will be joining community c1 or c2.

Figure 3: Rule based mining   Where C1 is the communities the user is indirectly  connected through his friend p1 as shown in the figure2.

W1W2 is the weight between user p1 and p2 represented by p1?s outgoing edge. Similarly W2W1 is the weight between user p2 and p1 represented by outgoing edge of user p2, AP is the assigned point depending on the value of weight as shown in table1.CP2 is the community weight of the user P2 for the community C1.

The values will be calculated for each community where the user is not the member but has friendship relation with the members of that community. In the figure 2 it can be seen that the user P1 is not the member of community C1 but has relation of friendship with user P2 who is the member of the community C1. The   community with the highest value will be community in which the user p1 is interested and will be joining in the future.

Similarly we can perform the prediction for each user and for each community he is not member of. The community which will have more number of memberships in the future will be the most popular community. Also based on the weight assigned we can predict the status of relation between the users.



V. IMPLEMENTATION  We have developed a social networking site resembling facebook . The users activities are monitored  and the data is      captured. The  dynamic graph is constucted and the rules generated are applied to the graph  for forecasting different predictions. The fuctionalities that are required by the user for interaction with other users are implemented.

A. Screens of social networking sites   Figure 4: Welcome page for user     Figure 5: Establishment of friendship relation   Figure 6: Interaction between users through messages  In all above figures (4-6) it can be seen that the user can communicate with other users by sending a friend request, sending a message, liking his post or by posting a comment.

All these interactions are monitored to calculate the weight between the two users. The user can also create a community, post a comment, and invite a friend to join his community.

These activities of a user are used to calculate his activeness of the user in a community.

TABLE 2: Maintaining the weight   It can be seen in table 2 that the user with id 5 has interacted with his friend with user id 6 only once hence weight between the two is 1. Similarly the user with id 5 has interacted with the user id 4 twice hence the access count between the two is two. Likewise we have captured the communication between the users by all means like chat, messages etc and stored the weight in database for each relation.

Figure 7: Weighted, directed, dynamic graph  The  different activities of the users like messages, chat, comments etc. are monitored and the dynamic graph is created as shown in figure 7. It shows the user-user friendship relationship as well as user-community relationship. The user p1 is not the member of communities c1, c2 but connected via his friend.

We have applied the formulated mathematical rules to the social  graph  to do predictions. The values obtained for communities c1, c2 and c3 are shown below.

For user P1:  C1  (3+1)*1 + 4 = 8 C2  (3+1)*1 + 5+ (5+4)*2 + 3 = 30 C3  0 (0 friend of p1 member of c3)  Also for user P2:  C1  (6+4)*2 + 4 =24 C3  (5+3)*2 + 4 = 20   Similarly rules can be applied for any user of the graph we  are interested in. The community with highest value is the community the user will be joining in the future. We get non- zero value for the communities where the user is involved indirectly through his friend whereas we get zero value for the community where the user has zero number of friends as members of that community.



VI. RESULT ANAYLSIS A. Forecasting based on the result From the values obtained above the analyzed result is as follows  a>  Since the value of c2 is highest for user p1, he is likely to join community c2 in future.

b> The users P2 and p3 is already member of community c2.

c> The community gaining maximum memberships is c2.

d> The user p3 is likely to join community c1 in future.

e> From the weights represented on the edges we can  understand the strength of relationship between the users for e.g. user p1 and p2 are just friends.

f> The method is more efficient compared to Apriori algorithm as there is no need of scanning the dataset again and again for predictions.

g> The graph represents huge data in a simple representation making it easy to perform predictions quickly.

B. Finding the accuracy of the predictions  To find the accuracy of the system 6-8 users were allowed to use the system with their user id and password for 9-10 days. The real world simulation was done to find the accuracy of the prediction made by the system.

The predictions were noted on each day and after observation for 10 days it was found that maximum number of predictions turned true. The information obtained is visualized in the following charts.

Figure 8: Accuracy of predictions day wise   Figure 9: Accuracy of predictions percentage wise      The above figure 7 shows (day wise) number of predictions that turned true. Figure 8 shows the overall accuracy of the predictions in terms of the percentage for 10 days. Thus by conducting this experiment for 10 days it was found that the predictions made are accurate.



VII. CONCLUSION  The graph based mining approach is proposed for mining and forecasting for a social networking site. Thus a system is proposed for prediction of future activities of the user on the social networking site. Based on this forecasting we can find the most popular community among others which will get maximum membership in the future and in which the users are more active. We have also determined the strength of relationship between the two users or between a community and user. Also since the data is visualized it helps to build a rule based model which is more efficient than other methods of prediction like Apriori and F-Tree generation. We have made the predictions only with respect to friendship levels as well as with respect to community. Other predictions with respect to applications, albums etc can also be made.

