

The Use of Data Mining in Pharmic Quality Analysis of Traditional Chinese Medicines*    Xia WU1      Shun LONG1,2      Wei-heng ZHU1,2,* 1Department of Computer Science, JiNan University  2Guangdong Emergency Technology Research Center of Risk Evaluation and Prewarning on Public Network Security Guangzhou 510632, China  *Corresponding Author: Wei-heng ZHU, E-mail: tzhuwh@jnu.edu.cn     * This work is supported by the State Key Laboratory of Software Engineering in Wuhan University (SKLSE2010-08-31) and the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province, China (No.2010A032000002).

Abstract ? We present in this paper our works on applying data mining techniques to research on traditional Chinese medicines. This is aim to unveil the underlying associations between chemical ingredients of traditional Chinese medicines and their pharmic qualities which are of vital importance in both research and practice. Various data mining approaches have been evaluated, as well as different performance improvement techniques, among which we identify the best for practice. Our results can help guide future researches on traditional Chinese medicines, particularly in the development of new medicines.

Keywords ? Data Mining; Traditional Chinese Medicine; Pharmic Quality Analysis; Chemical Ingredients;

I.  INTRODUCTION  During hundreds of years of active practice, numerous heuristics and prescriptions about traditional Chinese medicnes[5] have been found, accumulated, inherited and applied in daily practice. Most of them have been proven effective and with less side-effects when compared against the western medicines. However, there is a bottleneck for its further development and spread-out abroad, mainly due to its lack of modern scientific explanation, in particular a systematic analysis and theory about its pharmic qualities of these medicines.

To tackle the above problems, some works have been carried out to introduce scientific analysis to traditional Chinese medicine in the past few decades. It is expected to give traditional Chinese medicine not only a modern interpretation, but also a scientific methodology of education and practice, which is believed vital for an opportunity for further development.

The pharmic quality theory of traditional Chinese medicine is considered the foundation of traditional Chinese medical science. It is very different from its western counterpart in that it focuses on sapor (Xing(\)Wei(\), or taste), virulence, impact (Sheng(-)Jiang(\)Chen(/)Fu(/), or literally ascending, descending, sinking and floating) and tropism (Gui(-)Jing(-)), which are considered core of this pharmic quality theory. However, traditional Chinese medical science provides people only intuitive heuristics about how to apply this pharmic theory without a scientific interpretation of them.

This hinders its further development in modern practice.

Various modern approaches have been applied to investigate the association between ingredients of traditional Chinese herbs and their pharmic qualities, as listed below.

Data mining[3], also popularly referred to as knowledge discovery from data (KDD), is the automated or convenient extraction of patterns representing knowledge implicitly stored or captured in large databases, data warehouses, the Web, other massive information repositories, or data streams.

Various data mining approaches have been developed to help people to unveil new and potentially useful and understandable knowledge from massive amount of data available. They have been successfully applied to agriculture, industry, finance, business, biology as well as many other domains. It is worth noting that it has also been applied to analysis of traditional Chinese medicines. However, most prior works focus on the application of one particular approach, and there is a lack of comprehensive analysis and comparison of various data mining approaches in the domain and their applicabilities and effectiveness.

We present in this paper a systematic approach to apply data mining techniques to both the pharmic qualities and chemical ingredients of traditional Chinese medicines.

Empirical experiments have been carried out in order to make a comprehensive comparison of these approaches.

Experimental results show that they can effectively unveil the correlations bwetween the chemical ingredients and pharmic qualities.

The outline of this paper is as follows. Section II presens a brief review of related works, before section III explains the classification approaches used in our experiments together with different improvement techniques. The empircal experimental results and corresponding analysis are then presented in section IV, before some concluding remarks are made.



II. RELATED WORK  Various modern approaches have been applied to investigate the association between ingredients of traditional Chinese herbs and their pharmic qualities. They can be roughly classified into two major categories. The first uses   DOI 10.1109/CSSS.2012.360     statistics and philology to archive historical books and documents of medical science in order to unveil the associations between these pharmic qualities. Alternatively, modern biological techniques are applied, aided by bio-chip techniques, model clinical medical science and bio-chemistry etc, in order to give a scientific interpretation of traditional Chinese medical science. However, neither approach makes a break-through because of its own hindrance in various aspects.

There have been some published works in the application of modern data mining techniques to the study of traditional Chinese medicine in the past years. Tong et.al.[5] provides a concise survey of related works in this area. However, it does not give an in-depth discussion about pros and cons of various data mining techniques in their applications, and therefore provide little useful hints to real works. Similarly, Xu et.al.[7] investigates the methodology and theoretical foundation for modern analysis of pharmic qualities of traditional Chinese medicines, but provides little insight of how to apply various techniques in practice.

Abraham et.al.[1] discuss how to use Na?ve Bayesian classifiers in medical analysis. Based on some quantitative results, it provides a comparison among various NB classifiers. We evaluate alternative mining techniques other than Bayesian classifier in our work. Lu et.al.[4] applied inter- dimensional association rule mining techniques to a traditional Chinese medicine chemical database which includes fields of TCM effects, family of plants, activities of chemical components and modern pharmacodynamics of medicine extracts. A series of strong rules have therefore been found.

Yang et.al[8] provides a case study of applying cluster analysis in ingredient analysis of one particular traditional Chinese medicine in gengsheng. It focuses on and provides an empirical study of seven different chemical ingredients within gengsheng.

Deng et.al.[2] present a data mining software package for traditional Chinese medicine analysis, but their works mainly focus on the development methodology and software architecture aspects of the system instead of the mining techniques used.

In comparison, our work focuses on in-depth comparison and analysis of various data mining approaches available, as well as their pros and cons. Quantitative results are provided to support our analysis, as well as an in-depth analysis and techincal discussion about how to apply them.



III.  CLASSIFICATION TECHNIQUES  Various classification approaches have been developed for data mining purpose. We choose some of the most popular and successful approaches in our experiments. They include association rule mining, decision tree and Bayesian classifier.

A. Association Rule Mining Association rules demonstrate attribute-value conditions that occur frequently together within a given set of data.  They suggest the probability of cooccurrence of certain itemsets.

Association rule mining aims to discover such associations between is widely used for analysis of market basket and transaction data.

In our experiments, we choose the influential apriori algorithm for association rule mining in order to identify the itemsets whose frequency surpasses a given threshold for Boolean association rules. Apriori algorithm is based on the monotony of frequent itemsets which suggests that if an itemset is a frequent set, then any subset of it must be frequent itemset as well, otherwise, any superset of it must be non- frequent as well. The algorithm adopts an iterative level-wise search approach where k-itemsets are used to explore (k+1)- itemsets. It takes the advantage of the Apriori property to reduce the search space in order to improve the efficiency of level-wise generation of frequent itemsets.

B. Decision Tree A decision tree is a flow-chart-like tree structure where each node denotes a test on an attribute value, and each branch suggests an outcome of the test, and the leaves representsclasses or class distributions. It is widely used in categorical data but can also be applied to numeric data. A decision tree is usually generated from a given set of training samples, before being applied to classify new data. ID3, CART, C4.5 and C5.0 are the most widely used decision tree generation algorithm currently available.

C. Bayesian Classifier Bayesian classifiers are statistical classifiers which can predict probabilities of class memberships, i.e. the probability of a given sample belongs to a particular class. The na?ve Bayesian classifier is based on the class conditional independence assumption which suggests that the effect of an attribute value on a given class is independent of the values of the other attributes. It has been widely used in domains such as medical diagnosis and text processing. However, our preliminary experimental results suggest that the chemical ingredients of traditional Chinese medicines are not independent, and therefore a Bayesian classifier without such an independence restriction must be used.

Average One-Dependence Estimator (AODE) algorithm enhances the na?ve Bayesian classifier in that it weakens the independence assumption. For an item <x1,x2,?xi>, AODE classifies it into the category y where  AODE assumes that feature Xj at least depends on another feature Xi and that the category Y depends on Xi as well. A predefined threshold m is adopted in order to avoid inaccurate prediction of probabilities. Our experimental results show that it can effectively unveil the corelations between the chemical ingredients of traditional Chinese medicines with a high accuracy.

D.   Further Improvements  To further improve the classifier accuracy, we improve the performance of these above approaches in different manners as given below:  1) Bagging: in each classification iteration, each classifier is learned for each training set which is sampled with     replacement from the original set of samples, beore being used to classify aan unknown sample. Its prediction is counted one vote. A bagged classifier C* is adopted to count the votes and assign the class with the most votes to this new sample.

2) Adaboost: Adaboost (short for Adaptive Boosting) is a liner classifier whose output converges to the logarithm of likelihood ratio. It constructs a strong classifier as linear combination of multiple weak classifiers, which are assigned different weights in order to indicate their classification capabilities. It is a meta-algorithm, usually used in conjunction with many other learning algorithms to improve their performance. It is adaptive in the sense that subsequent classifiers built are tweaked in favor of those instances misclassified by previous classifiers.

3) Stacking: the sample set is first partitioned into two datasets, namely held-in and held-out. The classifiers are then trained with held-in and their votes on held-out are combined (rather than chosen) by yet another classifier which generally provides better performance than any single classifier, as suggested by many prior works in related areas.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS  A.  The Experimental Data We apply the above data mining techniques to 60 different major chemical ingredients of 100 most common traditional Chinese medicines collected from various sources.

The raw data collected undergo data cleansing in order to detect and correct (or remove) corrupt or inaccurate data within. During this process, some numerical data are standardized, some are normalized, some are categorized (for instance the existing of some chemical ingredients are indicated as 1 or 0 if otherwise), some missing data are filled in, and some irrelevant attributes are filtered, before being analysed in weka[6], a popular data mining tool. Table.I illustrates part of the resulting data ready for mining purpose.

TABLE I AN EXAMPLE OF RAW DATA: CHEMICAL INGREDIENTS OF MINT  Name Monecular Formula Value Limonene C10H16 0 oleic acid C18H34O2 0  myristic acid C14H28O2 0 ? ? ?  3-carene C10H16 1  B.   Association Rule Mining Results The Apriori algorithm is applied to the dataset to unveil association rules between pharmic qualities and chemical ingredients. Various experimental parameters have been tested and the best results are given in Table.II, with minimum support 0.4 and minimum confidence 0.75.

Table.II suggests that among the 60 major chemical ingredients, astragalin, sabinene, p-cymene, beta-pinene, beta- phellandrene, beta-bisabolence, and alpha-humulane are vital to the pharmic quality of traditional Chinese medicines. If an unknown medicine contains no such ingredient, it is very likely that its pharmic quality is cold. However, the associations between chemical ingredients of those ?hot? medicines are far less obvious, and therefore we must use alternative classification approaches for judgments.

TABLE II  RESULTS OF ASSOCIATION RULE MINING WITH MINIMUM SUPPORT 0.4 AND MINIMUM CONFIDENCE 0.75   Condition Pharmic quality  conclusion Support Conf.

1 astragalin=0, sabinene=0, p-cymene=0,  beta-pinene=0, beta-phellandrene=0, beta-bisabolence=0, alpha-humulane=0  Cold 40/52 0.77  2 astragalin=0, sabinene=0,  beta-pinene=0 4-terpineol=0,  beta- phellandrene=0, beta-bisabolence=0, alpha-humulane=0  Cold 40/52 0.77  3 astragalin=0, p-cymene=0,  beta-pinene=0 beta- phellandrene=0, gamma-terpinene=0, beta-bisabolence=0, alpha-humulane=0  Cold 40/52 0.77  4 astragalin=0, beta-pinene=0  4-terpineol=0, beta- phellandrene=0, gamma-terpinene=0, beta-bisabolence=0, alpha-humulane=0  Cold 40/52 0.77  5 astragalin=0, sabinene=0, p-cymene=0,  beta-pinene=0 3-carene-0,  beta- phellandrene=0, alpha-humulane=0  Cold 40/52 0.77  6 astragalin=0, sabinene=0, p-cymene=0,  beta-pinene=0 beta- phellandrene=0, gamma-terpinene=0, beta-bisabolence=0, alpha-humulane=0  Cold 40/52 0.77    C.   Comparison of Alternative Classification Approaches In pursuit for higher performance, we choose J48 which is a Java implementation of C4.5, Naive Bayesian and AODE as discussed in the previous section and apply them to the dataset. Their performances are evaluated together with their enhancements via Bagging, Adaboost and Stacking as suggested above. The results are summarized in Table.III as given below.

TABLE III  THE ACCURACY OF ALTERNATIVE CLASSIFICATION APPROACHES AND THEIR IMPROVEMENTS  J48 Naive Bayesian AODE without improvement 92.5% 68.75% 83.75% + Bagging 92.5% 70% 83.75% + Adaboost 93.75% 80% 88.89% + Stacking 87.5% 87.5% 85.5%       Fig. 1 The raw result of applying J48 with Adaboost.

Table III shows that when applied independently, aJ48 achieves the highest accuracy of 92.5% mong all three approaches, whilst Naive Bayesian yields the poorest accuracy of 68.75%. This suggests that these chemical ingredient features are not independent, as discussed above. In addition, AODE achieves a significantly better accuracy (83.75%) than its Naive Bayesian counterpart (68.75%), although still inferior when compared against J48.

Moreover, all three approaches achieved higher accuracy when improved with Bagging, Adaboost and Stacking techniques. This is particularly true for J48 which yields the highest accuracy of 93.75% when improved with Adaboost.

The corresponding ROC area (as suggested in Fig.1) reaches 0.996 which suggests a it is a very effective classification.

However, it is still worth noting that among all the 40 ?hot? medicines whose pharmic qualities are ?hot?, there are still 4 misclassified as ?cold? by J48+Adaboost.

Therefore, we can confidently conclude that decision tree mining (J48) improved with Adaboost is the best classification approaches among all candidates considered.



V. CONCLUSION  This paper presents our works on applying data mining techniques to research on traditional Chinese medicines. This is aim to unveil the underlying associations between chemical ingredients of these medicines and their pharmic qualities which are of vital importance in both research and practice.

Various approaches have been evaluated together with different improvement techniques, among which we identify the most accurate one in J48+Adaboost. Our results can be used as a guideline for future researches on traditional Chinese medicine, particularly in the development of new medicines.

We are currently evaluating these approaches with an even larger set of data. Further works include a more detailed investigation of the impact of chemical ingredient quantities on pharmic quality.

