Mining Association Rules on Qing Court Medical  Records: Semantic Abstraction and Standardization

Abstract?To explore the association relations among disease, pathogenesis, physician, symptoms and drug, we adapt a variational Apriori algorithm for discovering association rules on a dataset of the Qing Court Medical Records. There are five types of semantic associations we intend to discover, including Disease-Pathogenesis-Drugset(DPaD),Disease-Symptoms-Drugset (DSyD), Disease- Drugset (DD), Disease-Physician-Drugset (DPhD) and Disease- Drug Category Set (DDC). To solve the synonymity problem and the data sparseness problem, we give a mapping strategy which maps pathogenesis to standardized forms and maps drugs to drug categories. With the mapping strategy the number of frequent drugsets rises from 287 to 1184.

The experimental results indicate that our method with the mapping strategy is an effective way to acquire valuable semantic association rules.

Keywords: association rule; frequent drugset; Apriori; Traditional Chinese Medicine; data sparseness; synonymity problem; knowledge  base

I. INTRODUCTION The prescription of Traditional Chinese Medicine is  gradually formed on the effort of thousands of years? practice of the past dynasties? experts. The medical records of Traditional Chinese Medicine possess a lot of prescriptions which deal with a great many kinds of diseases. These prescriptions are evaluated by many clinical cases and present high validity. The Qing Court Medical Records [1] is a book that includes medical records of the imperial families and aristocrats of the Qing dynasty.

The prescriptions of Traditional Chinese Medicine contain understanding of diseases and laws of scientific treatments.

Such knowledge can be represented as association rules and used to construct medical knowledge base, which is very helpful for medicine researchers to discover the features of  drugs, research new prescriptions, develop and transmit Traditional Chinese Medicine, etc. Therefore, it is highly significant to automatically discover such association rules.

Data mining technique [2][3][4] which can be used to recognize useful, novel and comprehensible patterns through the processing of massive data has been developing rapidly. In this paper, we employ the apriori algorithm which is a kind of data mining techniques for association Rule Mining to discover the implicit, valuable and associational knowledge from a dataset of traditional Chinese Medicine.  Unfortunately, due to the problems of synonymity and data sparseness of Traditional Chinese Medicine prescriptions, applying the algorithm for mining association rules directly leads to unsatisfactory experimental results. Thus, we preprocess our dataset first before applying the mining algorithm. Specifically, we convert all pathogenesis to standard forms and map drug names to drug categories. Experiment results show that our method is effective in discovering much more valuable medical knowledge.



II.  RELATED WORKS Some work applied the association rules on different data  sets to find the laws of Traditional Chinese Medicine.

Yao et al. [7] employed association rules to study 106 formulae for treating diabetes. This work first gives us a tip that data mining is a powerful tool to acquiring knowledge.

Chen et al. [8] explained how to apply the association rules between pathogenesis and disease through examples.

Jiang et al. [9] used association rules analysis to analyze prescriptions for the treatment of spleen-stomach diseases.

Chen et al. [10] analyze more than 550 Li Dong Yuan's formula of spleen and stomach by using the association rules to  The paper is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61173063, Grant No. 61035004 and Grant No. 30973713) and the National Funds of Social Science (Grant No. 10AYY003).

DOI 10.1109/CIT.2012.102    DOI 10.1109/CIT.2012.102    DOI 10.1109/CIT.2012.102    DOI 10.1109/CIT.2012.102     mine the relationships between formula, herbal medicine and syndrome.

Song et al. [11] applied association rules to analyze the couplet medicines treating spleen and stomach in order to explore the association degree of couplet medicines. The work also presented some reasons of association degree  Zhang et al. [12] mined rules of the drugs of prescriptions dealing with Traditional Chinese Medicine Nephrosis.

Li et al. [13] discovered the rules between theories, method, prescription and drugs by mining associations based on situations of 628 clinical cases.

Lu et al. [14] applied association rules to processing Traditional Chinese Medicine chemical data to mine inter- dimensional association rules among Traditional Chinese Medicine effects, family of plant, activity of chemical component and modern pharmacody of Traditional Chinese Medicine extracts.

In contrast to the previous work which focused on specific disease or specific physician, our method can deal with much more variety of clinical cases which contain many kinds of patients, clinical-time, symptoms, prescriptions, drug categories, and so on. This paper mines the frequent items which are called frequent drugsets on the Qing Court Medical Records in some specific conditions which produce the association rules. There are more than 200 patients whose medical records are described in the Qing Court Medical Records that our work focuses on. The medical records deal with various aspects of the Traditional Chinese Medicine.



III. TRADITIONAL ASSOCIATION RULES MODEL  A. Theoretical Model  Let 1 2 { , ,..., }nI I I I?  be a set of drugs. Let D be a set of prescriptions P. Each P is a subset of I such that P I? .

Meanwhile, each P has an identifier PID. Let A and B be respectively a set of drugs. Here iA P I? ?  and  jB P I? ?  are relations between these sets where i and j are the PID of P.

Definition 1 Support count: the count of prescriptions which contains some set of drugs A in D. That is  ( ) ( )support A count A? ?? ???? where  ( ) |{ | } |count A P A P P D? ? 	 }  Definition 2 Confidence degree: the percentage of prescriptions in D containing set of drugs A which also contain B. That is  ( | ) ( | )confidence B A p B A? ?? ? ?  B.  Association Rules Algorithm Apriori[3][4][6] is a seminal algorithm proposed by R.

Agrawal et al. [5] in 1993 for mining frequent itemsets for Boolean association rules. This algorithm has two steps which split the association rules algorithm into two sub-problems: finding frequent itemsets and generating association rules. The step of finding frequent itemsets is showed in Table I . In the background of the current context the algorithm of the first step is displayed in the form of finding frequent drugsets.

TABLE I. FINDING FREQUENT DRUGSETS ALGORITHM  finding frequent drugsets algorithm Input: D, a set of prescriptions; min_sup, minimum support count Output: L, frequent drugsets in D  1  find drugsets L1 in which every set contains one drug; 2  for (k=2; Lk-1 ?? ;k++) { 3 based on Lk-1 generate candidate drugsets Ck; 4  for each prescription p  D { 5  scan D for counts of every set c of Ck; 6 } 7  Lk ={c Ck|c.count?min_sup} 8  } 9  return L1  L2 ?  Lk ...

Table I shows the pseudo-code for finding frequent drugsets algorithm. Step 3 generates the candidates with an important property [3][4][5][6] to eliminate the sets that are not frequent. The property will not be showed in this paper. At last all the candidates satisfying minimum support count are united in step 9. The algorithm of generating association rules which our algorithm is different from is not showed in this paper. Our algorithm is given in the next section.



IV. EXPERIMENTATIONS  A. Data Source The data sources of the work are from the Qing Court  Medical Records which medical records of the imperial families and aristocrats of the Qing dynasty. For example, Fig.

1 is an original medical case and its translation [1][15]  We can know that the imperial physician of the case is Lu Tinggui ( ), that the patient is a wife of the eleventh prince of Qian Long and so on from the content of the Medical Record.

According to the work of Wang et al. [15], the Qing Court Medical Records is transformed into a computer-readable, structured representation. Therefore, the Medical Records can be stored in the database and we can perform some data mining techniques on it. The work of this paper continues Wang?s work [15] with the data mining techniques.

The major schema of database storing the structured Qing Court Medical Records is given in Fig. 2.

The schema shows that the database contains most of the information in the medical record. Then we can perform our experiment on it.

Translation: Medical record of wife the eleventh prince suffering from  pharyngalgia due to pathogenic wind-heat.

Qian long, July 26, 47, the doctor, Lu Ting-gui, examined the patient,  the wife of the eleventh prince, and found that her pulse was a ?superficial and rapid pulse,? the pathogenesis was ?wind-heat,? the symptoms are ?fever with chills, and pharyngalgia.? So the doctor prescribed the formula ?decoction for dispelling wind and clearing away heat.? The prescription is?1 Qian 5 Fen of schizonepeta spike, 1 Qian 5 Fen of burdock fruit, stir- frying and triturating, 1 Qian 5 Fen of mint herb, 1Qian 5 Fen of divaricate root, 1Qian 5 Fen of platycondon root, 2 Qian of Baikal skullcap root, 2 Qian of forsythia fruit, 1Qian 5 Fen of cape jasmine fruit, stir-frying, 2 Qian of Ningpo figwort root, 2 Qian of honeysuckle flower, 1 Qian of licorice root, raw?, the guiding-drug is ?3 pieces of common ginger, 1 bunch of juncus pith?.

Qian long, July 27, 47, the doctor, Lu Ting-gui, rerexamined the patient, the wife of the eleventh prince, he prescribed the formula ?decoction for dispelling wind and soothing thoat?. The prescription is ?1 Qian 5 Fen of schizonepeta spike, 1Qian 5 Fen of divaricate root, 2 Qian of burdock fruit, stir-frying and triturating, 1 Qian 5 Fen of Chinese thorowax root, 8 Fen of Chinese Goldthread rhizome with ginger toasted, 2 Qian of forsythia fruit, 1 Qian 5 Fen of bombyx Batryticatus, 2Qian of Baikal skullcap root, 2 Qian of honeysuckle flower, 3 Qian of platycondon root, 1 Qian 5 Fen of raw burdock fruit, 1 Qian of licorice root?, the guiding-drug is ?3 pieces of common ginger, 1 bunch of juncus pith?.

Figure 1.  A Medical Record in Qing Court Medical Records and its translation[1][15]  Figure 2. the major schema of database  B. Theoretical Model Our model is different from the above model. This section  will explain our model. First, we give some definitions of the symbols.

P: some prescription ( )  dr: some drug( )  dr.DC: the drug category ( ) of dr  pr.DI: the disease ( ) of P  di: some disease  P.PA: the pathogenesis ( ) of P  pa: some pathogenesis  P.PH: the physician ( ) of P  ph: some physician  P.SY: the symptoms ( ) of P  sy: symptoms  I: the set of the whole drugs  A: some set of drugs  Definition 3 Support count: the count of prescriptions which contain some set of drugs A in conditions of  , , ,DI PA PH SY . That is  ( ) ( | , , , )support A count A DI PA PH SY? ????? where  ( | , , , ) | { | . .

. . } |  count A DI PA PH SY P A P P DI di P PA pa P PH ph P SY sy  ? ? ?  ? ? ? . .P DI di P PA. .....

. . } |P PH ph P SY sy. ..P There are a number of prescriptions given the conditions of  some disease, some pathogenesis, some physician and some symptoms. The support count of A shows how many times the drugs of A occur together. For example, the count that Lu Tinggui, a physician, who adds divaricate root ( ) into prescriptions for wind-heat ( ), also adds forsythia fruit (  ) is 10 times. It shows that 10 prescriptions of Lu Tinggui for wind-heat adopt divaricate root and forsythia fruit.

Definition 4 Confidence degree: the percentage of prescriptions which contain some set of drugs A in conditions of , , ,DI PA PH SY . That is  ( ) ( | , , , )confidence A p A DI PA PH SY?               ??? where  ( | , , , )( | , , , ) ( , , , )  | { | . . . . } | | { | . . . . } |  count A DI PA PH SYp A DI PA PH SY count DI PA PH SY  P A P P DI di P PA pa P PH ph P SY sy P P DI di P PA pa P PH ph P SY sy  ? ?  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  } |d h. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .

} |. . .. . .

Also take the Lu Tinggui?s prescriptions for example. A confidence of 60% of divaricate root and forsythia fruit means that 60% prescriptions of Lu Tinggui for wind-heat which contains divaricate root also contains forsythia fruit .We don?t consider the confidence between two arbitrary sets of drugs but between some set of drugs and prescriptions which are under some conditions. It is a difference from the traditional association rules model. The confidence degree is described as a state of being certain that a drugset is correct in the condition of the definition.

The above conditions are too strict to acquire enough data which possibly lead to nonsense results. We also think the conditions combined with the drugsets must make sense in theory.  In other words the knowledge we acquire should contain explicit semantic information. Because of these, we introduce some restrictions to the condition?we remove some conditions. After careful analysis, we think the conditions combined with the drugsets listed below are the most interesting.

DI && SY ? A  According to specific disease and specific symptoms, we find the frequent sets of drugs. Then we can acquire the characteristics of drug therapy for specific disease and specific symptoms  DI ? A  It is the association between the disease and the set of drugs.

It can be used to research the feature of drug-using of treatment for specific disease.

DI && PH ? A  It is the association between the disease and physician and the set of drugs. The association reflects the feature of drug- using of specific physician for specific disease. It is valuable experience of Traditional Chinese medicine expert.

DI && PA ? A  This association is similar to the first one obviously. We can acquire the characteristics of drug therapy for specific disease and specific pathogenesis. In order to solve the problem that one pathogenesis may have different ways of descriptions which we call the problem of synonymity and lead to data sparseness, we supply a standardized document to map every pathogenesis to a standardized form.

DI ? DC  Two kinds of drugs can be classified into the same drug category because they may have similar efficacy. However, maybe two prescriptions for the same disease have two drugs that have different names and belong to the same drug category.

Mining the frequent set of drug category for specific disease can acquire more intrinsic characteristics of drug therapy while assisting in solving the problem of data sparseness. We manually finished a table for mapping a drug to drug category table, so that for each drug, we can know its category.

C. Finding Frequent Drugsets Table II shows the pseudo-code for finding frequent  drugsets algorithm in some conditions. ?rP? in step 3 is the set of prescriptions which satisfies the conditions?one of the input of the algorithm. Step 5 does not only return the frequent drugsets F but also return the count of every frequent drugset.

The method of computing confidence degree is formulation ????with the count of P and the count of every frequent drugset in step 7. The output of the algorithm is the frequent drugsets with the confidence degree and support count of every drugset.

Step 1 to step 4 can eliminate a large amount of prescriptions which do not satisfy the conditions and lead to largely decreasing the number of prescriptions used to acquire the frequent drugsets. Therefore, the algorithm can reduce the time complexity of finding frequent drugsets because it can decrease the number of the transactions of Apriori [3][4][6] as one of the important factors of  deciding the efficiency [3][4][6].

TABLE II. FINDING FREQUENT DRUGSETS ALGORITHM  finding frequent drugsets algorithm in some conditions Input: min_conf, minimum confidence degree; min_sup, minimum support  count; the conditions; P, the set of all prescriptions in the database Output: the frequent drugsets F in the conditions with confidence degree  and support count of each frequent drugset  1  For each p P{ 2  If(p satisfies the conditions) 3  rP=rP {p}; 4  } 5  F=execute the finding frequent drugsets algorithm in table 1; 6  for each frequent drugset f  F { 7  compute the confidence degree conf of f; 8  if(conf< min_conf){ 9  discard f; 10 } 11  } 12  return F, support count, confidence degree;  The algorithm generates frequent drugsets in a particular situation. In other words, rules of which the precondition is the situation and the consequence is the frequent drugsets are generated. The rules are semantically clearer and contain more semantic information than the traditional ones some of which may not be able to be explained semantically. Some examples of the algorithm?s results will be showed in the next section.



V. RESULTS Based on the medical records of 200 patients in the Qing  Court Medical Records we performed our algorithm in the form of six kinds of associations?Disease-Pathogenesis- Drugset (DPaD), Disease-Standardized Pathogenesis-Drugset (DSPaD), Disease-Symptoms-Drugset (DSyD), Disease- Drugset (DD), Disease-Physician-Drugset (DPhD) and Disease- Drug Category Set (DDC).

The support count represents the number of occurrence of the drugset. Intuitively, if the support count of one drugset is very low, it will possess no referential significance. Therefore, the drugset of which the support count is less than 5 was abandoned. We can know that the confidence degree is between 0 and 1 from the definition of the formula. Here, we     split the confidence degree into ten equal parts. Fig 3 shows the number of drugsets of which the confidence degrees are between the corresponding intervals in which the intervals of [0%, 10%], [10%, 20%] don?t give because of the less sense.

The horizontal coordinate of Fig. 3 represents the confidence interval. The vertical coordinate of Fig. 3 represents the number of frequent drugsets. The table under the bar graph shows the number of the frequent drugsets of different category in different confidence intervals.

Figure 3. the distribution of the frequent drugsets in different confidence intervals  Fig. 3 show that the low confidence intervals contain a number of frequent drugsets and the high confidence intervals contain only a few. Especially  the high confidence intervals [50%, 100%] of DPhd, DSyD and DPaD have no frequent drugsets. However, we should acquire some valuable ones from the empirical analysis. After we analyse the medical cases and the results, we discover that many of the frequent drugsets in the low confidence intervals are valuable. The reason that we can?t acquire the valuable ones is that the sparse data and the synonymity of pathogenesis, drug and symptoms. According to the above two problems, we have a try in two aspects: mapping every pathogenesis to a standardized form and mapping every drug to a drug category.

The row one and row two of the table in Fig. 3 show that the number of drugsets in [50%, 60%], [60%, 70%], [70%, 80%] and [90%, 100%] all rises and in [80%, 90%] decreases after mapping every drug to a drug category. The total number rises by 212 in the confidence intervals [50%, 100%]. The growth rate is 73.86%. After mapping, one prescription may contain two drugs which are mapped to the same category.

Then it leads to the decrease of the number of items in the prescription and overall the decrease of kinds of drugsets.

However, it can increase the support count and confidence degree. While the mapping decreases the total number of kinds of drugsets, the number of frequent drugsets in the high confidence intervals can increase. Then we can acquire more frequent drugsets.

The row three and row four of the table in Fig. 3 show that the number of frequent drugsets rises from the original amount of 0 to 398 in the confidence intervals [50%, 100%] after mapping every pathogenesis to a standardized form. By the fourth row we can know if there is not a standardized document, we will not get any frequent drugsets.

TABLE III. TOTAL NUMBER OF FREQUENT DRUGSETS BEFORE AND AFTER MAPPING  before after  category DD DPaD DDC DSPaD total  amount 287 0 499 398 1184  total 287 897 1184  Table III gives the total number of frequent drugsets before and after the mapping strategy with the minimum support count of 5 and the minimum confidence degree of 50%. This paper extracted the frequent drugsets with the minimum support count of 5 and the minimum confidence degree of 50%.

Table III shows that the number of frequent drugsets we acquired is 1184. Compared to the original 287 frequent drugsets, we obtained 897 more with an increase of 312.54%.

The results demonstrate the effectiveness of our mapping strategy.

TABLE IV. EXAMPLES OF RULES  Serial number  Rules Confidence degree  Category  1 rubella ? [saposhnikovia divaricata]  ? [ ]  100.0% DD  2 consumptive diseases ? [licorice, atractylodes macrocephala]  ? [ , ]  83.33% DD  3 cough ? [drugs for clearing and dissipating heat-phlegm]  ? [ ]  86.55% DDC  4 dysmenorrhea ? [blood- activating analgesic medicinal, drugs for regulating Qi flow, Hematinics]  ? [ , , ]  84.62% DDC  5 cold ? [drugs for regulating Qi flow]  ?[ ]  84.09% DDC  6 bellyache syndrome of heat of liver ? [radix paeoniae rubra, pericarpium citri reticulatae viride, cyperus rotundus]  ? [ , , ]  100.0% DSPaD  7 cough syndrome of fire invading lung and stomach ? [fructus aurantii, balloon flower]  ? [ , ]  82.35% DSPaD     The frequent drugsets combined with the preconditions can form rules. The rules of the result are candidates of knowledge.

If we want the knowledge to be applied in clinical cases practically, the reliability of them requires further validation.

However, the result of our experiment indicates our method can be used to acquire knowledge and can effectively improve the problem of data sparseness. The above table presents some rules of the results with the confidence degree and the category.



VI. CONCLUSION Knowledge acquisition aiming to construct knowledge base  is a branch of Artificial Intelligence. Knowledge base is the basis of machine intelligence. In this paper, we use data mining techniques to acquire the knowledge about Traditional Chinese Medicine. It is a step to construct knowledge base. The result of our experiment indicates that our method can acquire a number of knowledge. Our mapping strategy can effectively increase the number of knowledge acquired and improve the problem of synonymity and data sparseness. The results show the effectiveness of our approaches.

The main contributions of this paper are twofold: (i) the acquired knowledge can be applied in expert system and QA system and can assist the research of new prescriptions; and (ii) that the knowledge should contain explicit semantic information and make sense in theory can be a good idea.

Meanwhile, our mapping strategy can effectively improve the problems of synonymity and data sparseness.

However, there exit some problems in our work. Our work needs more data. What the value is we should set the support count and confidence degree is a second problem. The value is too high to acquire much more knowledge. If the value is very low, we can?t confirm the correctness of the knowledge. The symptoms also possess synonymity and we should establish a standardized document. We will solve these problems in the next step.

