Let Tagging be more Interesting

Abstract?In these recent years, the social semantic web has recognized a real attention by the majority of researchers in the world. We propose in this paper an original approach concerning a powerful technology which has recognized a great success in the social web area, we talk about folksonomies. The aim of our contribution is to provide another view about the semantics missed in the social web technologies and show how we can use the methods of Data mining to extract the meaning of tags in folksonomies.

Especially we will present how we can analyze user profiles according to their tags in order to personalize the recommendation of pertinent resources and surmount the lack of semantic links between tags for improving the quality of results returned by the current folksonomies.

Keywords-Folksonomie; Web 2.0; Semantics; Association Rules; Resource Recommendation; Tags Ambiguity; Spelling Variations.



I. INTRODUCTION Web 2.0 offers to the net users more possibilities of  expression for achieving their goals. These possibilities have allowed this community to create, annotate, share and make public what they found interesting on the web and therefore are gre:atly involved in the evolution of the web.

Among the powerful technologies of Web 2.0 we find folksonomies, this term has recently appeared on the net to describe a system of classification to collaboratively creating and managing tags to annotate a set of web resources. The basic principle of this concept focus on three main elements: the user, the resource and the tag, where the combination of these three notions gives delivery for a search tool based on the annotation of web resources by users whom employed a set of words called tags. Websites based on folksonomies allow their users to publish resources in order to share them with others.

This technology continues every day to gain popularity, however, the use of folksonomies for finding information on the web poses some problems, for example we cite: the problem of tags? ambiguity, this one comes from the fact that a tag can designate several concepts (i.e., a tag can have several meanings), for example when a user employs the tag "orange" to annotate a resource, the system will not understand if he is talking about the "color" orange or the "fruit" orange. Also the variations in writing the same concept (Spelling variations) can pose some problems during the research?s phase, e.g. "cat" and "chat" means both the same concept (animal) in English and in French, but when a user searches resources annotated by the tag "cat", the system won?t offer him those tagged by the word "chat" because it can?t understand that the tag "cat"  is equivalent to the tag "chat". Even, the tags that are freely chosen in these systems can make finding resources more doubtful than the metadata recovering from a lexicon examined by the professionals of information.

Recently data mining has proved its efficiency in the Web field; in which data quantities become very large. Among the powerful methods of data mining we find association rules, where the necessity for searching interested relationships between a large set of data leads to discover the correlations between these latter in the form of an association rules set. The idea of using this principle in the recent technologies of Web 2.0 such as folksonomies; comes with the need to analyze the users? profiles according to their tags in order to allow us predict interesting resources for each user.

We aim in this contribution to recommend resources which are annotated with tags suggested by association rules, in order to enrich user profiles with these resources.

In other words, our aim is to enrich user profiles based on similarities between users and association rules and by doing so to increase the community effect when suggesting resources to a given user. Also we will try to give a significant analysis to the relation between tags which are extracted by the association rules in order to exploit these ones to overcome the problem of spelling variations and let users benefit from all the resources annotated by a set of equivalents tags.

Our paper is organized as follows: Section 2 present a quick overview about the main contributions attached to the domain of folksonomies, in Section 3 some basic notions about the association rules are presented. In Section 4 we will detail the design of our approach. After in the Section 5, we move to the experimental phase in order to measure the performance of the proposed approach and discuss the obtained results. Conclusion and future works are discussed in Section 6.



II. RELATED WORKS  A. Tag Recommendation The general aim of tag recommendation systems is to  help users choose the appropriate tags when annotating resources in order to increase the weights associated to each tag and so cross a step up to building a common vocabulary in these systems. Among the many works addressing this problem, let us cite that of Schmitz et al.

[16] who showed how association rules can be adopted to  2012 IEEE Second International Workshop on Advanced Information Systems for Enterprises  DOI 10.1109/IWAISE.2012.20     analyze and structure folksonomies and how these folksonomies can be used for learning ontologies and supporting emergent semantics. Their approach consists in reducing the ternary dimension of a folksonomy by projecting it on a triadic context, and then in extracting association rules from this two-dimensional projection.

Another noticeable contribution is that of Jaschke et al.

[10] who present a formal model and a new search algorithm called FolkRank, especially designed for folksonomies. It is also applied to find communities within a folksonomy and is used to structure search results.

Gemmell et al. [8] propose a tag-based recommendation method based on the adaptation of the K-nearest neighbor algorithm so that it accepts as input both a user U and a resource R and gives out a set of tags T. The interest of this approach is to orient users to use the same tags, and thus increase the chance of building a common vocabulary used by all members.

B. Resource Recommendation The general aim of resource recommendation systems  is to enrich the quantity and relevance of the recommended resources. Among the works addressing this problem, let us cite De Meo et al. [7] who propose an approach based on the principle of query expansion. The aim is to recommend resources to users searching by tags by enhancing their profiles represented by their tag-based queries. The principle of the approach is to enrich user profiles by additional tags discovered through the exploration of the two graphs TRG and TUG representing the relations respectively between tags and resources and between tags and users. Let us note that, when compared to the works on tag recommendation, the principle is the same: extract the most appropriate tags. Most of the techniques performed in this process demonstrate their contributions for building a language more or less common between users of folksonomies. However the methods that are used to achieve this goal are different from one approach to another. Regarding the work of De Meo et al., we can say that the results obtained with their approach show that the idea of proposing a system of resource recommendation is pertinent: the rates of precision and recall are optimistic. However the fact of forcing the user to specify a list of tags in order to get resources can generate a cognitive overload and it obliges the system to focus on the participation of the user to perform its recommendation procedure. Moreover the technique that has been designed in this work does not take into account the semantics between tags, in particular it cannot distinguish between ambiguous tags and therefore it may recommend resources that will be rejected by the user because they are not close to his preferences. In another contribution the one of Beldjoudi el al. [4], the authors propose a method to analyze user profiles according to their tags in order to personalize the recommendation of resources. Their objective is to enrich the profiles of folksonomy users with pertinent resources. In this work the authors argue that the automatic sharing of resources strengthens social links among actors and exploit this idea to enrich user profiles by increasing the weights associated to web resources according to social relations.

C. Overcoming the Lack of Semantic Links Between Tags to Mathes [12], "the terms in a folksonomy have inherent ambiguity as different users apply terms to documents in different ways. There are no explicit systematic guidelines and no scope notes". For this reason we are concerned by the problem of tag ambiguity in our approach of tag-based resource recommendation. Among the most important contributions on resolving tag ambiguity or extracting the semantic links between tags in a folksonomy, we start with [13] where Mika has proposed to extend the traditional bipartite model of ontologies to a tripartite one where the instances are keywords used by the actors of the system in order to annotate web resources. In his paper, Mika focuses on social network analysis in order to extract lightweight ontologies, and therefore semantics between the terms used by the actors. In [9], Gruber stated that there is no contrast between ontologies and folksonomies, and so recommended to build an ontology of folksonomy. According to Gruber, the problem of the lack of semantic links between terms in folksonomies can be easily resolved by representing folksonomies with ontologies. Specia and Motta [17] in their turn have preferred the use of ontologies to extract the semantics of tags. The proposed method consists in building clusters of tags, and then trying to identify possible relationships between tags in the same cluster. An attempt to automate this method has been done by Angeletou et al. [2]. Buffa et al. [6] present a semantic wiki reconciling two trends of the future web: a semantically augmented web and a web of social applications where every user is an active provider as well as a consumer of information. The niceTag project of Limpens et al. [11] is focused on the same principle: the use of ontologies in order to extract the semantics between tags in a system. In addition, the interactions among users and the system are used to validate or invalidate automatic treatments carried out on tags. The authors have proposed methods to build lightweight ontologies which can be used to suggest terms semantically close during a tag-based search of documents. Pan et al. [14] address the problem of tag ambiguity by expanding folksonomy search with ontologies. They proposed to expand folksonomies in order to avoid bothering users with the rigidity of ontologies. During a keyword-based search of resources, the set of ambiguous used terms is concatenated with other tags so as to increase the precision of the search results. Beldjoudi et al. [3] proposed a technique called SSF (Semantic Social Folksonomy) for improving resources? search in websites based on folksonomies with respecting users? interests. The presented approach specially designed to show the social interactions? usefulness in folksonomies for reducing tags? ambiguity problem. The authors illustrated through this contribution that the semantic in folksonomies can be emerged from the force of the community effect and the social interactions between society?s members. In another contribution the one of Beldjoudi el al. [5], the authors proposed new technique for improving the Social Semantic Web technologies in order to see how can overcome some semantics problems in folksonomies even     when representing these latter with ontologies. The authors also illustrated how they can enrich any folksonomy by a set of pertinent data in order to improve and facilitate the resources? retrieval in these systems.

To sum up, most of the works aspire to bring together ontologies and folksonomies as a solution to resolve tag ambiguity and overcome the lack of semantic links between tags. Sure enough the approaches described in this section show that the social nature of resource sharing is not in contradiction with the possibilities offered by ontology-based systems. But the rigidity that characterizes ontologies and the need for an expert who must control and organize the links between terms as in [9] seem a little cumbersome and too much expensive. Even the structures automatically extracted as in [13] still suffer from the ambiguity of concepts. Regarding the work of [17], we can say that the use of semantic web ontologies for extracting relationships between terms is not sufficient, because as the semantic web includes some specific domain ontology, that will push back the problem. Also the expertise of users which was introduced in [11] is characterized by the complexity of its exploitation. As a result we propose our approach where we aim to resolve the semantics lack problem when we recommend a set of pertinent resources to each user, all that without explicitly using ontologies.



III. ASSOCIATION RULES  In data mining, learning association rules is a widely used method for discovering interesting relations among variables in large databases. [15] describes analyzing and presenting strong rules discovered in databases using different measures of interestingness. Based on this concept of strong rules, [1] introduces association rules for discovering regularities between products in large scale transaction data recorded by point-of-sale (POS) systems in supermarkets. For example, the rule {onions; potatoes} ?  burgers found in the sales data of a supermarket indicates that if a customer buys onions and potatoes together, he is likely to also buy burgers 1 .

According to the original definition by [1], the problem of association rule mining is defined as follows:  Definition 1: Let I= {i1, i2,?,in}  be a set of n binary attributes called items. A rule is an implication X ? Y where X, Y? I and X Y =?. The sets of items (itemsets) X and Y are called antecedent and consequent of the rule respectively.

To select interesting rules from the set of all possible rules in a database D= {d1, d2, ?, dm}, with each transaction in D containing a subset of items in I, two measures are commonly used: support and confidence.

1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Association rules [Retrieved 13 May  2012]  Definition 2: The support supp(X) of an itemset X is the proportion of transactions in D which contain X.

Definition 3: The confidence conf(X ? Y) of a rule X ? Y measures the proportion of transactions in D that contain Y among those that contain X. conf(X?Y)= ???????? ?????????  ?????????   To be selected as significant and interesting, association rules are usually required satisfying a user-specified minimum support and a user-specified minimum confidence. The process of generating association rules is usually split up into two separate steps: First, the minimum support constraint is applied to find all frequent itemsets in a database. Second, the minimum confidence constraint is applied among the rules involving these frequent itemsets. The quality of the extraction algorithm thus strongly depends on the values chosen by the user for the minimum support and minimum confidence, which adequacy is relative to the application.



IV. APPROACH DESCREPTION The objectives of our approach are many: first as we  have mentioned above, we hope in this contribution to treat the problem of tags ambiguity and realize a technique of resource recommendation. Also we want to show how we can tackle the problem of semantics lacks in folksonomies in order to allow any user in the system benefit from the most possible number of relevant resources tagged by tags equivalent to the one written by this user.  We have chosen to realize this idea a powerful method in the Data Mining field; which is the Association Rules.

A. Formal Description Formally, a folksonomy is a tuple F = <U, T, R, A>  where U, T, R represent respectively the set of users, tags and resources, and A represents the relationship between the three preceding elements i.e. A ? U x T x R. In our approach we have considered a folksonomy as a tripartite model where the instances are web resources associated with a user to a list of tags. And therefore we have extracted three social networks 'tag_user', 'tag_resource' and 'user_resource' from our folksonomy as in [13].

Now, in order to make the correspondence between the classical problem of association rules, "which consist to fetch correlations between the different attributes (items) of database" and our problem, we propose to represent each user in the folksonomy as a basket (or transaction) and the tags used by this one as the set of items which are included in this basket.

Our objective is to find correlations between folksonomy? tags, in other words we want to find tags which appear frequently together in order to extract those which have an equivalent meaning (i.e. the related tags). For example, supposing that we have a data set in which the majority of users who used the tag "cat" employed also the tag "chat", in this case our approach will build a rule "cat ?chat", and so we can concluded that these two words are two related tags and thus propose the resources tagged by the     tag "chat" to the user who want obtaining resources tagged by "cat".

We can so define an associative rule R as follows:  R: ti ? tj,  And ti ?T, tj ?T, ti ?tj = ? Where T= {t1, t2,?tn} is a set of all tags.

And tk for k=1?n is a tag set (i.e. a subset of tags).

Noting that our final goal isn?t suggesting tags to users, but offering them the resources which are annotated by these tags in order to allow them benefiting from these resources if they accept. So we should note that each time when we propose to a user any resource; we also give him the famous tags which are already used to annotate this latter, and it?s him who must choose a tag among the proposed set or another one according to his preference.

In this approach we have used the association rules for achieving two different aims: The first one is to recommend a set of pertinent resources to each user in the community according to his profile basing on the community effect and the social interactions between society?s members. The second is to use the association rules to overcome the problem of semantics lack in folksonomies for allowing any user to benefit from the most possible number of relevant resources in these systems. In the next subsections we will detail how we can achieve our aims.

B. Resource Recommendation and Tags Ambiguity Resolution  After formalizing our problem, we must now choose one of the association rules? algorithms in order to extract all the interesting rules. Noting that there is a variety of algorithms which are proposed to achieve this task (for example we can cite the most famous one; known as "Apriori" [1]). Now, once the rules are available, we will proceed as follows: For each extracted rule, we'll see if the tags which are in the antecedent of the rule are used by the current user, if it?s the case; the system will provide the resources tagged with each tag found in the consequent of the rule to this user, noting that to avoid the problem of tag ambiguity (which is expressed by the fact that a tag can have several meanings) we have proposed to follow the steps outlined below (1, 2 and 3). But before explaining them; it?s important to note that we have remedied this problem by following the next analysis:  Problem: Lack of semantic links between tags leading to a problem of ambiguity: a tag can refer to several concepts, i.e. a tag can have several meanings.

Hypothesis: Two resources tagged by the same word (tag) are similar, if they are used by users who share similar interests or when they share some number of tags2.

2 Of course the degree of similarity between two resources will be  differing according to the number of common tags between them.

Solution: Measuring the similarity between users, to specify those which have similar preferences.

The following steps will detail the approach outlined in the previous discussion:  1. Calculate the similarity between the user who is actually doing a search and all the other users who have the tags which are existed in the consequent of the rule:  To calculate this similarity we suggest to use a measure that allows representing each user by a vector vi designates a series of binary numbers defined all his tags or resources. Thus, to calculate the similarity between two users, for example u1 and u2, this measure proposes to calculate the cosines of the angle between their associated vectors v1 and v2 as we watch in the formula:  ?? ??? ??? ? ?????  ???? ?????  ?? (1)  Noting that to find the vectors corresponding to each user, it must calculate the two matrices: UR x RU and TU x UT such that:  -UR= [Zij] where Zij = 1 if there is an edge between the user i and the resource j, 0 otherwise  -TU= [Xij] where Xij = 1 if there is an edge between the tag i and the user j, 0 otherwise  -RU and UT are the transposed matrices of UR and TU.

2. Calculate the similarity between resources where the users are not similar:  To avoid the "cold start" problem which generally results from a lack of data required by the system in order to make an excellent recommendation, we propose to measure the similarity between resources when the users are not similar. To accomplish this task we propose to calculate the matrix resource = TR x RT. Noting that:  -TR= [Yij] where Yij = 1 if there is an edge between the tag i and the resource j, 0 otherwise  -RT is the transpose matrix of TR.

3. Calculate the level of recommendation for each proposed resource:  Each resource recommended by the system is first associated an initial weight based on the similarities between users. Above a threshold fixed in [0,?1], we qualify the resource as highly recommended. Under this threshold, we consider the similarity between resources and we similarly highly recommend the resources which weights calculated on the product matrix RR = RT x TR are above a given threshold. Otherwise, we compute the average ratio between the number of resources shared by     the user of the recommendation system with his social network and the number of resources used by him. These numbers are given by the product matrix RR = RU x UR.

Above a threshold fixed in [0..1], we qualify the resource as highly recommended; under this threshold, it is simply recommended or weakly recommended if the similarity is close to zero.

We note that in the previous steps we are based our study on the analysis of the existing interactions between the different elements including in folksonomy, especially those between users in order to extract the semantic which we believe that it is hidden behind the strength of the community effect which characterizes these systems.

These social interactions can be represented as social networks using some tools in order to analyze the correlations captured from the different interactions. An example of these tools is "Pajek", this latter which has used by Mika in [13] is able to analyze large networks.

C. Semantics Lack Resolution and Tags Classification As we have already mentioned, the second aim of our  approach is to overcome the problem of semantics lack in folksonomies. To achieve this target we have exploited the association rules of Data mining to extract the most linked tags. In order to make the distinction between the tags of a folksonomy we must give the following definitions:  Definition 4 (Equivalent Tags): Let us consider that T1 and T2 are two tags in the folksonomy: The two tags T1 and T2 are equivalents (i.e. T1? T2) iff (T1 ?T2) and (T2 ? T1).

We can read this definition in the field of association rules as follow: the majority of users whom employed a tag T1, employed also a tag T2 and vice versa. The impact of this kind of interpretation is to give a more semantics to the rules extracted from the tags set. This semantics can be captured by doing the correspondence between our definition of the equivalent tags and the problem of spelling variation or synonymy. For example when we found the two following rules (cat ? kitty) and (kitty ?cat) we can conclude that the term cat is equivalent or is a synonym to the term kitty. With this method we can reduce the semantics lack in folksonomies.

Definition 5: (Directly Related Tags): Let us consider that T1 and T2 are two tags in the folksonomy: The two tags T1 and T2 are directly related (T1 is directly related to T2) iff (T1 ? T2) or (T2 ? T1).

After the extraction of all association rules, we can so according to the above definitions extract the related tags and especially the spelling variations (or the equivalents tags). So with this method we can recommend for example the resources tagged by two equivalent tags (e.g.

Cat and Kitty) each one to the users of the other.

Definition 6: (Indirectly Related Tags): Let us consider that T1, T2 and T3 are three tags in the folksonomy:  The two tags T1 and T3 are indirectly related (T1 is indirectly related to T3 i.e.:  T1 ? T3) iff (T1 ? T2) and (T2 ? T3).

According to this definition we can extract other significant relations between the tags of a folksonomy. For example when we have the two association rules (cat ?kitty) and (kitty ?chat) we can conclude the rule (cat ?chat), and so recommend the resources tagged by the last tag to the users whom employed the first one.



V. EXPERIMENT  A. Experiment over a Subset of del.icio.us Database In order to validate our approach, we have conducted a  first experiment with the del.icio.us database. Our test base comprises 507 tag assignments involving 51 users, 239 tags __some of which are ambiguous or have spelling variations__, 112 resources __each having possibly several tags and several users. Our system has extracted a set of 65 association rules from the analysis of the dataset with a support equal to 0.5 and a confidence equal to 0.6. We have for example the rule news ? software: 60% of the users using the tag news also use the tag software. To demonstrate the validity of our approach, we have distinguished four classes of users:  The first one contains the users who have employed ambiguous tags, the second those who did not use those tags. This ambiguity of tags has been subjectively decided: for instance apple is ambiguous and software is not. The third contains the users who have employed tags with spelling variations and the last one contains those who did not use those tags. Not surprisingly, our experiment has showed that, by applying the extracted association rules, the resources associated to non ambiguous tags are highly recommended. It has also showed that, in the case of rules involving ambiguous tags, our system recommends to the user the resources which are close to his interests with a high level of recommendation and, on the contrary, those which are far from his interests with a low level of recommendation.

B. Evaluating our Recommender Sustem over an Experimental Dataset To evaluate our approach which aimed to recommend a  set of interesting resources to each user in the system, we will use the following three metrics: recall, precision and the metric F1 since we try to evaluate the quality of a recommendation system. .

Noting that: Precision: it measures the system's ability to reject all not relevant resources. It is given by the ratio of all relevant resources selected and all selected resources.

Recall: it measures the ability of the system to retrieve all relevant resources. It is given by the ratio of relevant resources retrieved and all relevant resources in the database. The metric F1: It's a combination of the two previous metrics, and is defined by the following formula:  F1 = ?????????????????? ??!"" ?????????# ??!""  (2)  Because the calculation of these metrics requires the knowledge of all relevant resources for each user in order     to compare the results provided by our recommendation system and those which are actually preferred by each user, we have built a database by inviting 50 users to participate to an experiment. We first made a prototype of a folksonomy in the form of a website. Then we asked the users to specify their preferred resources. Finally, we asked each user to tag a set of resources among 77 ones available on our website, by using free keywords. Based on this dataset, we extracted 42 association rules with a support equal to 0.5 and a confidence equal to 0.6.

Afterwards we calculated the three metrics for each participant in our test, for each tag.  The fig 1 presents the average values of the metrics we obtained for our 50 users.

Figure 1. The average of the three metric: precision, recall and F1  C. Discussion We have shown through this experiment that the use of  data mining methods has proved its effectiveness in the procedure of recommendation within folksonomies. As we have seen; the results obtained from our data sample are optimistic and so we can say that the community effect which characterizes folksonomies showed his power in users? profiles enrichment. Comparing our approach with other works aimed to recommending a set of resources for each user like the approach cited in [7], we find that the technique that has been designed doesn?t take into account the semantic between terms, in particular it can?t distinguish between the ambiguous tags and therefore it can provide to a user resources that can rejected by him because they are not close to his preferences. Also the fact of forcing the user to specify a list of tags in order to obtain a set of resources can cause a cognitive overload because it will oblige the system to focus on the participation of user to realize this procedure. Now comparing our approach by the one presented in [16], we can say that the idea expressed in this work aim to present how association rule mining can be adopted to analyze and structure folksonomies, and how the results can be used for ontology learning and supporting emergent semantics. The work so discussed how we can use the rule mining in folksonomies, however the rules extracted in our approach differ in the idea and the principle from them presented in [16], also our approach has the luck to tackle the problem ambiguity during the recommendation of resources and takes into account the preferences of each user when it him recommend a set a relevant resources. In addition we have tried in this contribution to overcome the problem of  semantics lack to allow any user in the system to benefit from the most possible number of pertinent resources which are tagged by a set of tags equivalent to the one written by this user.



VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS Our investigations in the Web 2.0 field and especially  that of folksonomies have enabled us to make a substantial contribution in which we have interested by enriching users? profiles automatically by a set of relevant resources and resolving the problem of semantics lack in folksonomies. We have proposed a new technique based on the association rules of data mining and the social interactions between the folksonomies users, in which our objective is creating a consensus among the actors of a same system in order to teach them how they can organize their web resources with a correct and optimal manner. We have tested this approach on two datasets where we have obtained good results. Now, in order to expand and improve this work we propose to enrich the generated association rules by other measures which will help to specify the relevance degree of each rule to each user and we wish also to validate our approach on other databases.

