Application of MBSE as a Support                      to the Definition of the Port Informer Service

Abstract ? This paper describes an application of the Model Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) approach in a study performed on behalf of the Italian Port Informers Association, with the purpose to provide a solid technical background to the definition of the Port Informer Service (also referred in this paper simply as Service), and to its future evolution.

The current Italian legislation does not include such Service neither among the ?public utility services? ruled by the Maritime Authority (Coast Guard), nor among the ?general interest services? ruled by the Port Authority. The lack of a clear definition of the Service is the source of an uncertain situation, in which the activities of the Port Informers derive from local ordinances issued by the single Harbor Master?s Offices (Capitanerie di Porto, local office of the Coast Guard). From a different point of view, the continuous evolution in the technological equipment of the authorities involved in port operations, with systems such as Vessel Traffic Services (VTS), Automatic Identification System (AIS), Port Management and Information System (PMIS) and so on, urges the Port Informers to share a common process of migration, in order to be fully integrated in the exploitation of the opportunities made available by the new technologies.

A strong need was thus felt for a new regulation of the services provided by the Port Informers at national level, in order to promote a necessary uniformity in the provision of the Service, and to better support the management of port security, maritime traffic monitoring and navigation security.

Keywords: e-Navigation; e-Maritime; MBSE; information management

I. INTRODUCTION The Ship Reporting and Communication Service provided  by the Port Informers in the Italian ports consists in the spotting and identification of commercial ships, in the recording and signaling of their arrival/departure times, in the updating of the maritime situation in the inner and outer harbor areas, in the support to the communications between ships and agencies, in the recording and distribution of the meteorological weather reports, in the continuous listening in the appointed radio frequencies, and in general in the collaboration with the Maritime Authority, Port Authority and other public entities for  the collection and dissemination of data useful for port and maritime security and safety.

The placement of the IMO?s e-Navigation concept within the EU e-Maritime initiative is shown in Figure 1, highlighted with the yellow box. In this frame, the Port Informer Service can be considered as belonging to the first and last part of the scope of e-Navigation, i.e. the berth-to-berth voyage of the ship; the first part being the process of departure of the ship from the berth, and the last covering the approach of the ship to the port of destination.

The study conducted for the Italian Port Informers Association had the explicit aim to support the legislator and the authorities involved in the management of port activities with a clear, technical definition of the service provided. The study was conducted according to a methodology based on the following four steps:  1. Analysis of the complex legislation background  2. Survey of the current presence of Port Informers in the Italian Ports  3. Application of modern modeling techniques for the definition of a uniform nation-wide model of the service  4. Provision of specific Guidelines for the implementation of the defined model    Figure 1.  e-Navigation and e-Maritime [Source: EU Commission Directorate for Mobility and Transport, Nov. 2010]      II. ANALYSIS OF THE ITALIAN MARITIME LEGISLATION.

The service of Ship Reporting and Communication has a  notary function and provides a relevant support to the functions exerted by the Maritime Authority related to articles 62 of the Navigational Code [1] and 59 of the Regulation for the Execution of the Navigational Code [2]. Up to 1994, the activity was ruled by the article 68 of the Navigational Code and by regional regulations set by local departments of the Maritime Authority.

Following the coming in force of Law n.84 of 1994 [3], the areas of competence between the Port Authority and the Maritime Authority have been clearly defined and regulated, assigning to the former the management of the ?land? side of the port, and to the latter the management of the ?sea? side.

Due to the consequent subdivision of the areas of competence, the service of Ship Reporting and Communication is no longer explicitly included in the public utility services which are under the responsibility of the Maritime Authority. Also, it is not included in the general services which can be appointed by the Port Authority. Accordingly, the service is currently regulated only thanks to local regulations set by the single Harbor Master?s Offices, which simply transpose and approve the current operative interactions between Port Informers and the port community.

In order to support common actions at national levels, a national Association of Port Informers has been formed to promote a new regulation which should recognize its role within the port community and the benefits of the provided services. A first important step in this direction was the issue of MARICOGECAP Directive 2/01/52077 [4], by the General Command of Harbor Master Offices, which set at national level the guidelines for the ?Ship Reporting and Communication? service to be provided by Port Informers.

The Circular constitutes a formal ratification of the public utility nature of the service and the complementarity between the Port Informers and the Italian Coast Guard roles within the port community. Moreover, the Circular assigns to the competent local Maritime Authority (the Coast Guard itself) the assessment and monitoring of the technical and financial capacity of the Port Informer, defining the main requirements for the Ship Reporting and Communication service.

In the same framework defined by the MARICOGECAP Directive, the Study described in this paper, promoted by the Association of Port Informers, is meant to provide the technical background to support the process of migration towards the final operational structure of the Port Informers.



III. PORT INFORMERS IN THE ITALIAN PORTS: A SURVEY Italian port informers are present in most of the large  commercial ports in Italy, as shown in Figure 2, with an organization based on over 150 specialized professionals. The ports covered by the service are: Genova, Savona, Venezia, La Spezia, Ravenna, Livorno, Napoli, Brindisi, Bari, Taranto, Gioia Tauro, Augusta, Milazzo.

The survey of the existing Italian Port Informers has been conducted with two instruments: questionnaires and technical meetings.

Figure 2.  The Surveyed Port Informers  All the existing operators have been provided with a dedicated questionnaire for the acquisition of the relevant information related to their organization, technological equipment, and activities. The information gathered has then been analyzed and discussed during specific technical meetings to resolve ambiguities and uncertainties, and the results finalized and presented in a joint workshop held with representatives of the existing operators.

All Port Informers provide the main services of Ship Reporting and Communication, integrated with the support to the coordination and promotion of the port facilities activities, towards Forwarding Agents, Maritime Agents, Transport Operators, Maritime Couriers and Navigation Lines. The analysis of the organizational aspects of the Port Informers and of their technological infrastructure highlights a significant inhomogeneity between the ports in which the service is active.

As shown in Figure 3, the average number of Operators is 7, with significant variations between a minimum of 2 (Port of Gioia Tauro) and a maximum of 10 (Ports of Brindisi and Ravenna), while the number of Supervisors is generally of 1 (La Spezia, Livorno, Milazzo, Venezia, Gioia Tauro) or 2 (Bari, Brindisi, Napoli, Ravenna, Savona), with the exceptions of Genova and Taranto where no role of Supervisor is foreseen, and Augusta, where there are 3.

Figure 3.  Personnel Employed in the Port Informers     Even with a normalization of the number of Operators employed to perform the services with respect to the yearly number of ships served by the Port, which is a figure more representative of the workload of the Port Informers, the inhomogeneity between the different ports is not resolved, and this fact can be related to the following main reasons:  ? the diversification on a local basis of the duties of the Port Informer regarding the generation of products with some added-value (such as bulleting, reports, statistics?) for the use of the Port community, which in some cases strongly affects the workloads  ? the lack of a uniform reference frame for the definition and provision of the services provided by the Port Informers in general, and of the due interaction with the Maritime and Port Authorities  A confirmation of the same results is given by the analysis of the infrastructures used by the Port Informers during their activity, as can be seen in Table 1, where each equipment has been grouped according to its main function (i.e. for communications or for the monitoring of the maritime situation).

TABLE I.  EQUIPMENT USED FOR COMMUNICATIONS/ MONITORING BY PORT INFORMERS  V H  F  A IS  Te le  ph on  e  FA X  G S  M  W eb  si te  V oI  P   P or  ta bl  e V  H F  V H  F  R ad  ar  B in  oc ul  ar s  A IS  M et  eo  S ea  gr ap  he r  V id  eo ca  m er  a  O W  N ED  O W  N ED  & U  SE D  U SE  D &  N O  T O  W N  ED  Augusta X X X X X X X X X - X X X - - - - - Bari X X X X X X X X X - X X X X X - - -  Brindisi X X X X X X X X X - X X X X X X - - Genova X - X X X - - X X - X - - - - - - -  Gioia Tauro X X X - X X - - X - - X X - - - - - La Spezia X X X X X X X X X - X X X - - - - -  Livorno X X X - X X - X X X X X X X X X X - Milazzo X X X X X X X X X - X X X X X X - - Napoli - - X X - - - - X - X X - - - - - -  Ravenna X X X X X X - X X X X X X X X - - X Savona X X X X X X - X X X X X X - - X X - Taranto X X X X X X - X - - X X X - - X - - Venezia X X X X X X - X X - X X X X - - - -  RADAR SYSTEMCOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT SIGHTING EQUIPMENT  PORT     As evident from Table I, all Port Informers communicate via radio or telephone with the ship command and with the port users, while not everywhere the use of fax and GSM is consolidated, and still less employed is the centralization of voice communications via VoIP.

Regarding the ship monitoring equipment, visual means (binoculars), VHF radios (for text messages) and AIS are widely spread, while not uniform is the use of radars, cameras and sea monitoring stations.

The case of radar equipment is very specific, and requires further discussion: in few ports, the Port Informer is connected with the Coast Guard facilities and receives the radar picture as a support to its activities, while in other cases it has the authorization to have a own radar for the collecting of the real- time maritime picture. In most of the cases however, such authorization is not granted, thus limiting the effectiveness of the service. This problem is related to the lack of a common recognized framework for the provision of the Port Informer Service, because sometimes the service is wrongly perceived as overlapping with the duties assigned to the Maritime Authority,  not as complementary to it, and no authorization is granted for the use of radars or radar data to the Port Informers.



IV. DEFINING A MODEL FOR THE PORT INFORMER SERVICE The development of a Unified Model for the service of Ship  Reporting and Communications is a first significant step for the definition of standardized and possibly automatized procedures characterizing the activity of the Port Informers.

Figure 4.  Sources and Users interacting with the Port Informers  As reported in Figure 4, where UML is used as graphical language, Port Informers interact with a fairly large number of actors involved in the management of Port activities, which can be grouped in two Classes: the primary sources (originators) of information, and the information users:  ? Primary sources: Harbor Master?s Office, Port Authority, Meteorological Agency, Ship Command, Maritime Health Authority, Pilots, Mooring Operators, Tug Boat Operators, Terminal Station Operators  ? Information users: Harbor Master?s Office, Customs Agency, Border Police, Fire Brigade, Maritime Health Authority, Finance Police, Pilots, Mooring Operators, Tug Boat Operators, Maritime Couriers and Navigation Lines, Terminal Station Operators, Civil and Military Authorities, Public and Private Transports, Tourists  The management of the information processed by the Port Informer has been elaborated in an UML Activity Diagram, as shown in Figure 5, and can be summarized as follows:  1. Collection of Information (the relevant information is gathered either from a primary source, or generated by the own sensors)  2. Validation of Information (the information acquired is validated through correlation with other information derived from different sources, from the knowledge of historical data, with ad-hoc verification procedures, or based on the Port Informer?s experience)  3. Elaboration of Information (the information is stored, disseminated towards the Users who have a rightful interest in it, and/or used for the generation of several types of product: bulletins, statistical reports, etc.)      Figure 5.  The Process of Information Management  A. Main Phases of Information Exchange.

The identification and characterization of all the types of information managed by the Port Informers has been performed with the identification of 8 different phases of intervention of the Port Informer, corresponding to the different operative conditions of the ship with respect to the Port. The phases are shown in Figure 6, and are the following: (i) Ship scheduled to arrive in the Port, (ii) First voice contact with the Ship command, (iii) Ship entering the Port, (iv) Ship maneuvering within the Port (v), Ship docked, (vi) Ship planned for departure, (vii) Ship maneuvering to exit the Port (viii), Ship out of the Port. The information which cannot be related to any of these phases (i.e. Meteorological data, ferry schedules, etc.), is considered as belonging to no phase.

The types of information are grouped in the following categories: (i) Information Related to Ship Transit, (ii) Administrative Information, (iii) Technical Information, (iv) Other Information, and (v) Generated Products.

B. Analysis of Information Flow.

Within each of the phases, a UML Sequence Diagram has been constructed, to represent the flow of information between the various actors involved. This has been helpful to identify communalities between the different ports, where the same information is treated with different names, but also to highlight the different timings and approaches used for the exchange of the different types of information. An example is shown in Figure 7.



V. GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE UNIFIED SERVICE  A. Evolution of the Technological Infrastructure.

The analysis shown in the previous sections highlighted the relevant role played by the Port Informer in response to the information and operative requests of commercial users, and as support to the monitoring and control activities of the public authorities present within the port.

Figure 6.  Phases of Information Exchange, and Types of Information  At the same time, the analysis helped to identify the areas which can be further developed, in order to strengthen the efficiency of the service provided, and to consolidate the peculiarity of the role held by the Port Informers, whose recognition has been earned on the field in many years of qualified support.

The vision which can lead to the full qualification of the Port Informer service, can be achieved according to the Study with the following three steps:  1. Evolution of the Technological Infrastructures  2. Evolution of the operational Regulation of the Service  3. Evolution of the Structure of the Association  The implementation of the Unified Model of the service must tend towards a full integration of the infrastructures of the Port Informer with the info-telematic platforms already existing in the port, both public and private, such as the PMIS (Port Management and Information System) and VTS/AIS (Vessel Traffic Service/Automatic Identification System), made available by the Coast Guard (Comando Generale delle Capitanerie di Porto).

Figure 7.  Sequence Diagram for the Analysis of Information Flow       This integration will in fact allow an harmonization of the duties of the Port Informer with those held by the Maritime Authority, and present a common interface towards the end users.

The study analyzed the architecture which every Port Informer should implement, in order to guarantee the uniformity of the service provided, with the proper sensors, communications equipment, network interfaces and databases.

Detailed information regarding state of the art equipment and methodologies for automatic surveillance and support to navigation can be found in [5] and [6]. An example of the investigated architecture is shown in Figure 8.

Figure 8.  Target Network Architecture for the Port Informers  B. Birth of the Consortium, and its Self-Regulation.

With the support of the Study performed, the associated Port Informers have at last approved the constitution of a National Consortium of Port Informers. The Consortium will propose itself as the sole interface towards the competent authorities for the evolution of the normative applicable at national level, and as a guarantee of the quality level and high performance of the service provided to the users.

The guidelines produced by the Study have been acquired by all the Associated Port Informers, and internally distributed as a white paper [7], and led to the approval of a unique Regulation (Regolamento del Servizio di Avvistamento Navi e Comunicazioni [8]). The Regulation, implementing the contents of the MARICOGECAP Directive, defines in a clear way the objectives of infrastructure, legal and organizational evolution of the service.

In particular, the Regulation states the following basic principles:  ? The nature of ?public utility? of the Service towards the Maritime Authority, in relation to the latter?s obligations ruled by Article 62 of the Navigational Code  ? The acceptance of the legal authorization issued by the Maritime Authority ex Article 68, in substitution of the waiver to the concession ex Article 36 of the Navigational Code  ? The setting of a maximum price for the service by the Maritime Authority, notwithstanding the market  negotiation of the price with the private users of the service  ? The setting of minimum technical and professional requirements along with a monitoring on the quality of provision of the Service, by the Maritime Authority  Following the approval of the Regulation, the Association of the Port Informers is promoting an update of the Port Ordinances by the local Harbor Master?s Offices in those ports where the Port Informer is active. A specific role in this respect has been played by the Maritime Direction of region Liguria, which is supporting the issue of a Pilot Ordinance related to the Port of Genova, with the purpose to accelerate the migration process described above.

CONCLUSIONS The application of Model Based techniques, together with  the Systems Engineering paradigm of ?seeing the whole picture?, has proved to be an effective tool to support the analysis of a complex problem  in a complex scenario, such as the recognition of the role held by the Port Informers in an evolving legislation framework within the complexity of industrial ports management at local and national level.

