Combining Fuzzy AHP and Association Rule to Evaluate the Activity Processes of   e-Learning System

Abstract?with the rapid development of technology and the Internet become universal, many courseware has been transformed into digital materials, resulting in the vigorous development of e-Learning platform. This paper combines Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process and Association Rule to evaluate the process of ?Practice Score? and ?Interactive Learning?. In this research, visiting 30 teachers for interviews with experts in Taiwan during two months, all respondents compare the various criteria for these two learning processes.

Further, get the various elements of the fuzzy relative weights and the sequence of importance from the results of all respondents. Analysis showed the ?Practice Score? process, the users generally considered the most important two criteria are data correctness and the stability of data link. For the ?Interactive Learning? process, users are most concerned about whether the platform can provide real-time exchange of knowledge and can quickly update the subject matter with interactive platform or not. The results could be a reference for further development of e-Learning system, and can be used as the basis of the e-Learning process management.

Keywords-e-Learning; Process management; Multiple- criteria decision-making(MCDM); Fuzzy AHP

I. INTRODUCTION With the gradual popularization of Internet, many  courseware has been transformed into a way of digital materials to present. The method of learning become more flexible, therefore, more and more people through the network to do the online learning. This new learning platform is called e-Learning. Because of promotion and resource form the domestic and the international, the development of e-Learning has been matured. However, how to evaluate the pros and cons of e-Learning system is the most important consideration to build the e-Learning system.

In recent years, many scholars do the research on assessing the online teaching and learning outcomes by using e- Learning platform of the academic community [1]. However, poor of studies for the activities process in the e-Learning system.

According to Davenport, the concept of process is a set of structured and measurable activities, it must have the beginning and the ending, and enable to define what is the input and output [2]. End users often exclude the use of e- Learning system for teaching or learning, due to the complex  menus and operating environment when they operate the e-Learning systems. For the end users, it?s necessary to provide proper guidance and metrics when they try to familiar with the operating environment of the e-Learning system. On the other hand, for the system builders, to understand the user?s need of functionality and interface as the base of system development is also very important.

Therefore, for the activity flows of e-Learning system, analyzing the requirement of the users and set a complete evaluation mechanism are absolutely necessary for expanding the popularity of e-Learning.

In our research, it base on the systematic analysis process, and focus on the ?Practice Score? process and ?Interactive Learning? process in e-Learning system to build the evaluation framework of system activities. The purposes of the study include: ? Through the literature review, to select the appropriate  evaluation elements, and build the Hierarchical Structure of Evaluation for two sets of activity flows.

? By way of the questionnaire, and then using the Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP) and Association Rule (AR) to calculate the fuzzy relative weight among elements, and find out the associated rules between each criteria and the importance sorting of criteria in the entire set of activity process.

? We build the Hierarchical Structure of Evaluation for e-learning process and propose the method to evaluate the process in this study. It is also verifiable on other e- Learning systems ultimately.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: The contributions and achievements of other relative researches are reviewed in section 2, including: multi-criteria decision theory, fuzzy analytic hierarchy process and association rules, as the theoretical basis of the following study. In section 3, we select the ?Practice Score? process and the ?Interactive Learning? process to evaluate, and describe the evaluating methods which proposed in our study briefly. In section 4, describe the data processing of questionnaire and show the experimental results. Finally, in section 7, to make a conclusion of our study which can be as the reference in the development or use of the system for the e-Learning system?s builders and users, and also give related recommendations for the future researchers.

DOI 10.1109/ICGEC.2012.72    DOI 10.1109/ICGEC.2012.72    DOI 10.1109/ICGEC.2012.72    DOI 10.1109/ICGEC.2012.72

II. LITERATURE REVIEW  A. Multiple Criteria Decision Making Multiple criteria decision making method (MCDM) is  mainly related to the problems of evaluation and selection, and it has been rapidly developed in the field of operations research and management science in recent years [3]. Tzeng et al. mentioned that MCDM is the most appropriate method to assess the digital learning system .The most important part in this approach are decision theory and analysis [4]. In MacCrimmon?s research, the configuration guidelines and preferred architecture can be obtained through the analytic hierarchy process. The decision-makers can get the target hierarchy structure between decision-making goals and decision-making criteria by the analytic hierarchy process method [5].

B. Fuzzy Analytical Hierarchy Process The assessment of the information system is a multi-  criteria decision-making problem [6]. In 1977, Saaty presented that the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) is the most widely used and practical methods to solve such problems [7]. It can structure the decision-making problems, and provide guidelines, goal weight, and alternatives, to give determination of consistency for various criteria [8].

Generally speaking, people have not clear boundaries when they make any decisions. Therefore, when the experts decide the importance of elements, the results may be biased.

For this reason, in 1985, Buckley presented the Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP) [9]. This method combines the concept of fuzzy theory (Fuzzy Theory) and AHP, which complete the disadvantage of ambiguity on the two assessment elements for the importance by experts, and more truly reflect the actual situation.

C. Association Rule Association rule (AR) is a data mining method proposed  by Agrawal and several scholars in the 1990s. From a group of huge transaction data items and attributes, it can identify the associated rules between the information. The rules can effectively reveal the unknown relationships and provide the results of the forecasting and decision-making. Its defined as assuming I = {i_1, i_2, i_3 ... i_m} is a set of items of the collection, and the resulting rules in the form for X Y-, in which X-? I, Y-? I and X- Y-= ?. Each associates rules have two parameters to judge, the Support values (expressed in sup.), and the Confidence value (expressed in conf.) .and finally to find out whether exist any meaning from the association rules. Support level and trust level must meet the minimum support level (minsupp.) and the minimum confidence level (minconf.) set by user for an effective association rule [10].



III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY In this section, we will describe the assessment method  and the research procedures in this study.

A. Processes Assessment In this study, the Moodle platform as an example is  selected. We retrieve two sets of processes from e-Learning system, and choose the core functionality respectively, as the basis of process assessment for expert.

? Practice score process: In this process, both teachers and students can choose course which they want to view or operate. For teachers, they can increase new practice and score the test for students.

On the other hand, students can do online practice and upload test through the system.

? Interactive learning process: In this process, teachers and students also can choose the course which they are interesting. Teachers can add new discussion topic for students to discuss with others and express themselves views about the topics through the system.

B. Build the Hierarchical Structure of Evaluation According to the Parikh & Verma, the dimensions of  evaluation are divided into ?Technology?, ?Interface? and ?Function? in our research [11]. Through the collation of the literature, to identify suitable evaluation criteria and building the hierarchical structure of evaluation for two processes (Fig. 1), in order to define the association between all evaluation elements.

Figure 1. The hierarchical structure of evaluation  C. Pairwise Comparison After constructing the hierarchical structure of  evaluation, according to Saaty proposed an AHP pairwise comparison scale table, as shown in TABLE I [12], to pairwise compare between elements.

TABLE I. AHP PAIRWISE COMPARISON SCALE  Scale Definition 1 Equal importance 3 moderate importance 5 strong importance 7 demonstrated importance 9 extreme importance  2,4,6,8 Intermediate Values     ? Calculate the maximum eigenvalue (?max): via the numerical analysis of the eigenvalue solution, to identify the eigenvector and the largest eigenvalue ?max.

? Consistency test: after ?max is obtained, we need to calculate the Consistency Index (C.I.) and Consistency Ratio (C.R.) in order to test the consistency of the weights. If C.I. and C.R.

0.1, then to pass the consistency test [13]. The formulas are shown in (3) and (4).

C.I. = ?max - n / n - 1                        (3)  C.R. = C.I. / R.I.                             (4)  Among formulas (4), the Random Index (R.I.) is proposed by Saaty, which in order to adjust the different orders. The R.I. value table is shown in TABLE II.

TABLE II. RANDOM INDEX (R.I.)  Number of level elements(n) 1 2 3 4 5 6  R.I. value 0 0 0.52 0.89 1.11 1.25  D. Weight Calculation & Series of Hierarchical ? Calculate the triangular fuzzy numbers: By the  left boundary value (Li), intermediate value (Mi), and the right boundary value (Ri) of each elements of the overall structure of evaluation, which obtain from the maximum value of the weights, the geometric mean and minimum values of each expert questionnaire, to calculate the triangular fuzzy numbers, in order to present experts fuzzy opinions.

? Normalization: In order to get more rigorous results of the analysis, normalize the triangular fuzzy number get from the front step is necessary. Normalized triangular fuzzy numbers expressed as (nLi, nMi, nRi), where n represents the number of experts. The formulas are shown in (8) to (10):  ??? = ??   ? ? ? ?? ? ?  ? ??  ? ? (8)  ??? = ?  ? ? ?   (9)  ??? = ??   ? ? ? ?? ? ?  ? ??  ? ? (10)  ? Defuzzification and standardization: To converted the normalized triangle fuzzy number to a real value DFi. In order to make the total  value of DFi obtained from elements of all levels, plus a total of 1, it is necessary to conduct the normalized process again. Finally to seek the weight values of the each level elements The formula is following as (11) and (12):  DFi  = {(?????)?(?????)}  ? + ???           (11)  ??? ? =  ??  ? ?? ? !?  (12)  ? Series of Hierarchical and rank of importance: In order to obtain the importance rank of the criteria on the Hierarchical Structure of Evaluation. We calculate the first level dimensions weights NWi through the previously mentioned steps, and the second layer criteria weights NWij. Finally, we can obtain the absolute weight NWk of the k sub-criteria, the formulas is shown as (13):  "#$ = "#? * "#?%                           (13)  E. Semantic Conversion & AR Analysis Through the FAHP method, to calculate the fuzzy  relative weight of the each element for each expert questionnaire, then according to Chen & Hwang proposed the fuzzy semantic scale variable table [14], as a basis to divide into three kinds of semantics, the table is shown as TABLE III. Via the conversion of semantics, we use the WEKA software to carry out AR analysis. Finally, the valuable association rules in the various sub-criteria are obtained.

TABLE III. FUZZY SEMANTIC BY NUMERICAL CONVERSION  Value Scale 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0.077 None 0.154 Very low 0.231 Low-very low 0.308 Low 0.385 Fairly low 0.462 More of less low 0.539 Medium 0.616 More of less High 0.693 Fairly high 0.770 High 0.847 High-very high 0.924 Very high 1.000 Excellent

IV. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS  A. Questionnaire In our research, the questionnaire for experts identified  as the professor in information field of the institutions, and experts with practical e-Learning platform experience.

Finally, in the two-month experiment, we visits 21 schools, and delivered 30 expert questionnaires, each of the questionnaires cost an average of 30 minutes (the longest as long as two hours or more).

After questionnaire, we verify the consistency whether ratio value of each questionnaire item is less than 0.1 or not, which in order to ensure the validity of the results. Then, the respective weights of the each questionnaire compiled to Excel 2010, in order to obtain the overall weights for the hierarchical structure of evaluation.

B. Fuzzy Relative Weights In this step, based on the FAHP method, we obtain the  fuzzy relative weights of the two e-Learning processes, which shown as TABLE IV and TABLE V.

TABLE IV. FUZZY RELATIVE WEIGHTS OF DIMENSIONS & CRITERIA  Practice score process Interactive learning process Dimension (weight)  Criterion (weight)  Dimension (weight)  Criterion (weight)  Technology (0.313)  Transmission Quality (0.451) Technology  (0.273)  Transmission Quality (0.461)  System Stability (0.549)  System Stability (0.539)  Interface (0.329)  Navigation (0.371)  Interface (0.363)  Navigation (0.407)  Visual Satisfaction (0.264)  Visual Satisfaction (0.301)  System Feedback (0.366)  System Feedback (0.292)  Function (0.358)  Data Statistics (0.277)  Function (0.364)  Personalized (0.298)  Searching Service (0.127)  Functional Integrality (0.300)  Functional Integrality (0.290)  Interactivity (0.402)  User Control (0.306)  C. Rank of Importance Through the relative weight calculation, we can obtain a  relatively fuzzy weight values for each element. By way of series of hierarchical, we can get the absolute weights of the criteria and rank of importance for the process, such as shown in TABLE V.

TABLE V. WEIGHTS AND RANKS OF SUB-CRITERIA  Practice score process Interactive learning process Sub-criterion Rank Sub-criterion Rank  Data Transmission Correctness (0.078) 1  Convenience (0.076) 1  Connection Stability (0.074) 2  Immediateness (0.070) 2  Manage of Practice and Teaching Materials  (0.063)  Graphic Arrangement of Interface (0.067)   Well Connection Quality (0.063) 4  Data Transmission Correctness  (0.066)  Clear Guideline and Direction (0.061) 5  Connection Stability (0.060) 5  For the practice score process, the ?Data Transmission correctness? and ?Connection Stability? is the first and second important sub-criteria. Experts believe that the user must be able to correct upload and download the practice or  materials through e-Learning system, when they do the online examination and assessment. It also should have a higher degree of stability for system connection requirements, in order to avoid errors due to the wrong process operation, and unexplained break. In addition, ?Manage of Practice and Teaching Materials?, ?Well Connection Quality? and ?Clear Guideline and Direction?, are also the important elements to evaluate the process.

For interactive learning process, the ?Convenience? and ?Immediateness? and ?Graphic Arrangement of Interface? is ranked in the top three in this process. Forum for learning Interactive, the system should provide a platform which is more convenient for real-time exchange of knowledge, able to quickly update the content. For the graphic arrangement of the functionality and interfaces, it should also meet the user's habits, and let users at a glance, to operate more smoothly.

D. Association Rules In this study, to use of WEKA software, with the top  three sub-criteria of the two processes, we selected a total of seven meaningful association rules, to arrange into TABLE VI.

TABLE VI. ASSOCIATION RULES  Association rules Conf.

Pr ac  tic e  sc or  e  C4.2 Graphic arrangement of interface = Excellent (19) => C1.2 Data transmission correctness = Excellent (15) 0.79  C2.1 Connection stability = Excellent (18) => C1.2 Data transmission correctness = Excellent (13) 0.72  C9.2 Manage of practice and teaching materials = Excellent (21) => C1.2 Data transmission correctness = Excellent (15)  0.71  C8.1 Integrality of assessment method = Excellent (17) => C1.2 Data transmission correctness = Excellent (12) 0.71  In te  ra ct  iv e  le ar  ni ng  C3.1 Ease of use = Excellent (16) => C4.2 Graphic arrangement of interface = Excellent (16) 1  C1.2 Data transmission correctness = Excellent (18) => C4.2 Graphic arrangement of interface = Excellent (17) 0.94  C1.2 Data transmission correctness = Excellent; C4.2 Graphic arrangement of interface = Excellent (17) => C4.1 System aesthetics = Unimportant (13)  0.76  In the ?Practice Score? process, if system supply well graphic arrangement of interface and a stable link, that would allow users to improve the accuracy for data transfer. The scoring mechanism provided by the system is meaningful when uploaded information is correct. In addition, when on the management of the production of teaching materials, the teaching materials upload correctly should be emphasized, in order to avoid providing incorrect information to students.

For ?Interactive Learning? process, the system can provide a good interface graphic choreography, so that the user will operate smoothly and easily. It can also increase the correctness of the data transfer on user interaction. In addition, the system will be able to improve the correctness of data transmission with a good interface graphic choreography, so that the visual appearance of the system will be relatively less important.



V. CONCLUSION Our analysis result showed that there are significant  differences between these two e-Learning processes when experts do evaluation. No matter which dimension, which are all need to be considered. Among three dimensions, the ?Function? is the most important dimension of considerations only with a sound and powerful features, which can satisfy the requirements of people. It became easier and smoother in operating process with a good interface design.

Comparing the difference of importance rank between two e-Learning processes, ?Graphic Arrangement of Interface? is the greatest different in two processes. Thanks to the ?Interactive Learning? process is diversified in function and operation, and emphasize the interaction on real-time. Therefore,  the layout of the text or image more in line with the habit of users, so that users can quickly to find what function they want to use and select rapidly. In addition, there are also significant differences sub-criteria is ?Clear Guideline and Direction? and ?Appropriate Display System Message and Response?. There are certain steps during the online practice, so through the appropriate prompts and guide from system can make user complete the operation successfully. On the contrary, use the forum to teaching and interaction, functions are more complex and diversified.

Therefore, the user can use arbitrarily and less limitations on operation.

Looking at two e-Learning processes, we found that ?Graphic Arrangement of Interface? and ?Data Transmission Correctness? have a great relevance, which denote a good interface-graphic layout will improve the correctness of the data transfer.

This study builds a hierarchical structure of evaluation and the results of the analysis can be verified in other e- Learning system or Website. For example, the results can be measured and compared to the system?s pros and cons, and choose their own use of learning environment for user. When the system developers to build system, they also can refer to the results of this study to design a high quality e-Learning system or site for learners.

