

Abstract? Learning Materials are structured as Learning Objects and are available in Learning Object Repository(LOR)  which are used in various courses of an Elearning environment.

Learning Management System aggregates these objects found in  LOR, provides an infrastructure and platform through which learning content is delivered and managed. Adaptation,  personalization, usage statistics are some of the LMS  functionality. But due to the exponential availability of Learning  Objects, it leads to  increase in difficulty to find the right  resource to the user based on the context of learning or his/her  preferences. When we search through keywords it results in huge  quantity of information being displayed. In this paper we are  considering the Search patterns of the users stored in search logs  and based on it association rules are generated using Frequent  Pattern Tree. We can generate a list of Frequent learning objects  using frequent item set mining approach FP-Tree, so that a  reduced, appropriate and relevant objects can be delivered to the  users.

Keywords? Learning Objects; Frequent PatternTree; Apriori; FP  Growth; Recommender Systems

I. INTRODUCTION    Today online learning is experiencing phenomenal growth.

Being networked, E-learning features instant updating, storage  and retrieval, distribution and sharing of information. The  paradigm of Learning Management System (LMS) is a  technology aimed towards facilitation and management of  massive amount of educational resources available in e-  learning environment. LMS can offer a great variety of  channels and workspaces that can facilitate information sharing and communication among participants in a course.

They help the educators in distributing information to  students, producing content material, preparing assignments  and tutorials, conducting quizzes and online tests and  managing distance classes. Customized learning, presenting  just the right material to the learner on demand is an important  issue that has to be considered. Personalization in learning can be achieved through user filling forms or by choosing various  search options. To an extent, can also be achieved with the  help of user profiles. Here we are considering Personalization  by searching for a correlation between the learners preferences  and it is achieved through association mining technique- FP tree, a non candidate generation approach. Frequent Learning  objects under a domain or sub domain can be fetched, thereby  a reduced and an appropriate set of objects can be delivered to  the user.



II. Literature Survey  A.  Learning Objects  Learning object according to experts ASTD Learning Circuits (2002) [1] defines a learning object as ?a reusable, media-  independent chunk of information used as a modular building  block for e-learning content?. The IEEE Learning Object Metadata Working Group, Learning Technology Standards  Committee (LTSC) [2] defines a reusable learning object as  ?any entity, digital or non-digital, which can be used, re-used  or referenced during technology supported learning? (IEEE,  2002). In The Instructional Use of Technology, Wiley (2000)  [3] defines a reusable learning object as any digital resource  that can be reused to support learning.

B. Learning Objects and Metadata Standard  Meta Data describes about these learning objects There are  many metadata standards like:-  ? The IEEE 1484.12.1 ? 2002 Standard for Learning Object Metadata(LOM)[2].

? Simple Dublin Core, standardized as ANSI/NISO Z39.85 ? 2001.

? IMS Metadata[9].These Metadata can be created through automated tools, semi automated tools or  manually by creators, authors of Learning Objects            C. Retrieval of Learning Objects  There are various Learning object Repositories like MERLOT[4],ARIADNE which facilitate keyword  searching and browsing through keyword for  various  subject Domain. The search depends on title, subject,  author?s name. Merlot uses subject, subcategory, type of  material, author?s name e.tc to search objects from various  fields like  Science, Engineering. There are other  repositories like HEAL, EdnA, SMETE also uses Keyword  Searches.

D. Association Mining-Apriori  Data mining (sometimes called data or knowledge  discovery) is the process of analyzing data from different  perspectives and summarizing it into useful information  Technically, data mining is the process of finding  correlations or patterns among dozens of fields in large  relational databases[8]. There are various types of analysis  like association, classification, clustering[14] and  prediction. Association rule mining finds interesting  association or correlation relationships among a large set  of data items[10].In Association mining two interesting measures called support and confidence is taken into  consideration. Mining Frequent items or objects with  Candidate Generation(Apriori Algorithm)[11] is  viewed  as a two step process:-  i)Find all frequent object set: By definition, each of these  object set will occur at least as frequently as a  predetermined minimum support count ( min sup).

ii)Generate strong association rules from the frequent  object set: By definition, these rules must satisfy minimum  support and minimum confidence measures(min conf).

E.  Disadvantages ?Apriori  i)In many cases the Apriori candidate generate-and-test  method significantly reduces the size of candidate sets,  leading to good performance gain. However, it can suffer  from two nontrivial costs:-  ii) It may need to generate a huge number of candidate sets iii) It may need to repeatedly scan the database and check a  large set of candidates by pattern matching.

F. Mining Frequent Objects without Candidate Generation ? FPTREE  FP-Tree, a novel and compact prefix-tree structure, is constructed for storing complete information of the  databases. Jian Pei?s [6] algorithm directly mines frequent  item sets without generating candidates. It gathers  sufficient statistics into a suitable data structure (called an  Frequent Pattern tree), all of the frequent patterns can be  generated without going back to the database. In order to  overcome the drawback inherited in Apriori, an efficient  FP-Tree based mining method, FP-growth, which contains  two phases, where the first phase constructs an FP tree,  and the second phase recursively Researches the FP tree and outputs all frequent patterns. The algorithm[6] is given  in ?Fig. 1?.

FP TREE Mining  Algorithm  FP-Growth(Tree, ?)  for each(ai  in  the header of Tree) do {  ? := ai U ?  generate(? with support = ai.support)  construct ?'s conditional base pattern  and ?'s conditional FP-Tree Tree?  if Tree? ?O  then call FP-growth(Tree?, ?)  Initially call:  FP-Growth(Tree, null)  Figure 1.Algorithmic steps for   Generating F-P Tree[6]

III.PROPOSED SYSTEM    The main idea of this paper is to use the search logs of users  during their learning process and try to derive a frequent  pattern of usage of   learning objects by these users. Both  Apriori and FP-Tree are influential algorithms for mining  frequent item sets for association rules [5]. Here we are using  frequent patterns from FP-Tree a non candidate generation  approach. We can generate various association rules of usage objects based on interesting measures. Further these set of  objects can be grouped and delivered together for a new user  during his learning process. The schematic model given below  can be described as follows:-    ? Users searches can be stored in a log in database.

? These can be further filtered based on domain or sub domain to reduced the set.

? Association Miner (FP-Tree) can be used to find the frequent Learning Objects and derive a pattern or  rules with min support and min confidence.

? For example let us consider A,G,F,H are Learning objects. If LO(A) is initial fetched based on domain.

If there is an association rule that corresponds to  LO(G),LO(F) LO(H)  then all 4  can be delivered  together. It is represented as a Single level  association rule  A?G,F,H.

?  A Recommender  system helps in fetching these objects from the LOR and can be delivered to the  user. A schematic model is shown in ?Fig. 2?.

? Based on measures like entropy relevant  attributes other than domain and sub domain can be chosen.

Figure 2.Proposed Recommender System

IV. RESULTS    A. Data Set for Experimentation    A data set of 10 user search are taken for work out. A,B,C ...

can be the name of learning objects or learning object ids can  also be generated. Order all items in Learning Objects  according to frequency descending order (minimum  support = 3). Below ?Fig.3? shows  User Searches  & the  Support  count of  each  Learning objects.

Search/usage  id  List of Learning  Objects Searched S1 G ,I, M, P, F, A, C, D  S2 A ,B, M, O, C, F, L  S3 B ,F ,H ,J ,O  S4 B ,C, K, S, P  S5 M , C ,E ,P ,A, F  S6 J ,K  S7 N, Q, R, S  S8 G ,H ,Z  S9 L ,Z, R  S10 Z ,T ,A    A 4 F 4 K 2 P 3 Z 2  B 3 G 2 L 2 Q 1  C 4 H 2 M 3 R 2  D 1 I 1 N 1 S 2  E 2 J 2 O 2 T 1    Figure 3. User Search  &  Support  count of  each LO   B.  Header Table and FP-Tree   Header Table(HT) and an FP-Tree  for the dataset is  shown in  figure ?4?. Path represent   the searches of objects and Nodes  have counts   of original frequency   A 4  C 4  F 4  B 3  M 3  P 3  HT            Figure 4. Frequent Pattern-Tree    C.   Condition Pattern base for LO-P:3  According to ?Table I? given below the Frequent pattern is  LO [C] and LO [P] have the support count and it appears 3  times. Thus  these two objects can be delivered together.

Similarly  ?Table.II?  depicts the objects that occur together when  LO[M] is searched.

TABLE I.

FP for LO ??P?  Frequent Path P?s Prefix path CPB Frequent  Pattern  <C:1 B:1>   P:1  <A:4 C:3 F:3 M:2> P:2  C: 1 B:1  A:2 C:2 F:2 M:2  CB:1  ACFM:2  CP:3  P:3    D. CONDITION PATTERN BASE FOR LO-M:3  TABLE II.

FP for LO ??M?  Frequent Path M?s Prefix path CPB Frequent  Pattern  A:4   C:3   F:3  M:2  A:4   C:3   F:3  B:1   M:1  A:2 C:2 F:2  A:1   C:1  F:1   B:1  ACF:2  ACFB:1  M:3  CM:3  AFM:3  CFM:3  ACM:3  AM:3  FM:3 ACFM:3       P:2 B:1 M:1  Root  L  A:4  C:3  F:3 M:2  C:1  B:1  P:1  F:1  B:1            E. Condition Pattern base for LO-B:3 & LO-F:4  TABLE III.

. FP for LO ??B? & ?F?  Frequent Path B?s Prefix path CFB Frequent  Pattern  C:1 B:1  A:4 C:3 F:3 B:1  F:1 B:1  C:1  A:1 C:1 F:1  F:1  B:3 B:3  Frequent Path F?s Prefix path CFB Frequent  Pattern  F:1  A:4 C:3 F:3  A:3 C:3  ACF:3    F:4  CF:3  FA:3  FCA:3      F. Condition Pattern base for LO-C:4  & LO-A:4  TABLE IV.

FP for LO ??C? & ?A?  Frequent Path C?s Prefix path CFB Frequent  Pattern  A:4 C:3  C:1  A:3  AC:3 C4  AC3  Frequent Path A?s Prefix path CFB Frequent  Pattern  A:4  A:4 A:4

V. CONCLUSION   This approach can generate association rules that associates  the users search  pattern of learning objects and  a new user  need not initiate a pull strategy  to get relevant learning  objects. This recommender system  can take an initiative  to  push a list of  learning objects based on new user?s  information need .Though FP tree has some drawbacks like it  takes lot of memory. We can use a divide and conquer  approach to data mining. If the FP-Tree does not fit into main  memory it can be broken into sub trees until the tree fits into  main memory. Instead of generating single FP tree for few  search criteria we can generate separate FP tree for each of  them using graph mining FP-Tree approach. The learning objects are retrieved using some of the user preferences like  title, author and domain.



VII.   FUTURE SCOPE    A simple metadata approach may discover association at a  shallow level but semantic information through semantic  analysis can be used. A single dimension like a domain or sub  domain is taken into account in this paper and single level  association mining is used. Association mining  based on  Multiple dimension[12](domain, author, age) and Multi level  abstraction of learning objects[13]  can be considered  for more appropriate  delivery of objects. Personalization can be further improved by filtering unsuitable learning objects based  on users profiles or by using ranking algorithm. Other  recommending algorithms based on collaborative filtering,  knowledge based   can be used .



VIII. REFERENCES   [1]. Barron, T., (2000, November). Learning Object Pioneers. ASTD  Learning Circuits. Retrieved 31  July,2005,from:http://www.learningcircuits.org/2000/mar2000/barr  on.htm  [2]. IEEE LTSC (2002). IEEE Standard for Learning Object Metadata.

1484.12.1-2002. Available at http://ltsc.ieee.org/wg12/  [3]. Wiley, D. A. (2000). Connecting learning objects to instructional design theory: A definition, a metaphor, and a taxonomy. In D. A.

Wiley (Ed.), The Instructional Use of Learning Objects: Online  Version. Retrieved March 20, 2004, from  http://reusability.org/read/chapters/wiley.doc  [4]. http://www.merlot.org/merlot/index.htm [5]. Kotsiantis S, Kanellopoulos D., Association RulesMining: A  Recent Overview, GESTS International Transactions on Computer  Science and Engineering, Vol.32 (1), 2006, pp. 71-82  [6]. Jiawei Han, Jian Pei, Yiwen Yin, and Runying Mao, Mining Frequent Patterns without Candidate Generation: A Frequent-  Pattern Tree Approach, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery,  Volume 8,Issue 1, pages 53-87, January 2004  [7]. Guizhen Yang: The complexity of mining maximal frequent  itemsets and maximal frequent patterns. Proceedings of the tenth   and data mining, Seattle, WA, USA 2004.  Pages: 344 - 353  [8]. Data Mining Concepts and techniques by kamber.edition 3 [9]. http://www.imsglobal.org/ [10]. Ceglar, A., Roddick, J. (2006). Association Mining. ACM  Computing Surveys, 38(2).1-42. ACM  [11]. R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski and A. Swami.Mining Association Rules Between Sets of Items in Large Databases", in Proc. of the ACM  Int. Conf. on Management of Data, Washington, USA, May 1993.

[12]. Frequent pattern mining: current status and future directions by Jiawei Han ? January 2007 Springer Science &Business Media,  LLC 2007.

[13]. FP-Tree and COFI Based Approach for Mining of Multiple Level Association Rules in Large Databases (IJCSIS) International  Journal of Computer Science and Information Security by Virendra  Kumar Shrivastava Vol. 7 No. 2, 2010  [14]. A Sai Sabitha,Deepti Mehotra .Quality Metrics  quanta for  Retrieving Learning Object by Clustering Techniques. The Second   Communication Technology and its Applications (DCTAP2012).

