Association Rule Analysis Using Biogeography  Based Optimization

Abstract? In recent years ,data mining has become a global research area for acquiring interesting relationships hidden in large data sets. Data Mining has been used in various application domains such as market basket data, bioinformatics, medical diagnosis, web mining and scientific data analysis. In this paper, we have tried to optimize the rules generated by Association Rule Mining using Biogeography Based Optimization(BBO).BBO has a way of sharing information  between solutions depending on the migration mechanisms .The motivation of this paper is to use the feature of BBO for finding more accurate results.

Keywords - Biogeography Based Optimization, Association Rule Mining, Data Mining

I.  INTRODUCTION Many business enterprises collect large amount of data  from their day to day transactions. Availability of powerful computers using modern information technology makes it possible to handle large amount of data at very low costs.

Thus, a large number of companies, organizations and institutions can afford to collect, store, transfer, combine and discover interesting relationships hidden in large datasets.

Data mining methods such as Association Rule Mining are gaining popularity in discovering the uncovered relationship which can be represented in the form of association rules.

Association rule learning methods provide a vigorous, sturdy and non-linear approach to find associations among the attributes in a database.

These rules can be engendered using numerous methodologies, both statistical and nature inspired. Recently, the nature inspired techniques proved more effective and efficient than the conventional approaches. A combined study of Hybrid PSO/ACO algorithm (PSO/ACO-AR) has been used for quantitative Association Rule Mining [1].Improved Genetic algorithm has been used in optimizing the association rules [2].A Quantum Swarm Evolutionary Algorithm is yet another advancement for mining association rules in databases [3].An interactive Association Rule Mining, system is  designed using a combination of Genetic Algorithm and a modified a-priori based algorithm [4].

In this paper, the key objective is to optimize the rules generated by Association Rule Analysis (Apriori method), using Biogeography Based Optimization (BBO). The findings of recent studies show strong evidence in support of using some aspects of biogeography to solve specific problems in science and engineering. We formulate a general Association Rule Analysis model for extracting useful information using a combination of BBO and Apriori based algorithm.

The organization of the paper is as follows: The paper is divided into 4 sections. In Section 2 BBO is discussed in brief.

Also this section discusses the concept of association rule analysis.Section3 presents the methodology and the dataset used. In the next section the experiments and results are discussed. Further, Section 5 concludes the study undertaken with the future work that can be carried out.

.



II. QUANTITATIVE ASSOCIATION RULE ANALYSIS AND BBO  A. Association Rule Analysis Association Rule Analysis (ARM) is introduced in  1993[5].ARM has gained attention for their power and ease of use. Besides market based data, association analysis is also applicable to other application domains such as bioinformatics, medical diagnosis, web mining and scientific data analysis. Information gained from association analysis develops a better understanding of how the different elements of the system interact with each other. An association rule implication expression of the form X ?Y, where X and Y are disjoint item sets that is, X?Y = ?, there is nothing common between two itemsets. The strength of an association rule can be measured in terms of two parameters.

? SUPPORT: support determines how often a rule is  applicable to a given dataset.

? CONFIDENCE : confidence determines probability or how frequently items in Y appears in transactions containing X  Support, s(X ?Y )= ?(X U Y) / N Confidence, c(X ?Y) = ?(X U Y) /?(X) X ?Y  represents an association rule Where ,X and Y = Disjoint itemsets and ?(X U Y) = Transactions containing items common to both X and Y ?(X) = Transactions containg items in  X N = Total number of transactions.

The values of support and confidence play a vital role in deciding what all rules associated with datasets may be profitable to promote items that customers seldom buy together.

Support is essentially used to eliminate uninteresting rules, since a rule that has a very low support may occur simply by chance. Confidence on the other hand, measures the reliability of a rule.

Illustration: (X ?Y), higher the confidence, the more is the percentage of transactions containing Y in addition to X.

B.  BBO The idea of Biogeography Based Optimization (BBO) was first presented   in December 2008 by D.Simon [6].Biogeography Based Optimization (BBO) is a population base evolutionary algorithm (EA) which has a way of sharing information between solutions depending on the migration mechanisms of ecosystem [6]. BBO involves migration which is an adaptive process which is used to bring in some amount of changes in the existing islands.  One basic trait of BBO is that the original population is not discarded after each generation; it is rather modified by migration. In BBO each individual solution is considered as a habitat with a Habit Suitability Index (HSI) [7]. A Suitability Index Variable (SIV) which characterizes the habitability of an island is used.

Habitats with a high HSI mean that the habitat has a large number of species. On the other hand the one with low HSI has a smaller number of species. A good solution is analogous to an island with a high HSI and a poor solution indicates an island with a low HSI. High HSI solutions tend to share their features with low HSI solutions. Low HSI solutions accept a lot of new features from the ones with a relatively high HSI solution [6].



III. METHODOLOGY This section presents the steps followed and processed  during the study.BBO is known to find the optimal solution of a problem.

B. DataSet We have used the dataset of a supermarket containing n  items with m-transactions. Using a-priori technique association rule analysis is performed on the dataset with BBO to reduce the number of candidate itemsets and to evolve rules of richer quality.

C. Proposed Framework Strategy used in order to perform data analysis consist of  three major steps  1.Generation of frequent itemset: The main aim under this step is to extract all the itemsets that satisfy the threshold value. Minsup b(minimum value for support) defined is considered as the threshold value. The resultant itemsets are known to be frequently used itemsets.

2. Generation of Rules The main objective is to extract all the rules with a high confidence value from the frequent itemsets found in the previous step.

3. Find the generalized association rules by pruning the taxonomy using BBO.

User gives sets of items as input and n-itemsets are generated as output.BBO rule miner enhances the rules which are profitable.

D.  Considerations It has been considered as that the species migrate from  one habitat to another habitat as mixed population. Species satisfying the HSI (support) are considered for association rule generation and those not satisfying the HSI (support) are rejected. Confidence of rules generated is calculated and checked against the defined threshold value of confidence. If confidence is satisfied then it is a rule else rejected.

ASSUMPTIONS  ? Initially a dataset with n items following the transactions is considered.

? It has been assumed that items satisfying the min defined support value are selected   and included into the 2-itemset.

n- Itemset  BBO rule miner  User  Dataset Frequent Itemsets     ? For the purpose of this project, min support considered is 11  ? Also for the analysis   purpose, combinations of each item satisfying the min support value are formed.

? Follow the same process until the rules are extracted.

A. Algorithm-Framework for Data Association       Input-Dataset  Output-Extracted Rules  1. Calculate the occurrences of each itemset in different transactions. Define HIS, minsup and mincnf.

2. Put the itemset according to the minsup defined thereby defining the 1-itemset.

3. Select a item from 1-itemset and make combinations with remaining items of 1-itemset.

4. If the combination satisfies the minsup defined then include it in the 2- itemset.

5. Check for the other combinations satisfying the minsup.

The algorithm discussed above is illustrated in the flow diagram:   HSI= 11  Emigration rate = number of items satisfying the  min support value  Immigration rate = infinity  Smax=infinity  Smin=1            Satellite Image  Calculate the occurrences of each itemset in different transactions.

Define HSI (cost function), Smax, Smin, immigration rate (?) and Emigration rate (?)   Absorb the itemset according to the minsup defined thereby defining the 1-itemset  Select a item from n-itemset and make combinations with remaining items of n- itemsets. (Initially n = 1)  If the combination satisfies minsup defined.

Absorb the itemset in the n+1 ?itemset. n = n+1  Check for the other combinations satisfying the minsup  If all the combinations in the dataset are checked  Stop the process  TRUE FALSE TRUE  FALSE  FALSE  TRUE

IV. RESULT Minimum Support was varied from 1.5% to 0.6%. As the  number of transactions increased the running time also increases. BBO ARM tends to converge as the number of transactions grows. Accuracy of generated rules is 100%.The combination of BBO with a-priori query optimization make association rule mining yield fast results. The association rule mining problem is modeled as a multi-objective combinatorial problem which is solved using BBO.



V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE In this paper,we have tried to use the robustness of BBO in  a way of sharing information between the solutions in combination with a-priori principle.The results generated after applying the technique on the dataset,includes the desired rules with richer quality .Those rules help in deciding the pattern as to how different items in a supermarket can be arranged for lucrative results.The results show that the proposed model can attain profitable and optimized performance in terms of minimum support and number of items.

