Computationally Intensive Content Analysis of Public Diplomacy Data:  Understanding the Public Remarks of US Secretaries of State, 1997-2011

Abstract This paper continues to test the ASSANA  methodology for the computer-assisted analysis of large-scale, unstructured, text-based data in international affairs research. Traditional methodologies for exploring the role of the Secretary of State in projecting ?soft power? have focused on reading and analyzing texts to uncover important themes and patterns.  However, the increasingly large volume of data available presents a significant challenge for these traditional methods of analysis.

We examine three data sets consisting of every remark by Secretary Clinton since taking office (n=2,438), Secretary Rice from 2005-2009 (n=1,766), and Secretary Albright from 1997-2001 (n=1,335). We use computer-assisted content analysis to find key themes for each Secretary and search for similarities between key themes and phrases. We find a limited number of similar keywords across the dataset, except International and Issues. However, the following phrases are shared between all Secretaries: Human Rights, Foreign Policy, Middle East, International Community, and North Korea.

1. Introduction   The United States is a unique case study in foreign policy. As the world?s leading economic and military powerhouse it plays a critical role in foreign affairs but has preferred historically to eschew many long-term international entanglements. Throughout its rise to become the world?s only remaining superpower, US ideals and values have shaped its foreign policy through promoting freedom and democracy around the world. The Monroe Doctrine aligned America with an ?open door? policy as well, increasing its international presence and pressure on authoritarian regimes and governments [12].

However, as the events of September 11 illustrated vividly, the American image and actions  Amy Wozniak American University  awozniak711@gmail.com  abroad have very real security and prosperity consequences at home. As Frederic McCormick states in his 1911 piece, ?If [a nation] has no great foreign affairs it will not only lack greatness, but it will also be incapable in some of the essentials of nationality? [12].

The Department of State is the primary foreign policy agency within the United States. The US has embassies, consulates, and diplomatic relations with countries spreading from Iceland to Japan, which carry out international policy functions. At the top of this organization sits the Secretary of State, the United States? highest official in foreign affairs. The Secretary of State serves as an American spokesman, foreign policy creator, and international negotiator.

The Department of State?s Mission is to, ?Shape and sustain a peaceful, prosperous, just, and democratic world and foster conditions for stability and progress for the benefit of the American people and people everywhere? [5].

Recently, international relations scholars have asked questions about the role of the Secretary of State in projecting ?soft power? and the differences in scope, focus, and tone, based on venue and audience [4]; [11]; [13]. However, the large volume of text-based data now becoming available, presents a significant challenge for traditional methods of social science analysis. Most scholars confronted with this ?data deluge? [14] have been confined to smaller samples of her speeches because of time and resource constraints.  Further, we can identify no systematic study of the impact of female Secretaries of State in the United States.  As Berman and Brady note, social scientists recognize the promise of using large-scale digital data to answer important research questions, but frequently do not have the skills or infrastructure to capitalize on them. Many social scientists trained only in traditional methods of qualitative analysis, and even those using computer assisted qualitative data analysis software (CAQDAS) software, find it difficult to cope with the time and effort required to analyze these large data sources [2]. New texts are emerging to help train non-specialists on these techniques [15].

DOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.140    DOI 10.1109/HICSS.2013.140     The US Government is also promoting the use of Big Data and web based tools to enhance transparency and openness. The State Department has taken the unprecedented step of making every single public statement by the Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, both inside and outside the country, available for download on their website (http://www.state.gov/). There are also archived sites where former Secretaries Rice and Albright?s remarks can be found. These and other similar efforts across government to enhance participation, such as the Open Government Initiative (http://www.whitehouse.gov/open) and Data.gov (http://data.gov/), are yielding voluminous amounts of digital data that could be analyzed by social scientists.  However, in most cases these data are either ignored or underutilized because of their relative magnitude.

2. Purpose   The purpose of this paper is to further test components of an integrated methodology we call ASSANA - Accelerating Social Science Analysis for a New Age in which computational tools are used to assist in the analysis of large-scale, unstructured, text-based data focused on key questions in international affairs research.  To do so, we used QDA Miner (computer-assisted qualitative data analysis software - CAQDAS - application) and WordStat (a computer aided data mining - CADM - tool) to analyze every remark made by Secretaries Clinton, Rice, and Albright during their tenures in office.  Our two overarching goals are to:   1. Identify the key themes and issues of each Secretary of State during their tenure and to explore any similarities or differences arising between them, and;  2. Better understand the potential of computer- assisted analytical tools, particularly CAQDAS and CADM, for analyzing large-scale, text-based data.

The following sections of this paper review the relevant literature review, describe our conceptual framework, present our research questions, and methodology. We then outline our findings for each research question, and discuss their implications. We conclude with the limitations of this study, and areas for future research. Our goal is to explore the efficacy of ASSANA for analyzing larger, more complex data sets in a way that we hope will encourage other international relations scholars to do the same.

3. Literature Review   Recently, women have held important foreign policy positions within the United States administrations. Since former President Bill Clinton nominated Madeleine Albright in 1997 as the first female Secretary of State, Colin Powell has been the only male to hold the position. President Barack Obama has not only had Hillary Clinton as his Secretary of State, but also nominated Susan Rice as the US Ambassador to the United Nations, as well as nominated two female Supreme Court justices. These women have inserted themselves into a political domain historically dominated by white males throughout history. Madeleine Albright and Secretary Clinton share close personal connections; Albright was Secretary of State during President Clinton?s second term, a job that Hillary Clinton, then first lady, now holds. Condoleezza Rice was nominated by former Republican President George W. Bush, after Colin Powell lost much of his credibility after backing the Iraq War.

As Secretary of State, these women have held a strong influence on the US foreign policy message. A 2009 study by Goldsmith and Horiuchi examined the effects of high level visits on foreign public opinion [6]. Through analysis of secondary survey data based on affect towards the US after September 2011, the authors found that leaders have the ability to frame events for foreign publics within these visits, but the effect of the frame can be short-lived and depends on multiple variables. The one main concept identified by the authors that can influence the effect of the frame is the credibility of the speaker [6].  Secretary Clinton has been considered a highly effective Secretary of State and a credible, high-level official, making her a top candidate to have influence over foreign publics, and the ability to frame an issue favorably for the US [8]. However, when Condoleezza Rice was Secretary of State she inherited the Iraq War blunder which cost her predecessor his credibility which could have caused her less influence. Although these three women were in different administrations, any consistencies or differences between their remarks will lead to a more comprehensive and larger picture of US foreign policy initiatives.

Madeleine Albright reflected on the issue of gender and foreign policy in an article for the SAIS Review titled Women in American Foreign Policy in 2000. She was the first female Secretary of State, and one of the highest ranking females in an American administration throughout its history. In the year 2000 her thoughts were that the questions surrounding females in foreign policy should be ?put     to rest.? Her ability to conduct foreign policy and international relations was not hampered by the subject of her gender. Within her article Secretary Albright states that the plight of women worldwide was also one of her main issues, and would become a part of US foreign policy efforts [1]. Current Secretary Hillary Clinton has also been seen as promoting the rights of women and girls worldwide as well. During our analysis, any keywords relating to women and girls or women?s rights would be consistent with Secretary Albright?s prior statements.

Other assumptions made by scholars when discussing women in foreign policy include that women are more pacifist than men, and their views tend to be more moderate. According to Rhodri Jeffreys-Jones in Changing Differences women tend to have more pacifist views than men, and therefore support peace proposals and historically have called for peace more often than men [7].  Also, according to Dr. Kevin Lasher, one of Secretary Albright?s main goals as Secretary of State was to make Americans believe ?foreign policy was important in their lives,? portraying a focus on the domestic audience, and not just a foreign audience. Lasher also points to the fact that Madeleine Albright and Condoleezza Rice were the best spokesmen for US foreign policy portraying the ability to speak well and be understood as a desirable character for Secretary of State. Lasher states that for Condoleezza Rice, ?US Foreign policy should proceed from the foundation of the national interest, not from the interests of a hypothetical international community? [9]. So while Albright might have focused on the importance of international engagement to domestic audiences, Rice?s focus was on the national interest.

A study on the key themes and issues of these female Secretaries of State will allow us to examine consistencies or differences in US foreign policy trends across a lengthy time period. This study will also help advance the argument for Big Data analytics in the social sciences and lend support to the role of computer-assisted content analysis and data-mining within large datasets.

4. Conceptual Framework  The research domain of public diplomacy is built upon earlier scholarship on ?propaganda? and political persuasion. Harold Lowell defines propaganda as the, ?management of collective attitudes by the manipulation of significant symbols? [10]. In short, propaganda is a tool to influence collective attitudes through communication instruments. From World War II propaganda, to Cold  War spheres of influence, to modern-day facebook and Twitter accounts, governments acknowledge and are actively involved in influencing foreign publics through communication. This process is now currently recognized as public diplomacy within the US government.

Secretaries of State provide a vital function of leadership by informing and influencing foreign publics when giving remarks domestically or internationally. The Secretary is the spokesperson of US foreign policy, and due to her status as a high level official, the major themes and issues from his or her speeches can be seen as an indicator of policy priorities for the United States.  It is important to examine these remarks as a whole in order to better understand the function they play in public diplomacy efforts, as well as to specifically identify what consistencies and differences there are among US administrations. More specifically, we are interested in whether these key messages promoted by the Secretaries of State are consistent or dynamic across time.  Figure 1. below illustrates this basic conceptual framework that will drive our research questions.

Figure 1. Conceptual Framework  5. Research Questions  Based on our prior research and literature review, we ask the following questions of these three datasets:  1) What are the most important keywords and phrases used by each Secretary during their tenure?

2) What are the similarities between the important keywords and phrases of each Secretary of State when compared to each other?

6. Methodology  This study is part of a large, multi-tiered project called Accelerating Social Science Analysis for a New Age (ASSANA).  ASSANA is designed to develop, refine, and disseminate a methodology for social scientists to use computer-intensive software to engage large-N studies.  The complete ASSANA methodology uses four stages, each driven by a different approach to analyzing the large, unstructured, text-based data.  The strengths of each approach will be harnessed to yield greater insights than that approach would yield alone.  We will then compare the findings generated by these four approaches, and determine the differences in time, consistency in findings, and research questions answered.  Figure 2 below represents the modified ASSANA workflow for this study.

Figure 2. Modified ASSANA Workflow    The four approaches used in ASSANA are  described below, from least computationally intensive to most computationally intensive.

1. Traditional: Traditional hand-coding and content analysis where a researcher reads each observation of source material, reflects, makes notes, and develops subject codes along the way.

2. CAQDAS: Computer Assisted Qualitative Data Analysis Software. Enables faster hand-coding and automatic data cleanup.

3. CADM: Computer Assisted Data-Mining and Content Analysis software. Statistical and algorithmic analysis of text to look for patterns.

4. High Performance Data Mining: Content analysis in a High Performance Computing Environment using R/tm.

For this study, we use only two of the four stages  of the ASSANA methodology: (2) CAQDAS and (3) CADM, in order to examine each Secretary?s remarks for key themes and issues that arise and any consistencies or differences between each Secretary.

This paper reports on the qualitative data analysis, including the computer assisted content and keyword analysis.

6.1. Data Collection  The datasets for this paper consist of every remark made by Secretaries Albright, Rice and Clinton during their time in office. It was compiled using an automated web-scraping program called SiteSucker (http://www.sitesucker.us/).  To collect the data, the program was ran to create a project folder going down 6 Levels in order to retrieve the correct text from the US State Department website, http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/index.htm/, as well as the archived sites for Secretary Rice: http://2001- 2009.state.gov/ and Secretary Albright: http://1997- 2001.state.gov/.  As an example, the data collection for Secretary Clinton resulted in a folder structure beginning with ?rm? which lists each year (2009- 2012), and nested folders underneath each year for every month (1-12). The speech files are then contained in html format under each monthly folder.

At the time of this paper submission the Secretary Clinton dataset is currently 2,438 cases. Secretary Rice?s dataset includes 1,766 speeches, and Secretary Albright?s dataset includes 1,335 speeches.

6.2. Computer Assisted Content Analysis  The analysis for this project utilizes two software programs within the Provalis Research Suite, QDA Miner and WordStat (http://www.provalisresearch.com/). This software allows for coding of key variables for the study, and calculation of frequency of words and phrases, and keyword-in-context retrieval.  A more detailed analysis of this data will take place later, but this  ???????? ?????  ?????????????????????  ?? ????????????? ?????????????? !??  ?? ? ?? ?"#?	?$?? %?#??? ?&??'?? ?#??  ?? ? ?? ?"#?	?$?%?#??? ? &??'?? ?#?(#???????)???? ?!???  ???!???? ? ?? ? ?"#?	??*??????  ?? ? ?? ?"#?	?$?)?????? &??'?? ?#??  ?? ? ?? ?"#?	?$?)?????? &??'?? ?#?(#??????)???? ?!???  *?????????? ????????? ???????  ??+???	?? ?  ,+???? ? %?#??? ???  (#????????#?  ,+???? ? )???????(#? ???????#??  ??+???	?? ???("????? ,+???? ?%?#??? ??????  ?""????????	?????  ??+???	?? ???("????? ,+???? ?)????????????""?  ???????	????  ???????????????  ???????????????     initial analysis of the data has proved to be very interesting.

In order to begin the analysis, the data was first converted from html text into individual cases using the Document Conversion Wizard within QDA Miner. The Document Conversion Wizard is run from QDA Miner upon creation of a new project.

One can then choose the HTML files that are to be converted into cases.  Once all the files are chosen, the researcher can then specify parameters for importation of the data in order capture the remarks without extra html code. For our purposes within the Clinton Dataset, the beginning delimiter was specified as ?Subscribe to Updates,? while the end delimiter was ?What?s New.? This allowed the researchers to capture the section of text that was required for analysis as a separate document variable, and limited the amount of cleaning of the data required.

The data analysis techniques used in this paper are described here briefly, but can be explored more deeply by going to the website of the mixed methods software used in the analysis  (http://provalisresearch.com/).  QDA Miner is part of a comprehensive mixed methods data analysis software suite from Provalis Research (http://www.provalisresearch.com/).  This mixed methods suite contains three integrated applications, including: (1) QDA Miner ? a computer assisted qualitative data analysis software (CAQDAS); (2) WordStat ? for content analysis and text mining; and; (3) SimStat for statistical analysis.  In this project, we used QDA Miner, as well as WordStat.

Consistent with our conceptual framework, we see the public remarks of US Secretaries of State as being an explicit attempt to shape public opinion, especially when speaking abroad and to foreign publics.  So as a result, what Secretaries choose to include in their public remarks helps to frame events and signal important areas of focus for US foreign policy.

In order to uncover the key themes contained in each Secretary's speeches, we repeated an approach from an earlier paper examining Secretary Clinton?s speeches only [3]. This approach determines important keywords and phrases as ones used most frequently, as well as that occur in the largest percentage of cases.  For the purposes of this paper, our assumption is that words and phrases that are used frequently are sending important signals to frame a debate about the desired approach to international affairs.  An Exclusion Dictionary was also used to extract extraneous keywords before the analysis occurred.  These extraneous words include most pronouns and other expected spurious  words.  We also set the system parameters to only identify words that were not included in every case (we assumed these words would likely be artifacts of the formatting ? e.g., used in the URL). This frequency analysis yielded very interesting exploratory observations that are reported on below.

Of course, we recognize that there is a broader context within which each word or phrase is used, but our initial set of research questions explored in this paper focused on understanding the broad contours of what was ?important? across a very large dataset of speeches.  Subsequent research will deepen this analysis.

To be more specific, during this research we used the Content Analysis tools within WordStat to identify and visualize those words that were used most frequently occurring within the entire dataset.

Since ?importance? of words and concepts was our overarching concern, we consider a keyword to be ?important? if it is within the top 15 most frequently used keywords in the dataset, and if it occurs within the top 15 keywords by case percentage. However, what we report on in our findings is an integrated listing of words and terms, because the two measurements combined produce a more valid measurement of importance, because it is possible that a keyword that is used frequently may only be contained within one, or a small number of cases.  So a keyword or phrase that occurs with both high frequency and across multiple cases is more likely to be important.

A second tool within WordStat, Phrase Finder, was then used to identify the most frequently occurring phrases within the dataset. We set the system parameters to only report those phrases that contained a minimum of 2 words, a maximum of 5 words, and appear in a minimum of 3 cases. The results were then sorted by frequency and case percentage, similar to the process we used with keywords. The key phrases is an important second step in our analysis, as we are able to see that although Human and Rights might be frequently occurring keywords, we cannot say that the speaker means Human Rights. Phrase Finder adds a second dimension to the analysis of our datasets by allowing researchers to uncover further themes without having to read the entire dataset of speeches. Our findings are detailed below, along with figures from the content analysis.

The computer-assisted methodology is important to use and document in order to learn more about how these techniques help to analyze Big Data. One of the most important aspects of the content analysis tools is they allow the researcher to gather information about the whole dataset, no matter how     large, without having to read the entire set of documents. Sampling the dataset for closer inspection can be done after the computer-assisted content analysis, and then compared to the earlier findings in order to see if they are consistent or differ in their findings.

7. Findings   The first research question (RQ1) of this paper asks, ?What are the most important keywords and phrases used by each Secretary during their tenure as Secretary of State?? To answer the first part of this question we used QDA Miner and WordStat, to perform a keyword frequency by case analysis on each dataset.  As an illustration, Figures 3 and 4 illustrates the keywords used by Secretary Clinton.

Figure 3. Secretary Clinton?s Important  Keywords by Frequency     Figure 4. Secretary Clinton?s Important Keywords by Case Percentage     From the figures above we see that the most important keywords for Clinton are:  ? Economic ? International ? Future  ? Issues ? Peace ? Rights ? Human ? Progress  We followed this procedure for each Secretary of State to identify their important keywords. Figures 5- 8 illustrate the keywords for Rice and Albright.

Figure 5. Secretary Rice?s Important  Keywords by Frequency     Figure 6. Secretary Rice?s Important Keywords by Case Percentage      Figure 7. Secretary Albright?s Important  Keywords by Frequency       Figure 8. Secretary Albright?s Important Keywords by Case Percentage     Tables 1 below summarize the most important keywords used by each Secretary.

Table 1. Important Keywords by Secretary  Secretary Albright  Secretary Rice Secretary Clinton  Peace Iraq Economic International International International  Issues Democracy Future Foreign Talk Issues  Fact Political Peace Issues Rights Democratic Human Progress   To answer the second part of this research  question we used QDA Miner and WordStat, to perform a phrase frequency by case analysis on each dataset. Again as an illustration, Figures 5 and 6 illustrates the key phrases used by Secretary Clinton.

Figure 9. Secretary Clinton/s  Important Phrases by Frequency      Figure 10. Secretary Clinton?s Important Phrases by Case     We followed this procedure for each Secretary of State to identify their important phrases. Figures 11- 14 illustrate the key phases for Rice and Albright.

Figure 11. Secretary Rice?s Important  Phrases by Frequency      Figure 12. Secretary Rice?s Important Phrases by Case Percentage         Figure 13. Secretary Albright?s Important Phrases by Frequency     Figure 14. Secretary Albright?s Important Phrases by Case Percentage   Tables 2 below summarize the most important  phases used by each Secretary.

Table 2. Important Phrases by Secretary   Secretary Albright  Secretary Rice Secretary Clinton  Human Rights Middle East  Human Rights Foreign Policy International  Community International Community  Middle East  North Korea Middle East Saddam Hussein  Human Rights Civil Society  Source for Information  Saddam Hussein  Foreign Policy  International Community  Nuclear Weapons  Climate Change  Mass Destruction  Foreign Policy Rule of Law  Weapons of Mass  Destruction  Soviet Union Economic Growth  North Korea Nuclear Men and  Program Women Rule of Law  European  Union Private Sector  Cold War   European Union  Chairman Arafat  Nuclear Weapons  North Korea   Our second research question (RQ2) asks, ?What are the similarities between the important keywords and phrases of each Secretary of State when compared to each other??  There are a limited number of keyword similarities between all three Secretaries, with International and Issues being the only common keywords. Secretary Rice does not share any unique keywords with either Secretary Albright or Secretary Clinton; however Secretary Albright and Secretary Clinton share the keyword Peace together.

There seems to be more similarities between the Secretaries and the phrases they use. All three Secretaries share Human Rights, Foreign Policy, Middle East, International Community, and North Korea as important keywords. Secretary Albright and Secretary Rice share Saddam Hussein, while Albright and Secretary Clinton share Rule of Law. Secretaries Rice and Clinton also share Nuclear Weapons and European Union as well.

8. Discussion   At first look, it does not seem like the Secretaries of State have been consistent with their messaging since only basic words like International and Issues are common amongst them. However when comparing the phrases we find much more commonality. It seems to show that Human Rights, the Middle East, and North Korea have been common foreign policy goals since at least 1997.

This shows us that although administrations may change, and even political parties, there are some consistent themes in foreign policy. We can say that the Middle East and North Korea are the main important region and state that the United States is consistently concerned with, however the European Union showing up as a common phrase between Secretary Rice and Clinton shows that this is an up and coming important region as well. This also tells us that a large portion of the United States foreign policy is concerned with Human Rights. Since this phrase has been consistent for almost 12 years, it can be said this is an important message from the United States. Another finding is the consistency of     International Community across all Secretaries. This is particularly interesting in Secretary Rice?s case since her previous statements include conducting foreign policy based on the national interest, and not the international community.

Some of the more interesting findings come from what is unique about each Secretaries important keywords and phrases. For instance, Secretary Albright has Mass Destruction and Weapons of Mass Destruction as two of her most important phrases, however these words are not found in Secretary Rice?s important phrases. This could be a conscious effort by Secretary Rice to not use Weapons of Mass Destruction after it was found that Iraq never had them. There is also a commonality between Secretary Albright and Secretary Rice in that they share Saddam Hussein in their important phrases. This supports the fact that the Iraqi nation and its former leader was a key point in foreign policy from as early as 1997 up until 2005, a span of at least eight years.

Secretary Rice also has some of the most politically charged keywords and phrases, more so than Secretaries Albright and Clinton. Three of Secretary Rice?s keywords are Democracy, Political, and Democratic. This could show that she felt a very politically motivated purpose to foreign policy.

Another unique finding from the Rice dataset is that the Soviet Union is one of the important phrases for Secretary Rice. Since the Soviet Union collapsed in 1990, it is interesting this phrase comes up most frequently, and within a high percentage of her speeches. Further keyword in context analysis should lead to more explanations for the appearance of this phrase so frequently. Talk is another unique keyword for Secretary Rice as well, denoting an open mind towards dialogue and communication within her foreign policy messages.

Secretary Clinton separates herself from the previous female Secretaries of State as well. She is the only Secretary with keywords of Future, Progress, and Economic denoting a difference in how she views her position from the others. Future is an interesting keyword; it could note that she sees foreign policy as being a long-term investment, or that the United States should be more forward looking in their foreign policy initiatives. Or she wants to convey to other nations that the US is thinking about the future, and not staying in the present. Progress is also interesting. It is a word that can carry a negative connotation for some people within the United States, such as conservatives.

However, again keeping in mind the Secretary of State is usually speaking to a foreign audience, she could be lauding foreign publics for their progress, or pushing foreign countries to make more progress  democratically, or within the human rights realm.

Finally, she is the only Secretary to use Economic as well. This could be a product of our times, when most of the world is embroiled in economic recessions; it could also note the ever-increasing globalization of the world?s economic ties and its shared ups and downs. Secretary Clinton and Secretary Albright share the keyword Peace with each other, while this is not part of Secretary Rice?s keywords. This could be confirming Jeffreys-Jones?s statement that women tend to be more pacifists, but Rice would not fit within the mold since Peace was not within her keywords. It could have to do with ideological differences between Democrat and Republican administrations, or it could be due to the fact that Secretary Rice was trying to manage public opinion on the two ongoing wars in the Middle East, Afghanistan and Iraq. Mentioning Peace might be seen as hypocritical while being involved in two conflicts. Secretaries Albright and Clinton also share Rule of Law, as a common phrase while Secretary Rice does not. This might be a conscious decision since many foreign populations saw the invasion of Iraq as unlawful, and Secretary Rice did not want to court controversy.

Finally, Secretary Albright?s dataset had the least amount of speeches, but it still provides insight into her unique themes. Fact is the only keyword unique to Secretary Albright, which could possibly denote a pension for speaking the truth, or only imparting what is fact-based and not opinion based on her part.

She does have unique phrases though, including Mass Destruction, Weapons of Mass Destruction, Cold War, and Chairman Arafat. Although currently most people would pair Weapons of Mass Destruction with a Secretary of State from the Bush administration, it was Secretary Albright who used the terminology most often. Secretary Albright?s use of the phrase Chairman Arafat is also telling, it shows that the Palestinian conflict was given much higher priority during the late 1990?s then it has been today.

Palestine or any of its conjugations does not appear on either Secretary Clinton?s or Secretary Rice?s important keywords or phrases. This conflict has given way to Iraq and Afghanistan.

Also interesting from the findings is there are no keywords or phrases relating to women, girls, or women?s rights as a foreign policy initiative.

Although Secretary Albright discussed her wish to make a difference in the lives of women and girls across the developing world within her article in the SAIS Review, our findings are not consistent. None of the female secretaries had an important keyword or phrase relating to females leading us to believe that while women and girls might be an important     and emotional topic, it is not a top priority for US foreign policy.

8. Limitations   This paper has multiple limitations on its research. The datasets included are only for the three most recent female Secretaries of State and cannot be used to generalize an overall US foreign policy message. Also, there is a gap between the three female Secretaries filled by Secretary of State Colin Powell. For purposes of this paper, and in order to keep gender consistent across all datasets, Secretary Powell was not included.

Another limitation is the lack of keyword in context analysis. Although these keywords and phrases are important due to their number of times used, as well as their appearance in a large percentage of cases, their context may differ. Further analysis of these important keywords and phrases will lead to deeper insights and more complex nuances.

9. Future Research   This study is an initial analysis on three separate datasets. Further contextual analysis can lead to deeper understandings of the frequently occurring keywords and phrases that are predominant from each Secretary. Keyword in context analysis will provide further unpacking and clearer definitions of what each keyword or phrase means when the Secretary uses it. A prior crosstabs analysis on the Secretary Clinton dataset provided further clues to the evolution of keywords and phrases over time and geography. This analysis will be completed on Secretary Rice and Secretary Albright?s datasets as well. Future analysis will include Secretary Powell?s tenure from 2001-2005 in order to see if his themes are consistent with those before and after his term.

Future research will also include the final two approaches from the ASSANA Methodology; traditional hand coding as well as the High Performance Computing Environment. Incorporating these other approaches will allow for a full review of the differences in findings and time for analysis between each approach.

10. References   List and number all bibliographical references in 9-point Times, single-spaced, at the end of your paper.  When referenced in the text, enclose the citation number in square brackets, for example [1].

Where appropriate, include the name(s) of editors of referenced books.

[1] M. K. Albright, ?Women in American Foreign Policy?, SAIS Review, 2000, pp.65-70.

[2] F. Berman and H.E. Brady, Workshop on Cyberinfrastructure for the Social and Behavioral Sciences: Final Report, 2005.

[3] D. Cogburn and A. Wozniak, ?Accelerating Social Science Analysis for a New Age: Moving from Traditional to Computational Methods for Analyzing Large Scale Text- Based Data in International Affairs.? ISA 2012.

[4] S.R. Corman, A. Trethewey, and B. Goodall, ?A 21st Century Model for Communication in the Global War of Ideas: From Simplistic Influence to Pragmatic Complexity?, Consortium for Strat Coms, August 3, 2007.

[5] Department Mission Statement, Bureau of Resource Management, Dept. of State http://tinyurl.com/statedata November 2011.

[6] B. E. Goldsmith and Y. Horiuchi, ?Spinning the Globe?

U.S. Public Diplomacy and Global Foreign Opinion,? Journal of Politics. Vol. 71, No. 3, July 2009: 863-875.

[7] R. Jefferys-Jones, ?Changing Differences: Women and the Shaping of American Foreign Policy.? Rutgers University Press, 1997.

[8] H. LaFranchi, ?Hillary Clinton, Obama?s road warrior, snags ?most traveled? title.? The Christian Science Monitor, February 7, 2011.

[9] K. J. Lasher, ?The Impact of Gender on Foreign Policy Making: Madeleine Albright and Condoleezza Rice.? American Political Science Association, September 2005.

[10] H. Lasswell, ?The theory of political propaganda,? American Political Science Review, v.21, 1927, pp. 627-31.

[11] K.M. Lord and M. Lynch, America?s Extended Hand: Assessing the Obama Administration's Global Engagement Strategy, 2010.

[12] F. McCormick, ?What does Secretary of State Mean??, The North American Review, 1911, pp. 206-212.

[13] J. Nye, Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics, Public Affairs, 2005.

[14]  Hey, T. and Trefethen, A. (2003) The Data Deluge: An e-Science Perspective, in Grid Computing: Making the Global Infrastructure a Reality (eds F. Berman, G. Fox and T. Hey), John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK.

[15] G. Miner; J. Elder; T. Hill; R. Nisbet; D. Delen; A Fast. Practical Text Mining and Statistical Analysis of Non- structured Text Data, (2012).

