

Abstract?The Hyperspectral Microwave Atmospheric Sounder (HyMAS) is being developed at Lincoln Laboratories and accommodated by the Goddard Space Flight Center for a flight opportunity on a NASA research aircraft. The term ?hyperspectral microwave? is used to indicate an all-weather sounding that performs equivalent to hyperspectral infrared sounders in clear air with vertical resolution of approximately 1 km. Deploying the HyMAS equipped scanhead with the existing Conical Scanning Microwave Imaging Radiometer (CoSMIR) shortens the path to a flight demonstration.

Hyperspectral microwave is achieved through the use of independent RF antennas that sample the volume of the Earth?s atmosphere through various levels of frequencies, thereby producing a set of dense, spaced vertical weighting functions. The simulations proposed for HyMAS 118/183-GHz system should yield surface precipitation rate and water path retrievals for small hail, soft hail, or snow pellets, snow, rainwater, etc. with accuracies comparable to those of the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder. Further improvements in retrieval methodology (for example, polarization exploitation) are expected.

The CoSMIR instrument is a packaging concept re-used on HyMAS to ease the integration features of the scanhead. The HyMAS scanhead will include an ultra-compact Intermediate Frequency Processor (IFP) module that is mounted inside the door to improve thermal management. The IFP is fabricated with materials made of Low-Temperature Co-fired Ceramic (LTCC) technology integrated with detectors, amplifiers, A/D conversion and data aggregation. The IFP will put out 52 channels of 16 bit data comprised of 4 ? 9 channel data streams for temperature profiles and 2-8 channel streams for water vapor.

With the limited volume of the existing CoSMIR scanhead and new HyMAS front end components, the HyMAS team at Goddard began preliminary layout work inside the new drum.

Importing and re-using models of the shell, the scan head computer, and the slip rings developed for CoSMIR was the starting point. The next step was to modify the antenna faceplate to accommodate the dimensions of the three dual polarization Gaussian Optics Antenna (GOA) assemblies. Two mechanical concepts for the core technology, the hyperspectral IFP, were captured in a design tradeoff. Connector models considered minimum bend radii for the IFP analog connectors.

Hyperspectral imaging is accomplished by strategically using a short wavelength intermediate frequency of 18-29 GHz, and thus reducing the size of components in the connection of the  front end to the IFP. The SMK (2.92mm) Series connector will lay near the hinge line to minimize its? flexing.

The digital output of the IFP will use a Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) that must be accommodated by the scan head computer. To make that computer more reliable, maintainable, and forward compatible with the 52 HyMAS channels, a testbed of the scan head, calibration, and archive computers and the PIC24 microprocessor that resides on the IFP is in development. The computers will be programmed using a new framework application called Interoperable Remote Component (IRC). This software allows flexibility to program computers that communicate with each other and can adapt easily to the emerging HyMAS requirements for data format, algorithms, and graphical user interface (GUI). It is expected that the CoSMIR instrument will cut over to the IRC after it is adapted on an updated CoSMIR testbed.

