

Abstract? A multi-tier architecture consists of numerous craft as part of the system, orbital, aerial, and surface tiers.  Each tier is able to collect progressively greater levels of information.  Generally, craft from lower-level tiers are deployed to a target of interest based on its identification by a higher-level craft.  While the architecture promotes significant amounts of science being performed in parallel, this may overwhelm the computational and transmission capabilities of higher-tier craft and links (particularly the deep space link back to Earth).  Because of this, a new paradigm in in-situ data processing is required.

Model-based transmission reduction (MBTR) is such a paradigm.  Under MBTR, each node (whether a single spacecraft in orbit of the Earth or another planet or a member of a multi-tier network) is given an a priori model of the phenomenon that it is assigned to study.  It performs activities to validate this model.  If the model is found to be erroneous, corrective changes are identified, assessed to ensure their significance for being passed on, and prioritized for transmission.  A limited amount of verification data is sent with each MBTR assertion message to allow those that might rely on the data to validate the correct operation of the spacecraft and MBTR engine onboard.

Integrating MBTR with a multi-tier framework creates an MBTR hierarchy.  Higher levels of the MBTR hierarchy task lower levels with data collection and assessment tasks that are required to validate or correct elements of its model.  A model of the expected conditions is sent to the lower level craft; which then engages its own MBTR engine to validate or correct the model.  This may include tasking a yet lower level of craft to perform activities.  When the MBTR engine at a given level receives all of its component data (whether directly collected or from delegation), it randomly chooses some to validate (by re- processing the validation data), performs analysis and sends its own results (validation and/or changes of model elements and supporting validation data) to its upstream node.  This constrains data transmission to only significant (either because it includes a change or is validation data critical for assessing overall performance) information and reduces the processing requirements (by not having to process insignificant data) at higher-level nodes.

This paper presents a framework for multi-tier MBTR and two demonstration mission concepts: an Earth sensornet and a mission to Mars.  These multi-tier MBTR concepts are compared to a traditional mission approach.

