Mining Association Rules Uses Fuzzy Weighted FP-Growth

Abstract?In data mining, the association rules are used to search for the relations of items of the transactions database. Following the data collected and stored, it can find values through association rules, and assist manager to proceed marketing strategies and plan market framework. In this paper, we attempt to use fuzzy partition method and decide membership function of quantitative values of each transaction item. Also, from managers we can reflect the importance of items as linguistic terms, which are transformed as fuzzy sets of weights. Next, fuzzy weighted frequent pattern growth is used to complete the process of data mining. The method above is expected to improve Apriori algorithm for its better efficiency of the whole association rules. An example is given to clearly illustrate the proposed approach. Finally, the experiment results are made to show the performance of the proposed methods.

Keywords?Association rule, Fuzzy partition method, FP-growth, Apriori algorithm.



I. INTRODUCTION  DATA mining is a methodology for the extraction ofnew knowledge from data. This knowledge many relate to problems that we want to solve [12]. Thus, data mining can ease the knowledge acquisition bottleneck in building prototype systems [7], [9]. If data mining extraction can effectively be applied on all varieties of analysis, it will assist the process of decision-making in business such as marketing promotions, inventory management and customer relationship management.

In common transactions, an association rule is an impli-  cation expression of the form X ?? Y , where X and Y are disjoint itemsets, i.e., X ? Y = ? [13]. The strength of an association rule can be measured in terms of its support and confidence. The purpose is to search for the relation existing among items of database. Thus, association rules can assist decision makers to scoop out the possible items that are likely to be purchased by consumers. Meanwhile, it facilitates planning marketing strategies [4].

The well-known Apriori algorithm [3], applies two-phases  approach to look for the association rules from database. In the approach of Apriori algorithm, each item is treated as Boolean variable, and support and confidence [7] are to respectively evaluate the accessibility and reliability of association rules.

By these, we can determine the quantity of association rules.

Chien-Hua Wang is with the Department of Information Manage- ment, Yuan Ze University, Taoyuan, 32003, Taiwan, ROC (e-mail: thuck@saturn.yzu.edu.tw).

Sheng-Hsing Liu is with the Department of Information Manage-  ment, Yuan Ze University, Taoyuan, 32003, Taiwan, ROC (e-mail: cindyliu@saturn.yzu.edu.tw).

Chin-Tzong Pang is with the Department of Information Manage-  ment, Yuan Ze University, Taoyuan, 32003, Taiwan, ROC (e-mail: imct- pang@saturn.yzu.edu.tw).

nevertheless, when processing huge database, Apriori algo- rithm can not effectively handle the matter.

Next, regarding to the matter of decision making, it takes the  consideration of user?s perception and cognitive uncertainty of subjective decisions. Zadeh proposed fuzzy theory [15] in 1965 that deals with cognitive uncertainty of vagueness and ambiguity. Due to linguistic variables and linguistic value [16], [17], [18] were described as fuzzy concepts to correspond with the possible cognition of a decision maker subjectively. It helps proceed analysis of decisions. Thus, fuzzy data mining has recently become an important topic to delve into.

Moreover, most conventional data-mining algorithms set  the minimum support and minimum confidence at numerical values. Linguistic minimum support and minimum confidence value are more natural and understandable. In this paper, we use Fuzzy Weighted FP-growth to deal with problems of quantitative transactions such as the ones with linguistic minimum support and minimum confidence value. Due to FP- growth mines association rules from 1-itemset, so we apply the method which was proposed by Hong et al. in [8] to mine 1-itemset. And utilize the property of FP-growth to mine. Also, items may have different importance, which is evaluated by managers or experts, such as linguistic terms.

And we transform the importance of items, quantitative value of transactions, minimum supports and minimum confidences into fuzzy set, and filter weighted large items out by fuzzy operations. Finally, we used FP-growth algorithm to mine fuzzy weighted association rules with linguistic supports and confidences.

This paper is organized as follows. Data mining and fuzzy  partition method in Section 2. Using the notation and the proposed method are presented in Section 3. An example to illustrate the proposed mining algorithm is given in Section 4.

This is ended with conclusions in Section 5.



II. RELATED WORKS A. Data Mining The goal of data mining is the exploration and analysis  in order to discover meaningful patterns [4]. Among these technologies of data mining, Agrawal and Srikant proposed Apriori algorithm to find association rules in transaction data [1], [2], [3]. However, the algorithm may suffer two nontrivial costs which involve generating a huge number of candidate sets and repeatedly scanning the database and checking a large set of candidates by pattern matching.

Without candidate generation method proposed FP-growth  [6] by Han, Pei and Yin, which adopt a divide-and-conquer  SCIS-ISIS 2012, Kobe, Japan, November 20-24, 2012     strategy which compress the database representing frequent items into frequent-pattern tree (FP-tree). But it retains the itemset information, and then divides such a compressed database into a set of conditional database, each associated with one frequent item, and mine each such database sepa- rately.

In practice, the FP-growth method transforms the problem  of finding long frequent patterns to looking for shorter ones recursively and then concatenating the suffix. It uses the least frequent items as the suffix, offering good selectivity. The method substantially reduces searching costs. When the data is large, it is sometimes unrealistic to construct a main memory- based FP-tree. An interesting alternative is to first partition the database into a set of projected database, and then construct an FP-tree and mine it in each projected database.

A study on the performance of the FP-growth method shows  that it is efficient and scalable for mining both long and short frequent patterns, which is about an order of magnitude faster than that of the Apriori algorithm [5], [6], [13]. Thus, this paper combines FP-growth and fuzzy partition method to mine fuzzy association rules.

B. Fuzzy partition method Fuzzy sets were originally proposed by Zadeh [15], who  also proposed the concept of linguistic variables [16], [17], [18]. A linguistic variable is a variable whose values are linguistic words or sentences in a natural language [14].

For example, the values or linguistic values of the linguistic variable ?amounts of oranges that were purchased? may be ?close to 5 pounds?. In this paper, triangular membership func- tions are used for the linguistic terms defined in quantitative attributes.

Since the comprehensibility of fuzzy rules by human users  is a criterion in designing a fuzzy rule-based systems [11], fuzzy association rules with linguistic interpretations must be taken into account. To cope with problem, it is considered that quantitative attribute, which is used to describe each transaction data, as linguistic variables. Next, each linguistic variable can be partitioned by its linguistic values represented by fuzzy numbers with triangular membership functions. Thus, simple fuzzy grids in feature space resulting from the fuzzy partition is obtained.

A quantitative attribute xk can be divided into K partitions.

In addition,AKxk,li stands for a candidate 1-dim fuzzy grid, and ?Kxk,li(x) can be defined as follows:  ?Kxk,li(x) = max{1? |x? a K li |/bK , 0},  where aKli = mi + (ma ? mi)(i ? 1)/(K ? 1), b K =  (ma ?mi)/(K ? 1), and ma and mi are the maximum and minimum values of the domain interval of xk, li is the ith linguistic value of K linguistic values defined in linguistic variable xk, respectively. Furthermore, ?Kxk,li(x) indicates the certain of degree of x belonging to AKxk,li(x), where 0 and 1 indicate absolute certainty that x belongs to AKxk,li(x), respectively. And decision makers may subjectively determine the partition numbers for individual quantitative attributes. It should be noted that ?Kxk,li(x) = 1 for K = 1 [10].



III. NOTATION AND ALGORITHM A. Notation  n : the number of transaction database; m : the number of items; h : the number of managers; f : the number of membership functions for ite-  m importance; tp : pth transaction data, where 1 ? p ? n; K : the number of linguistic values in each qua-  ntitative item of transaction database, where K ? 2;  xk : kth item, where 1 ? k ? m; AKxk,li : ith linguistic value of K linguistic values d-  efined in linguistic variable xk,where 1 ? k ? m, 1 ? i ? K;  ?Kxk,li(?) : the membership function of A K xk,li  ;  qxktp : the quantitative value of the item xk for pth transaction data;  countKxk,li : the summation of the values ? K xk,li  (qxktp ) for p = 1, 2, ? ? ?n;  countmaxxk : the maximum of the values of count K xk,li  for i = 1, 2, ? ? ?K; Gmaxxk : the fuzzy grid of xk with count  max xk  ;  Wkg : the transformed fuzzy weight for the import- tance of item xk evaluated by the gth mana- ger, 1 ? g ? h;  W avek : the fuzzy average weight for the importance of item xk;  ? : the predefined linguistic minimum support value;  ? : the predefined linguistic minimum confiden- ce value;  Ir : rth membership function of item importance 1 ? r ? f ;  Iave : the average weight of all possible linguistic terms of item importance;  wsupk : the fuzzy weighted support of item xk; wconfR : the fuzzy weighted confidence of rule R; minsup : transforming fuzzy set from the linguistic m-  inimum support value ?; minsup : the fuzzy weighted set of minimum support;  minconf : transforming fuzzy set from the linguistic m- inimum confidence value ?  wminconf : the fuzzy weighted set of minimum confide- nces.

SCIS-ISIS 2012, Kobe, Japan, November 20-24, 2012     B. The fuzzy weighted FP-growth algorithm INPUT: A body of n training data; a set of m items with their importance evaluated by h manager; four sets of membership functions respectively for item quantities, item importance minimum support and minimum confidence; a predefined linguistic minimum support value ? and a predefined linguistic minimum confidence value ?.

OUTPUT: A set of weighted fuzzy association rules.

STEP 1: Transform each linguistic term of importance for item xk, which is evaluated by the gth manager into a fuzzy set Wkg of weights, using the given membership functions of item importance.

STEP 2: Calculate the fuzzy average weighted W avek of each  item xk by fuzzy addition: W avek =  h ?  h?  g=1  Wkg .

STEP 3: Using fuzzy partition method to divide the quantita- tive item AKxk,li for each item xk in each transaction datum tp into a fuzzy set, AKxk,li represented as:  ( ?Kxk,l1(q  xk tp )  AKxk,l1 +  ?Kxk,l2(q xk tp )  AKxk,l2 + ? ? ?+  ?Kxk,lK (q xk tp )  AKxk,lK )  using the given membership functions ?Kxk,li(?), where A K xk,li  is the ith fuzzy grid of K linguistic values defined in linguistic variable xk of tpth transaction data.

STEP 4: Calculate the scalar cardinality of fuzzy grid AKxk,li for each item xk in the training data:  countKxk,li = n?  p=1  ?Kxk,li(q xk tp ).

STEP 5: Find countmaxxk . And let G max xk  be the grid with countmaxxk for item xk, where count  max xk  = max 1?i?K  countKxk,li .

STEP 6: Transform the given linguistic minimum support value ? into a fuzzy set (minsup) of minimum supports, using the membership function for minimum supports.

STEP 7: Calculate the fuzzy weighted set of the given minimum support value as below and use COA method to perform defuzzification.

wminsup = minsup ? (the gravity of Iave), where  Iave =  f ?  f?  r=1  Ir .

STEP 8: This step begins to proceed with FP-growth. During the first scan training data and check Gmaxxk which corresponds with ? value. Next, establish a descending data table which Header Table. According to the Header Table, rebuild new fuzzy set table which is sorted by original fuzzy sets table.

STEP 9: Initially set the root node of the fuzzy FP-tree as {ROOT}, and then the second scanning training data, which builds the membership function FP-tree is accorded the new fuzzy sets table, and link the node of fuzzy grids which the  tree.

STEP 10: Mine the items of Header Table ascendingly.

Then set up the conditional pattern base of each node in a membership function FP-tree. Next, build conditional membership function FP-tree.

STEP 11: Repeatedly mine conditional membership function FP-tree and gradually increase frequency pattern base. If the conditional membership function FP-tree contains one path, all patterns can be listed.

STEP 12: Do the following substeps for each newly frequent patterns s : (s1, s2, . . . , sz+1).

(a) Find the weighted fuzzy set (W?ps) of s in each tran- saction data tp as :  W?ps = min 1?k?n  (?psk ?Wsk)  where ?psk is the membership function of grid sk in tp and Wsk is the average fuzzy weight for sk.

(b) Calculate the fuzzy weighted support (wsups) of ite-  mset s as : wsups = n?  k=1  W?ps/n  (c) Check whether the weighted support (wsups) of fre- quent patterns s is greater than or equal to the fuzzy weighted minimum support (wminsup) by fuzzy ra- nking. If wsups is greater than or equal to wminsup , then they form frequent patterns.

STEP 13: Transform the given linguistic minimum confidence value ? into a fuzzy set (minconf ) to minimum confidences, using the given membership function for minimum confidences.

STEP 14: Calculate the fuzzy weighted set of the given minimum confidence value below and use COA method to perform defuzzification: wminconf = minconf ? (the gravity of Iave), where Iave is the same as that calculated in STEP 7.

STEP 15: Construct the association rules from membership function FP-tree each frequent pattern d-itemset s with items (s1, s2, . . . , sd), d ? 2 using the following substeps:  (a) List all possible frequent patterns as follows : s1 ? . . . sk?1 ? sk+1 ? . . . ? sd, k = 1 to d.

(b) Calculate the fuzzy weighted confidence value wconfR of each possible fuzzy association rule R as :  wconfR = counts  counts?sk ?Ws  where counts = n?  p=1  ( d  min g=1  ?psg ) and Ws = d  min p=1  W avesp .

SCIS-ISIS 2012, Kobe, Japan, November 20-24, 2012     (c) Check whether the fuzzy weighted confidence wconfR of fuzzy association rule R is greater than or equal to the fuzzy weighted minimum confidence wminconf by fuzzy ranking. If wconfR is greater than or equal to wminconf, put rule R in the inter- esting rule set.



IV. AN EXAMPLE In this section, an example is given to illustrate the proposed  fuzzy weighted FP-growth algorithm. This is a simple example to show how the proposed algorithm can be used to generate weighted fuzzy association rules from a set of quantitative transactions. The data set includes five quantitative transac- tions, as show in TABLE I.

TABLE I: The data set used in this example.

TID ITEMS 1 (A,3), (B,8), (D,4), (E,11) 2 (B,7), (C,2), (D,3) 3 (A,2), (D,7), (E,6) 4 (A,3), (B,2), (E,5) 5 (B,5), (C,3), (D,8)  Each transaction is composed of a transaction identifier and items purchased. There are five items, A, B, C, D and E to be purchased. Each item is represented by a tuple (item name, item amount). For instance, the first transaction consists of three units of A, eight units of B, four units of D and eleven units of E.

Also assume that the membership functions for item quan-  tities are the same for all the items shown in Fig. 1. In this example, the amounts are divided into three fuzzy grids (Low,Middle and High). Their membership functions are produced for each item amount according to the predefined membership functions. Furthermore, the importance of the items is evaluated by four managers as shown in TABLE II.

Fig. 1: The membership function for item quantities in the example.

Similarly, assume the membership functions for item im- portance are given in Fig. 2.

For the transaction data given in TABLE I, the proposed  fuzzy data mining algorithm proceed as follows.

STEP 1: The linguistic terms for item importance given in TABLE II are transformed into fuzzy sets by the membership functions in Fig. 2. For instance, item A is evaluated to  TABLE II: The item importance evaluated by four managers.

MANAGER MANAGER 1 MANAGER 2  ITEM A Ordinary Very Unimportant B Very Important Important C Ordinary Unimportant D Ordinary Important E Very Important Ordinary  MANAGER MANAGER 3 MANAGER 4  ITEM A Ordinary Unimportant B Ordinary Ordinary C Unimportant Ordinary D Ordinary Ordinary E Important Important  Fig. 2: The membership function for item importance used in the example.

?importance? by Manager 1, and can be transformed as a triangular fuzzy set (0.25, 0.5, 0.75) of weights.

STEP 2: The average weight of each item is calculated by fuzzy addition. The average fuzzy weights of all the items are calculated, with results shown in TABLE III.

TABLE III: The average fuzzy weights of all the items.

Item Average fuzzy weight A (0.125, 0.313, 0.563) B (0.438, 0.688, 0.875) C (0.125, 0.375, 0.625) D (0.313, 0.563, 0.813) E (0.500, 0.750, 0.938)  STEP 3: The quantitative values of the items in transaction are represented by fuzzy sets. The results are shown in TABLE IV.

STEP 4: The scalar cardinality of each fuzzy grid in the transactions is calculated as the count value. Take the fuzzy grid A.Low as an example. Its scalar cardinality = (0.667 + 0 + 0.833 + 0.667 + 0) = 2.167. The step is repeated for the other grids.

STEP 5: The fuzzy grid with the highest count among the three possible grids for each item is found. Taken item B as an example. Its count is 1.167 for ?Low?, 2.667 for ?Middle? and 0.167 for ?High?. Since the count for ?Middle? is the highest among the three counts, the grid ?Middle? is used to represent the item B in later building membership function FP- tree process. This step is repeated for the other items. Thus, ?Low? is chosen for A, ?Low? is chosen for C, ?Middle? is  SCIS-ISIS 2012, Kobe, Japan, November 20-24, 2012     TABLE IV: The fuzzy sets transformed from the data set in TABLE I.

TID Fuzzy Sets  1 ( 0.667 A.Low  + 0.333 A.Middle  ), ( 0.833 B.Middle  + 0.167 B.High  ),  ( 0.5 D.Low  + 0.5 D.Middle  )( 0.333 E.Middle  + 0.667 E.High  )  2 ( 1.0 B.Middle  ), ( 0.833 C.Low  + 0.167 C.Middle  ),  ( 0.667 D.Low  + 0.333 D.Middle  )  3 ( 0.833 A.Low  + 0.167 A.Middle  ), ( 1.0 D.Middle  ),  ( 0.167 E.Low  + 0.833 E.Middle  )  4 ( 0.667 A.Low  + 0.333 A.Middle  ), ( 0.833 B.Low  + 0.167 B.Middle  ),  ( 0.333 E.Low  + 0.667 E.Middle  )  5 ( 0.333 B.Low  + 0.667 B.Middle  ), ( 0.667 C.Low  + 0.333 C.Middle  ),  ( 0.833 D.Middle  + 0.167 D.High  )  chosen for D and ?Middle? is chosen for E.

STEP 6: The given linguistic minimum support value is transformed into a fuzzy set of minimum supports. Assume the membership functions for minimum supports are given in Fig. 3, which are the same as those in Fig. 2.

Fig. 3: The membership functions of minimum supports.

Also assume the given linguistic minimum support value is ?High?. It is transformed into a fuzzy set of minimum supports, (0.5, 0.75, 1), according to the given membership functions in Fig. 3.

STEP 7: The fuzzy average weight of all possible linguistic terms of importance in Fig. 3 is calculated as Iave =[(0, 0, 0.25) + (0, 0.25, 0.5) + (0.25, 0.5, 0.75) + (0.5, 0.75, 1) + (0.75, 1, 1)] / 5 = (0.3, 0.5, 0.7). The gravity of Iavg is then (0.3 + 0.5 + 0.7) / 3, which is 0.5. The fuzzy weighted set of minimum supports for ?High? is then (0.5, 0.75, 0.1) ? 0.5, which is (0.25, 0.375, 0.5). Next, defuzzification is calculated and the value is 0.375.

STEP 8: This step begins to proceed with FP-growth. During the first scan data set and checking fuzzy grids is greater than or equal to 0.375. Next, establish a descending data table which Header Table, as shown in TABLE V. And, rebuild new fuzzy set table which is sorted by original fuzzy sets table.

STEP 9: Initially set the root node of the fuzzy FP-tree as {ROOT} and the second scanning data set, which builds the membership function FP-tree is accorded the new fuzzy sets table, and link the node of fuzzy grids with the tree.

STEP 10: Mine the patterns of Header Table ascendingly.

And set up the conditional pattern base of each node in a membership function FP-tree. Next conditional membership function FP-tree.

TABLE V: Header Table.

1-dim fuzzy grid Count B.Middle 2.667 D.Middle 2.667 A.Low 2.167  E.Middle 1.833 C.Low 1.5  STEP 11: Repeatedly mine conditional membership FP-tree and gradually increase frequency pattern base. If one single path is included in conditional membership function FP-tree, all patterns can be listed, and the results are shown in TABLE VI.

TABLE VI: Mining frequent patterns by the FP-tree.

1-dim fuzzy grid Frequent patterns generated  C.Low  {(D.Middle), (C.Low)};  {(B.Middle), (C.Low)};  {(B.Middle), (D.Middle), (C.Low).

E.Middle  {(A.Low), (E.Middle)};  {(D.Middle), (E.Middle)};  {(B.Middle), (E.Middle)};  {(D.Middle), (A.Low), (E.Middle);  {(B.Middle), (A.Low), (E,Middle);  {(B.Middle), (D.Middle), (E.Middle)  {(B.Middle), (D.Middle), (A.Low), (E.Middle).

A.Low  {(D.Middle), (A.Low)};  {(B.Middle), (A.Low)};  {(B.Middle), (D.Middle), (A.Low).

D.Middle {(B.Middle), (D.Middle)}.

STEP 12: The following substeps for each newly frequent pattern.

(a) The generant frequent patterns are firstly calculated.

Here, we used intersection for the minimum operator. Take (A.Low,E.Middle) as an example. The membership func- tion of A.Low and E.Middle for t1 are 0.667 and 0.333, respectively. Next, the average fuzzy weight of item A is (0.125, 0.313, 0.563) and the average fuzzy weight of item E is (0.5, 0.750, 0.938) from step 2. The weighted fuzzy set for (A.Low,E.Middle) in t1 is calculated as: min((0.6667) * (0.125, 0.313, 0.563), 0.333 * (0.5, 0.750, 0.938)) = min ((0.083, 0.208, 0.375), (0.167, 0.250, 0.312)) = (0.083, 0.208, 0.312).

(b) The fuzzy weighted support of each frequent pattern  is calculated. Take (A.Low,E.Middle) as an example. The fuzzy weighted count of (A.Low,E.Middle) is (0.271, 0.677, 1.156) and the total number of transaction data is 5. Its fuzzy weighted support is (0.271, 0.677, 1.156) / 5, which is (0.054, 0.135, 0.231). The step is repeated for the other candidate frequent pattern and used COA method to calculate fuzzy weighted support.

(c) Finally, the fuzz weighted support of each can-  didate frequent pattern is compared with that of the fuzzy weighted minimum support by fuzzy ranking. In the example, (A.Low,E.Middle), (D.Middle, E.Middle)  SCIS-ISIS 2012, Kobe, Japan, November 20-24, 2012     and (B.Middle,D.Middle) are found to be frequent fuzzy weighted minimum support. Therefore, they are frequent pat- terns.

STEP 13: The given linguistic minimum confidence value is transformed into a fuzzy set of minimum confidence. Assume the membership functions for minimum confidence values are which are similar to those in Fig. 3. Also, assume the given linguistic minimum confidence value is ?High?, it is transformed into a fuzzy set of minimum confidences, (0.5, 0.75, 1.0), according to the given membership function in Fig.

3.

STEP 14: The fuzzy average weight of all possible linguistic terms of importance is the same as that found in step 7.

Its gravity is thus 0.5. The fuzzy weighted set of minimum confidence for ?High? is then (0.5, 0.75, 1.0) ? 0.5, which is (0.25, 0.375, 0.5). STEP 15: Using the substeps to mine fuzzy rules as below.

(a) List all possible frequent patterns.

If A.Low then E.Middle If E.Middle then A.Low If D.Middle then E.Middle If E.Middle then D.Middle If B.Middle then D.Middle If D.Middle then B.Middle  (b) The weighted confidence values for the above possible fuzzy association rules are calculated. Take the first possible fuzzy association rules as an example. The fuzzy count of A.Low is 2.167 The fuzzy count of A.Low ? E.Middle is 1.833. The minimum average weight of (A.Low,E.Middle) is (0.125, 0.313, 0.563). The weighted confidence value for the association rule ?If A.Low then E.Middle? is:  1.833  2.167 ? (0.125, 0.313, 0.563) = (0.106, 0.264, 0.476).

The weighted confidence values for the other fuzzy associ- ation rules can be similarly calculated.

(c) The weighted confidence of each fuzzy association rule  is compared with the fuzzy weighted minimum confidence by fuzzy ranking. Assume the gravity ranking approach is adopted in this example. Take the association rule ?If A.Low the E.Middle? as an example. The average height of the weighted confidence for this association rule is (0.106, 0.264, 0.476) / 3, which is 0.282. The average height of the fuzzy weighted minimum confidence for ?High? is (0.25, 0.375, 0.5) / 3, which is 0.375. Since 0.375 > 0.282, the association rule ?If A.Low the E.Middle? is not in the interesting rule set.

In the example, the following three rules are put in the  testing rule set: 1. If a middle number of E is bought then a Low number  of A is bought, with a high support and a high confidence;  2. If a middle number of E is bought then a middle number of E is bought, with a high support and a high confidence;  3. If a middle number of B is bought then a middle number of D is bought, with a high support and a high confidence.

The three rules above are thus output as meta-knowledge concerning the given weighted transactions.



V. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we combine the concept of fuzzy weight and  use FP-growth to propose FWFP-growth algorithm mining all fuzzy association rules with linguistic supports and con- fidences. Furthermore, we assume all membership functions were static. In fact, setting concept of membership function may be different for everyone, whether item quantity or impor- tance et. In the future, we will attempt to design membership function and combine fuzzy data mining model dealing with various problem domains.

Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by the National Science  Council of the Republic of China.

