A Comprehensive Performance Analysis of Energy  Efficient Routing Protocols in different traffic

Abstract?In Mobile Ad hoc network, nodes are connected through a wireless are formed a fast changed network structure and it is a infrastructure less, can be set up anytime, anywhere.

The nodes are mobile based on battery operated and nodes have limited battery resources. Routing protocol selection in Mobile Ad Hoc Network is a big challenge, because of its regular topology changes and routing overhead. In Manet, energy efficient protocols are used to forward data packets one to another without much packet loss. Energy reactive routing protocol is effective routing protocol in Manet and nodes are requires energy efficient routing protocols to bound the power consumption, and lengthen the battery life to improve the life time of the network. The main objective of this paper is to enhance the network performance of different routing protocols, when frequent link failure in network due to mobility of the nodes in the network. The performance analysis and simulation are carried out to evaluate network performance using Network Simulator (NS-2), based on the different load, node mobility, delay, packet sending rate and energy consumption. It has been verified through various simulations, which represent a wide range of network conditions that energy AODV deliver the better performance as that of the modern protocols DSDV, TORA, DSDV, DSR and AODV in terms of energy efficiency but it is observed that DSR needs significantly smaller energy overheads than other protocols.

Keywords? AODV, DSR, DSDV, TORA, MANET, Energy efficient routing .



I. INTRODUCTION A Network is a set of interconnected nodes. A mobile ad-hoc network [1, 2] is a network where there is no fixed infrastructure. All wireless facilitated devices within the range of each other can discover and communicate in a point-to- point approach without linking central access points [3].

Mobile ad networks and devices are becoming increasingly popular because they provide user access to information and communication anytime and anywhere. There is no need for router individually as each node can work as host as well as router accordingly. Each node or mobile device is prepared with a transmitter and receiver. The topology of mobile ad-hoc  network is dynamic and depends upon the movement of the nodes accordingly it can change rapidly and unexpectedly. In exacting, a very large number of recent studies focused on Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs) [1, 4]. The performance analysis of a mobile ad-hoc network depends on the routing scheme employed, and the conventional routing protocols do not work efficiently in a MANET.

In MANET Energy efficient routing protocols are the only solution to above circumstances. Most of the existing work of making protocols energy efficient has been done on ?on demand routing protocols? because these protocols are more energy efficient rather than proactive protocols but still these have some problems which have been discussed in the next section. Energy efficiency can also be achieved by sensible flooding at the route discovery process in reverse reactive protocols [1, 4]. And energy efficiency routing can also be achieved by using efficient metric for route selection such as cost function, node energy, battery level etc.

It presents a performance comparison of three well-known routing protocols in MANET, based on the result analysis obtained by running simulations with different scenarios in Network Simulator [1, 5]. The comparison was done based on the parameters, number of sources in the network, duration of pause times, maximum movement speed and sending rate to evaluate the Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR), Normalized Routing Load (NRL) and average end to end delay.

To summarize, this paper is organized in 7 sections where Section 2 briefly describes routing protocols in MANET. In Section 3 describes the literature review of the existing protocols. In Section 4 describes the problem statement and briefly describes the protocols under consideration. In Section 5 describes the methodology we followed to perform simulations. In Section 6 describes the simulations analysis, graph and results using mat lab. Finally, In Section 7 describes conclusion of simulation analysis result.



II. ROUTING PROTOCOL IN MANET Routing Protocol is used to find suitable routes between communicating nodes. They do not have use any access points to connect to other nodes. Routing protocols can be generally classified into 3 categories:-Centralized versus Distributed,- Static versus Adaptive, and Reactive versus Proactive [6, 7].

A. Proactive Protocols Proactive protocols are called table driven protocols in which, the route to all the nodes is maintained in routing table.

Packets are transferred over the predefined route specified in the direction-finding table. In this scheme, the packet forwarding is done faster but the routing overhead is greater because all the routes have to be distinct before transferring the packets. Proactive protocols have lower latency because all the routes are maintained at all the times. For Example: DSDV, OLSR, WRP, CGSR, TBRPF [6, 7].

B. Reactive (On-Demand ) Routing Protocols In this group of protocol there is an initialization of a route discovery mechanism by the source node to find the route to the destination node when the source node has data packets to send. When a route is found, the route preservation is initiated to maintain this route until it is no longer required or the destination is not reachable. The benefit of these protocols is that overhead messaging is reduced. One of the disadvantages of these protocols is the delay in discovering a new route. The different types of reactive routing protocols are Dynamic Source Routing (DSR), Ad-hoc On-Demand Distance Vector routing (AODV), and Temporally Ordered Routing Algorithm (TORA) [7, 13].

C. Hybrid  Routing Protocols A hybrid protocol means the combinations of reactive and proactive protocols and takes advantages of these two protocols and as a result, routes are found quickly in the routing zone. Example Protocol: ZRP.



III. REVIEW OF EXISTING ROUTING PROTOCOLS In this section, we have brief review of the routing  operations performed by the familiar protocols. DSDV, AODV, TORA, EAODV and DSR are discussed:  A. Ad Hoc On-demand Distance Vector Routing (AODV) Protocol  The Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector Routing (AODV) protocol is a reactive routing protocol for mobile ad hoc networks [8]. While a reactive routing protocol, AODV only needs to maintain the routing information about the active paths. In AODV, the routing information is upholder in the routing tables at all the nodes. Every mobile node maintains a next hop routing table, which contains the destinations to which it currently has a route. In AODV, when a source node desires to send packets to the destination but no route is available, it initiates a route discovery process.

In the route discovery process, the source node broadcasts route request (RREQ) packets which includes Destination Sequence Number. When the destination or a node that has a route to the destination receives the RREQ, it checks the destination sequence numbers it currently knows and the one particular in the RREQ. To assurance the freshness of the routing information, a route reply (RREP) packet is created and forwarded back to the source node only if the destination sequence number is equal to or greater than the one specified in RREQ. It uses only symmetric links and a RREP follows the reverse path of the respective RREQ. Upon receiving the RREP packet, each intermediate node along the route information updates its next-hop table entries with respect to the destination node.

B. Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) Protocol Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) protocol [9, 10 and 15] is a reactive routing, on demand routing protocol based on the source routing. The source routing unimportantly allows routing of packets to be loop-free,it avoids the need for up-to- date routing information between different nodes and allows nodes that overhear packets containing routes to store this information for their own future use. A node that needs to send a packet to a destination checks in its route store if it has a route available. In a route discovery stage, a node sends the route request to the destination node. It reacts by the route reply than a path is established between the source and destination. Route maintenance phase , it indicates that the source route is broken; it can favor another route to reach the destination.

C. Distance Sequence Distance Vector (DSDV) Protocol Destination Sequence Distance Vector (DSDV) is a proactive routing protocol and it is based on the distance vector algorithm. In table-driven routing protocols, each node constantly maintains up-to-date routes to every other node in the network. Routing information is periodically transmitted during the network in regulate to maintain routing table consistency. The routing table is updated at each node by finding the modify in routing information about all the available destinations with the number of nodes to that particular destination. As well, to provide loop freedom DSDV uses sequence numbers, which is provided, by the destination node. In case, if a route has already existed before traffic arrives, transmission occurs with no delay. In case of failure of a route to the next node, the node instantly updates the sequence number and broadcasts the information to its neighbors. When a node receives routing information then it ensures in its routing table. If it does not find such entry into the routing table then bring up to dates the routing table with routing information it has found. In case, if the node finds that it has already entry into its routing table then it compares with the sequence number of the received information with the routing table entry and updates the information [11].

D. Temporally Ordered Routing Algorithm (TORA) Protocol:  The Temporally Ordered Routing Algorithm (TORA) is a highly adaptive, well-organized and scalable distributed routing algorithm based on the thought of link reversal [17].

TORA is proposed for highly self-motivated mobile, multi- hop wireless networks. It is a source-initiated on-demand routing protocol. It finds multiple routes from a source node to a destination node. The main characteristic of TORA is that the control messages are restricted to small set of nodes in the neighborhood of the occurrence of a topological change. To attain this, the nodes maintain routing information about adjacent nodes. The protocol has three basic functions: Route creation, Route maintenance and Route removal. TORA can undergo from unbounded worst-case convergence time for very stressful scenarios. TORA has a single feature of maintaining multiple routes to the destination so that topological changes do not require any reaction at all. The protocol responds only when all routes to the destination are lost.



IV. PROBLEM STATEMENT  A. Energy issues in Mobile  Ad-hoc networks: Ad-hoc networks have to suffer many challenges at the time of routing process. Dynamically changing topology and no unified infrastructure are the biggest challenges in the designing of an Ad hoc network.  If we compare it to the wired system then wireless network has less and more varying bandwidth, so bandwidth efficiency is also a major concern in Ad-hoc network routing protocols. It has Limited power supply is the biggest challenge of an Ad-hoc network so if we want to increase the network lifetime (time duration when the first node of the network runs out of power) as well the node lifetime then we must have an efficient energy organization protocol [18,19]. As a result an Ad-hoc routing protocol must meet all these challenges to give the average performance in every case.

B. Energy Efficiency: In Mobile ad hoc network, all the devices generally operate on battery seek to track the energy efficiency heuristically by the reducing energy they have consumed, whereas maintaining suitable performance of certain works. Using the power consumption is not only a single decisive factor for deciding energy efficiency. In fact, energy efficiency be able to measured by the duration of the specific time over which the network can have maintain a certain performance stage, which is known as the network lifetime. Therefore routing information to increasing the lifetime of the certain network level is different from the lowest amount energy routing.

Lowest amount energy routes [12] from time to time attract more flows, and the nodes in these routes enervate out their energy very soon; thus the whole network can?t perform any job due to the failure on these nodes. In the other words, the total energy consumed is balanced consumed along with all nodes in the networks. In general routing with highest lifetime  stability all the routes and nodes globally maintain in consequence that the network performance level for a longer lifetime. Hence, energy efficiency is not only measured by the power consumption but in more common it can be measured by the duration of time over which the network can preserve a assured performance level.



V. SIMULATION PARAMETERS   A. Mobility : Mobility model uses a random waypoint model in a rectangular field.

TABLE1: SIMULATION PARAMETERS  Parameters Values No. of Nodes 50  Simulation Duration 1000 Seconds Environment Size 1500 x 1500 m2  Maximum Movement Node Speed  10,20,30,40,50 m/sec  Pause Time 0,10,20,40,100 sec.

Packet Size 512 bytes  Packet Sending rate 20,60,100,150,200 Routing Protocols EAOADV,AODV,DSR,DSDV,TORA  OLSR Traffic Type CBR MAC Type MAC 802.11  Simulation Tool NS2-2.34 Mobility Model Random  Way Point  In addition, in order to examine the impact of movement speed on performances of routing protocols, we varied the maximum movement speed, while value of pause time and sending rate was kept unchanged. In that case, values of maximum movement speed range from 10 to 50 m/s, while pause time duration is 0 simulation seconds, and sending rate is 100 kbps.

B. Performance Metrics :

I. Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR): PDR shows how  successful a protocol is in delivering packets from source to destination in a network.



II. Average End to End delay: This is the average end to end delay of all successfully transmitted data packets from source to destination in a network.



III. Normalized Routing Load (NRL): NRL is the ratio of the number of routing packets transmitted in a network.



VI. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS In this section the comparison has done for the success rate and the energy consumption for the three routing algorithms over a wide variety of scenarios and traffic models resulting varying one of the three selected parameters i.e. node velocity, packet sending rate and pause time.

6.1 Effect of PDR versus varying pause time, movement speed, sending rate.

Obtained effects show characteristic differences in performance between considered routing protocols, which are the consequence of various mechanisms on which protocols are based. Although we carried out simulations with 10, 20 and 30 sources, only results with 20 sources are presented in this paper.

As in [1], ?on-demand? routing protocols, EAODV, AODV and DSR, attain high values of PDR, which means they are efficient protocols from the point of delivering packets to their destination (Fig.1,Fig.2 and Fig.3). For EAODV, AODV and DSR protocols, PDR is self-governing of mobility and number of sources, while DSDV has approximately the same PDR under low mobility. Since DSDV protocol uses a ?table driven? approach of maintaining routing information, it isn?t adaptive to the route changes that occur under high mobility as EAODV, AODV and DSR protocols are. As a result, DSDV and TORA protocol is not suitable for MANETs, because it is slow. Results obtained by running simulations with a changeable sending rate confirm the previous conclusion, but also show that all routing protocols don?t perform well when packet delivery ratio increases with respect to network load.

Fig.1. Packet Delivery Ratio for Pause time  Fig.2. Packet Delivery Ratio for Maximum movement speed  Fig.3. Packet Delivery Ratio for sending rate  6.2 Effect of Network Load versus varying pause time, movement speed, sending rate:  On the other hand, in all considered cases, regardless of mobility, source number or network load, DSR and TORA protocol generates significantly less routing load than EAODV, AODV and DSDV protocols as Fig. 4, Fig.5 and Fig.6 shows. In high network load cases, nodes using considered routing protocols send more packets, thereby sending a larger number of routing packets.

On the other hand, in high mobility cases, connection failures happen very often. Link failures initiate route discoveries in EAODV, AODV, since nodes have only one route per destination in their routing table. Thus, the frequency of route discovery in EAODV and AODV is straight comparative to the number of link failures. That is the reason why a major contribution to EAODV?s routing overhead comes from RREQ packets. On the other hand, reaction of DSR to connection failures in link is mild and sources route discoveries less often. The reason is plenty of cached routes at each node and prolongation of route discovery until all cached routes fail. That is the reason why RREQ packets don?t contribute so much to DSR?s routing overhead. A large contribution in DSR comes from RREP packets the node?s speed was chosen in the range 1-20 m/s and the packet send rate was gradually increased from 10 packets/s to 100 packets/s and the other parameters remain the same as in the previous experiments. All algorithms are able to cope up with an increased load (see Fig.4), however, the performance of EAODV is the worst for packet delivery ratio and DSDV, TORA and DSR has similar packet delivery ratio. Fig. 6 shows the effect of increasing the sending rate. This effect is analogous to the effect of increasing the number of source. All protocols present quite a steady behavior, the DSDV protocol merit to its table driven scheme, while on demand protocols thanks to their property of learning route information from previous packets.DSR shows lower value of routing load than EAODV and DSDV.

Fig. 4.  Normalized Routing Load for: a. Pause time  Fig.5. Normalized Routing Load for Maximum movement speed  Fig.6. Normalized Routing Load for sending rate  6.3 Effect of Average end to end delay versus varying pause time, movement speed, sending rate:  Analyzing average end to end delay, we come to the end that DSR routing protocol out performs EAODV and DSDV protocols (Fig.7, Fig.8 and Fig.9), unlike the results acquired in [1], where EAODV protocol has the best performances. As supposed previously, for any network topology change, nodes that use EAODV protocol have to send RREQ packets. In other words, a route discovery process has been to be activated, because EAODV is a routing protocol that has no available route when needed. Since of inefficient route maintenance, average end to end delay is the largest for EAODV. On the other hand, DSDV and TORA protocol proactively holds routes to all destinations in its table, regardless of topology changes. However, DSR protocol has the best performances, because it doesn?t depend on periodical activities, and it uses source routing and route caching, but also maintains multiple routes per destination. It excels especially in low mobility scenarios, which means that in cases when network topology is stable, routes are not stale and that results in the best performances under consideration.

Fig.7. Average End to End Delay for: a. Pause time  Fig.8. Average End to End Delay for Maximum movement speed     Fig.9. Average End to End Delay for sending rate  When a network contains a small number of sources or node?s sending rate is low, EAODV and DSDV protocols have a similar average end to end delay as DSR, especially when node mobility is low. In that case, the network is less loaded.

However, with source number or sending rate increasing, network load is increasing, and average end to end delay for all three protocols, especially EAODV and DSDV, becomes larger.

6.4 Effect of Energy Consumption versus varying pause time, movement speed, sending rate:  The energy consumption of the on-demand protocols increases as the maximum motion speed grows. As the movement speed moves from a humans walking MANET scenario to a road cars MANET, the DSR has lower energy per user data than EAODV and DSDV. When speed grows DSR performs better than EAODV, TORA and DSDV.

The performance of EAODV is the worst for packet delivery ratio and DSDV, TORA and DSR has similar packet delivery ratio.

Fig. 12 shows the effect of increasing the sending rate. This effect is analogous to the effect of increasing the number of source.

Fig.10. Energy Consumption for Pause time  Fig.11. Energy Consumption for Maximum movement speed  Fig.12. Energy Consumption for Packet Sending rate  All protocols present quite a stable behavior; some protocols are proactive and reactive scheme, while on demand protocols route information from preceding packets. DSR shows lower value of energy consumption than EAODV, TORA and DSDV.

On average on-demand protocols (DSR, EAODV, and TORA) present an energy descendent trend as the motion rate drops, the table-driven protocol (DSDV) presents an energy consumption that remains practically constant as packet sending rate varies  CONCLUSIONS  Routing protocol DSDV uses proactive ?table driven? routing, while EAODV, AODV, TORA and DSR use ?on-demand? routing. DSDV protocol periodically updates its routing tables, even in cases when network topology doesn?t modify. EAODV protocol has inefficient route maintenance, because it has to initiate a route discovery process every time network topology changes. Both protocols, EAODV, TORA, AODV and DSR, use route discovery process, but with different routing mechanisms. In particular, EAODV and AODV protocol uses routing information into the tables, it use one route per each destination, and destination sequence numbers as a mechanism for determining freshness of routes and route loops prevention.

On the other hand, DSR uses source routing and route caching, and doesn?t have depended on any periodic or time-based operations. In general, we can conclude that in low mobility and low load scenarios, all the protocols react in a similar way, while with mobility or load increasing DSR outperforms EAODV, AODV, TORA and DSDV routing protocols. Poor performances of TORA and DSR routing protocol, when mobility or load are increased, are the consequence of forceful use of caching and the lack of any system to expire out of date routes or establish the freshness of routes when several choices are available in the network. A central face is the development of the dynamic routing protocol that can efficiently and finds routes between two communication nodes. As well, in order to analyze and improve existing or new MANET routing protocols, it is desirable to examine other metrics like power consumption, fault tolerance, number of hops, jitter, etc. in various mobility and traffic models.

