Generation of Temporal Class Association Rules  from Quantitative Data

Abstract? Most of the data mining algorithms perform analysis on quantitative data only after performing discretization. Nowadays, there is a great interest in finding the health impacts of climate change. One of the factors that cause changes in the climate is the ozone layer. Adverse levels of ozone may cause several diseases like asthma, chronic disorders and other respiratory symptoms. Hereby we present an evolutionary approach based association technique to find the relationship between several multidimensional climatological variables that are involved in determining an ozone day. The relationships between variables are discovered by generating quantitative association rules that exhibit a temporal pattern. When association rules are generated from high dimensional quantitative databases, the rules suffer from loss of information due to discretization. To overcome this problem, the proposed approach involves genetic algorithm to discover all possible dependencies between variables with optimal intervals. Our method generates quantitative association rules on temporal database, with more realistic interval rather than crisp boundary.

Keywords? Data Mining; Class Association Rule; Quantitative data;  Temporal database; Genetic Algorithm

I. INTRODUCTION lassic data mining is heavily dependent on data itself and normally targets data-driven methodologies. Data mining refers to extracting or mining knowledge from large  amount of data [1]. Data mining techniques are the processes that focus on automatic exploration and analysis of large quantities of raw data in order to discover meaningful patterns and rules [2].

A. Association Rules Association rule mining is an important research area in the  field of data mining. Association rule is an expression of the form X Y, where X, Y are subsets of items and X Y=?.

The problem of   ?mining? a large collection of basket data type transactions for association rules between sets  of items with some  minimum specified  support  and confidence [3].

The drawback of this approach is it handles only categorical attributes. Apriori algorithm is used to solve the problem of discovering association rules between items in a large database of sales transactions [4]. Quantitative association rule mining is used to mine association rules from quantitative  and categorical data by discretizing   the   quantitative values   into   intervals.   An approach for mining association rules over quantitative and categorical attributes in large relational tables was introduced [5]. Discretization of these quantitative attributes refers to static partitioning of intervals which leads to loss of information [6]. Association rules that involve two or more dimensions or predicates can be referred to as multi dimensional association rules [1], [7], and [8].

These rules are framed by the conjunction and disjunction of more than two attributes or dimension, which is used to predict the consequence.

B. Temporal Mining Temporal  data  mining  is  the  data  mining  technique  which is used to discover hidden patterns, unexpected trends or other subtle relationships from sequential data [1] ( ordered with respect to time related information). Weather forecasting, financial or stock market prediction and automatic process control have been some of the oldest and most studied applications in such time series analysis [9]. Temporal association rules are evolved from temporal data base. These rules will be able to produce more realistic information like, in which period the rule is valid. Temporal data mining has the capability of mining activities rather than just states and thus, infers relations that may indicate a cause-effect association.

Temporal databases cover a wide spectrum of applications [10], [11], [12]. For example, in the area of medical health, they can store data related to drug administration of patients.

An interesting rule can be that, the use of a certain quantity of a drug influences the patient disease status after a time interval.

C. Genetic Algorithm Genetic Algorithm is one of the most used data mining  algorithm because of its evolutionary nature [13]. It overcomes the problem of generating irrelevant rules by considering the entire interval of the attributes under consideration. This algorithm generates optimal rules by undergoing several generations [14]. In this paper we present an approach to generate class association rules from quantitative attributes using genetic algorithm without discretization of numerical attributes.

C       D. Contribution and Outline In our work we have addressed the discretization problem  as a part of the data mining process on numerical attributes and we introduce a proposal for discovering temporal class association rules from temporal databases with a genetic approach. Our method generates Temporal Class Association Rules (TCARs) from temporal database by using genetic algorithm. We have used the genetic algorithm for generating the rules by avoiding the irrelevant rules with support and confidence measures.  Adaptive intervals instead of fixed ranges have been chosen to represent the membership of such values in this work. The search for the most appropriate intervals has been carried out by means genetic approach.

Thus, the intervals are adjusted to find TCAR with high values for support and confidence from Ozone level depletion database [17] from UCI repository to predict ozone day or normal day.

E. Related Work An algorithm called Weighted Counting Algorithm to  generate rules of one to one relation between antecedent and consequent from continuous data to predict monsoon rainfall has been proposed [6]. It uses FP-Tree for frequent pattern generation. Wen et.al proposes a Ward?s method to partition the shopping market and uses Supervised Apriori algorithm to recognize the positive and negative values of customer interest in online shopping industry [18]. An Equi-depth partitioning Approach to group the quantitative data and Apriori algorithm  to discuss about amino acid interactions in protein sequences has been discussed [19]. To mine Quantitative Association rules  to study the risk factor of heart disease and to study the price of  houses in a region using genetic learning has been discussed [20]. The author uses Evolutionary algorithm to generate association rules without discretizing the climatological variables which are numeric in nature. To predict the ozone level concentration of a day [21]. A method that performs logistic regression analysis on the respiratory symptoms and the use of rescue medication is prescribed to examine the effects of ozone on daily respiratory symptoms among children with asthma [22].

To generate Quantitative Association rules by qualitative approach  on the customer car purchasing dataset to identify customer interests has been proposed [23]. A method which uses multi-objective evolutionary algorithm for extracting frequent fuzzy item sets has been proposed to generate association rules, from quantitative data that form temporal patterns[24].

F. Paper Organization The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In  section 2, the frame work to generate the Temporal Class Association Rules (TCARs) is discussed. In section 3, the algorithm to evolve TCARs is being dealt. In section 4 the experimental evaluation of the algorithm based on the number of TCARs generated and its accuracy has been verified. And finally in the section 5, our work is concluded.



II. FRAMEWORK FOR MINING CLASS ASSOCIATION RULES  Our goal is to mine class association rules from Ozone detection database using genetic algorithm to predict the day whether it is ozone day or normal day. The parameter which causes these ozone/normal days has been determined by association technique. The frame work for mining the temporal class association rules (TCARs) is given in figure 1.

Fig. 1. Architecture for generating TCARs  A. Dataset Used To evaluate the proposed approach, ozone level detection  database which is taken from UCI repository [21] is used. The description of dataset is as follows.

Number of Instances: 2536 Number of instances after data cleaning: 1838 Number of attributes: 74 Dataset consists of temperature with 26 attributes (T0,??,T23, T_PK, T_AV), wind speed ratio with 26 attributes(WSR0,?..WSR23,WSR_PK, WSR_AV),relative humidity with 3 attributes(RH85,RH70,RH50), height with 3 attributes(HT85, HT70, HT50) and directions with 6 attributes (U85, U70, U50, V85, V70,V50 ) and sea level pressure. Even though the temperature and wind speed ratio are taken for different periods of time, the values are with only slight variations. Hence attribute selection is done based on CFS subset level algorithm and best first algorithm using weka tool to avoid the redundancy and repetition. Based on this algorithm, the selected attributes are WSRAV, T_PK, RH50, HT50 and V70.

B. Interesting Measures Interestingness measures play an important role in data  mining, regardless of the kind of patterns being mined. These measures are intended for selecting and ranking patterns according to their potential interest to the user. Good measures        also allow the time and space costs of the mining process to be reduced [15]. Measuring the interestingness of discovered patterns is an active and important area of data mining research. An objective measure for class association rules to generate the frequent item sets is the support value. It represents the percentage of transactions from a transaction database that the given rule satisfies [16]. Support value for the rule,   is defined as follows,   ? (1)   where |T| is the total number of transactions (patterns) in the database, ?A(xp) is the matching degree of the transaction xp with the antecedent part of the rule. Another objective measure for class association rule is confidence value. It assesses the degree of certainty of the identified association between the antecedent and the consequent [16]. Confidence value for the rule  can be defined as follows,   (2)   An  objective  function in genetic algorithm is the fitness  function which is used to measure the efficiency of an individual to reproduce in successive generations. The fitness function used in the proposed technique is given by,   (3)   Where F is Fitness function, supp is support, conf is confidence, recov is number of records covered by the rule, nattri is number of attributes, ampl is amplitude(difference) between the intervals in the rule, Ws ,Wc ,Wr , Wn , Wa  are weights to derive search where Ws  is weight value for support, Wc is weight value for confidence, Wr is weight value for coverage of rule, Wn is weight value for number of attributes, Wa is weight value for amplitude of a rule Ws =0.5 ,Wc =0.5 , Wr =0.2, Wn  =0.2 , Wa =0.3.



III. ALGORITHMIC DESIGN CONCEPT The algorithm for generating TCARs from ozone database  is given in figure 2.  The algorithm involves various steps which has been described as follows.

A. Data Preprocessing The pre-processing of data involves data cleaning and  attributes selection. Data cleaning is performed for the removal of noisy and missing value. Attribute selection involves the process of selecting necessary attributes from other attributes present in the dataset. It is done based on CFS subset level algorithm and best first algorithm using weka tool to avoid the redundancy and repetition of attributes.

Fig. 2. Algorithm for generating TCARs  B. Rule Generation The association rules are generated using genetic  algorithm. This evolutionary approach involves the codification of individuals in the form of chromosomes. The pre-processed data is taken as input and the maximum and minimum of all attributes is calculated, using which the individuals are codified. The codification of individuals is done by two structures Upper and Lower.

The upper structure contains all the attributes present in the dataset and their corresponding interval limits .The interval limits are given by an upper limit Ui and lower limit Li. The lower structure contains the type of the attribute with the values 0, 1.The value 0 is used when the attribute does not belong to the individual and value 1 is used when the attribute belongs to the individual. The structure for representing is given in figure 3.

Notations: T  - No. of instances,  - Fitness function,  -Selection of individuals, I1, I2-Iindividuals, - Null, Not Null Mutation of individuals, -Crossover of individuals,  Input: d - Raw dataset, D - selected attributes, N ? No. of generations, P ? No. of individuals  Output: R-TCARs  Method: 1. Data Pre-processing Data cleaning    : Eliminating the missing values  Attribute selection: d(a1,a2,...,a7) D(a1,a2,a3) 2. Rule generation Find min and max values for all attributes.

For i=1 to T Conversion of input values into chromosome  with initial population P .

For j=1 to N  Calculate support and confidence measures for all individuals (I1, I2 ? Ij )  Evaluate I1, I2 using .

Apply the genetic operator on (I1, I2 ? Ij ) to  select individuals with high fitness.

Perform  on the selected individuals( I1, I2 )  to produce Oj.

Perform    on the individuals (I1, I2 ? Ij ) Evaluate new population using .

3. Evolving TCARs The obtained individuals are taken and transformed into class rules ? R.

Fig. 3. Example of an individual    Where  x1,x2,x3 are the attributes of the dataset. The codified individuals are subjected to the genetic operators Selection, Crossover and Mutation.

1) Selection: From the codified individuals the genetic operator of selection is performed using tournament selection.

In tournament selection the individuals are evaluated using the fitness function and best fit individuals are selected from the population to perform crossover.

2)   Crossover:  From the selected individuals, the crossover is performed between two individuals to produce offspring. Here two parent individuals X and Y, chosen by means of tournament selection are made to perform a crossover between them to produce a new individual Z.

Let [lix ,uix], [liy, uiy], [liz,uiz] be the intervals with  lower limit li and upper limit ui in which the attribute ai vary for the individuals  X,Y,Z respectively. Let tix, tiy, tiz be the type of the attribute ai for the individuals X,Y,Z respectively. For each attribute ai two cases occur based on the types present in the lower structure of the individual.

Case 1:   if (tix= tiy )  then (tiz = tix) [liz,uiz]=[random(lix,liy),random(uix,uiy)]  Case 2:    if  ( tix  tiy  )  then [liz,uiz]=[lix,uix]   if (tiz=tix)  [liz,uiz]=[lix,uix]  if (tiz=tiy)   The crossover between the individuals is shown pictorially as in figure 4.

3) Mutation: The selected individuals are subjected to mutation. The mutation process is defined as any change that is made to the gene of the individual that is subjected to mutation. The change is determined by the probability of randomly selected individuals. Here mutation is focused on the type ti of the attribute in lower structure of the individual.

Mutation is done by two types Null Mutation and Not Null Mutation. In Null Mutation if the type ti of the selected attribute is not null (1) then it is changed to null (0). In Not Null Mutation if type ti of the selected attribute is null (0) then it is changed to not null (1). The Mutation process is pictorially represented as shown in figure 5.

Now the individuals that are obtained from the crossover and mutation process are evaluated using the fitness  function. If the fitness of the new individual is higher it is allowed to enter into next generation to compete with other individuals else it is discarded. This is performed in an iterative manner for N generations and the best individuals are extracted.

Fig. 4. Crossover between individuals       Fig. 5. Mutation of  individuals    C. Evolving TCARs From the obtained best individuals after N generations, the rules TCARs are framed to predict ozone day/normal day from ozone level detection database.

15   28   38    39      43   59  1 1 0  X1                X2               X3  Upper structure  Lower structure  1 1        0  20   35           4.0   5.0       3.2 5.3   1 1        0  15   28           38   59       43   58  0  1        0  22    38            60   65       40   45  1 1         0  20   35           50   62         33   51  Parent X Parent Y  Child Z  {Rand (32, 40),Rand (45,53)}  {Rand (40, 60),Rand (50,65)}  0 1        1  11   26           35   58       42   55  1  1        0  15   28            38   59       43   58  1 1        1  11   26           35   58       42   55  1  0        0  15   28            38   59       43   58  Individual Y Individual X  Individual X Individual Y  Scheme of Not null mutation         Scheme of Null mutation

IV. EXPERIMENTAL ANALY To evaluate the proposed approach, we ca experiments on a real world dataset name which were collected from 1998 to 2004 Galveston and Brazoria area in west of sou states of America. Several experiments w proposed work based on the number of TCA the accuracy of TCARs along with the conve generating the association rules. The experi been shown in figure 6 and figure 7    Fig. 6. Data size Vs no. of rules   Fig. 7. Data size Vs accuracy

V. CONCLUSION To overcome the problem of unnatur  partitioning the quantitative data we ha algorithm. It overcomes the problem of gen rules by considering the entire interval without performing discretization. Fina obtained to aid the prediction of ozone day ozone level detection database. From  YSIS arried out several ed ozone dataset,  4 at the Houston, uth central United  were conducted on ARs generated and entional method of mental results has        ral boundaries in ave used genetic nerating irrelevant of the attributes  ally TCARs are y/normal day from the experimental  evaluation it has been identifi has generated less number of T  REFER  [1] Han, J. and Kamber, M., ?Data M ed.?,  San Fransisco: Morgan Kau  [2] H S Song, Jae Kyeong Kim and S customer behavior in an  interne Applications, Vol  21, No 3, pp 1  [3] Rakesh  Agrawal,  Tomasz  Im Association  Rules  between  S Proceedings of 1993 ACM SIGM 216.

[4] Rakesh Agrawal and Ramakrishn Mining Association Rules in Larg 478?499.

[5] Srikant.R and Agarwal.R., ?Min Large  Relational  Tables?,   Pr International  Conference on M pp1-12.

[6] T.Dhanya and D.Nagesh kuma Association rules for Predicting Intelligent Systems, Vol 18 No:3  [7] Fayu and Wang, ?Application of Techniques in Manufacturing Res Seventh International Conferenc Discovery (FSKD 2010).

[8] Neelu Khare,  Neeru Adlakha,  K Mining Multidimensional Associ Telecommunication and Computi  [9]  Srivatsan  Laxman  and  Sastry mining?, Sadhana Vol. 31, Par April 2006,.

[10] Jin Soung Yoo and Shashi Sh Association Mining?,  IEEE T Engineering, Vol. 21, No. 8, Aug  [11] N.  Papadakis,  G.  Antoniou, problem in temporal databases: and Knowledge Engineering 59 (2  [12] C.D. Weekes, J.M. Vose, J.C. L Bierman, T. Greiner, G. Bociek Armitage,  ?Hodgkinn  disease outcome with a doxorubicin-co Oncology 20 (4) 1087?1093, 200  [13] M. Martinez-Ballesteros, A.Tron Riquelmea, ?Mining quantitative computation and its application Computer Aided Engineering, IO  [14] Jesus Alcala-Fdez, Andrea Bona the Genetic Algorithms based Journal of Fundamental informat  [15] Liqiang Geng And Howard J.

For Data Mining: A Survey?, AC Article 9, 2006.

[16] Jes?us Alcal?a-Fdez, Rafael Alc association rule-based classific problems with genetic rule s Transactions on fuzzy systems, v  [17] UCI Repository of machi http://archieve.ics.uci.edu (Acces  ied that the proposed approach TCARs with more accuracy.

RENCES   Mining: Concepts and Techniques. 2nd ufmann, 2006.

Soung Hie Kim,  "Mining the change of  et shopping mall?. Expert Systems with 58?168, 2001.

mielinski,  and  Arun  Swami  ?Mining Sets  of   Items  in  Large  Databases?  GMOD, Washington DC,USA, pp 207?  nan Srikant, ?Fast  Algorithms  for ge Databases?  Proceedings of the n Very Large Data  Bases,  1994, pages  ning Quantitave Association Rules in roceedings  of  ACM-SIGMOD  1996:  Management of Data Monreal , Canada,  ar, ?Data mining for Evolving Fuzzy Monsoon Rainfall of India?, Journal of ,2009.

Multidimensional Association Rule source Planning   System?,  2010 ce on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge  K. R. Pardasani, ?An Algorithm for iation Rules using Boolean Matrix?,  on Recent Trends in  Information, ing, 2010.

y.P.S,  ?A  survey  of   temporal  data rt 2, pp. 173?198. ? Printed in India,  hekhar,  ?Similarity-Profiled Temporal Transactions On Knowledge And Data gust 2009.

D.  Plexousakis,   ?The   ramification changing beliefs about the past?, Data 2) 379?434, 2006.

Lynch, D.D.   Weisenburger,  P.J.

k, C. Enke, M. Bast, W.C. Chan, J.O.

in  the  elderly:  improved  treatment ontaining regimen?, Journal of Clinical 02.

ncosob, F. Martinez-Alvarez and J. C.

association rules based on evolutionary  n to atmospheric pollution?, Integrated OS press of Authors, 2010.

arini, ?Analysis of the Effectiveness of on Extraction of Association Rules?, ica, 2010.

Hamilton,  ?Interestingness Measures CM Computing Surveys, Vol. 38, No.3,  cal?a, and Francisco Herrera,??A fuzzy cation model for high dimensional selection and lateral tuning?, IEEE  vol: 19, no.5,pp 857-872, 2011.

ine learning databases [online], ssed 21 April 2008).

[18] Wen-Yu Chiang,? To mine association rules of customer values via a data mining procedure with improved model: An Empirical case study?, Elsevier-Expert Systems with Applications,2011.

[19] Nitin Gupta, Nitin Mangal, K.Tiwari, P.Mitra, ?Mining Quantitative Association rules on  Protein Sequences?,springer, 2006.

[20] Jesus Alcala-Fdez, Andrea Bonarini, ?Analysis of the Effectiveness of the Genetic Algorithms based on Extraction of Association Rules?, Journal of Fundamental informatica, 2010.

[21] M.Martinez Ballesteros, F.Martinez Alvarez and A.Troncoso, ?An evolutionary algorithm to discover quantitative association rules in multidimensional time series?, Springer, 2011.

[22] Janneane F.Gent, W.Triche and R.holward ,?Association of low-level ozone and fine particles with respiratory symptoms in children with Asthma?, Journal of American Medical association, 2003.

[23] S.Prakash, R.M.S Parvathi, ?Qualitative Approach For Quantitative Association Rule Mining using Fuzzy Rule Set?, Journal of Computational Information Systems ,Vol 7 pp 1879-1885,2011.

[24] Stephen G. Mathews, Mario A. Gongora and Adrian A.

Hopgood,?Evolving Temporal Fuzzy Itemsets from Quantitative Data 2011.

