Exploring the associating rules of prescription and  syndrome on Radix Astragali with text mining

Abstracts-Single Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) is the basic  element in the formulae of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM).

How to acquire knowledge of a single CHM within the framework of TCM is a meaningful task. In TCM, Radix Astragali (RA) is frequently and widely used in clinical practice.

In order to explore the associating rules between prescription and syndrome on RA with text mining technique, we downloaded the data set on RA from Chinese BioMedical literature database (also called SinoMed). Then, the rules of prescription corresponding to disease and syndrome on RA were mined out by executing data slicing algorithms. The mining results were visually demonstrated with software Cytoscape 2.8. Text mining, together with artificial reading for anti-noising and validation, is an important approach in exploring the rules of prescription corresponding to disease and syndrome. The results showed that RA was usually used in treating diseases of diabetes and cancers.

For them, blood stasis due to qi deficiency was the main syndrome in TCM. Moreover, the results demonstrated associations among TCM syndrome, diseases and formulae associated with RA. These associated networks represented a variety of knowledge items which embodied the associating rules between prescription and syndrome on RA.

Key words: Text mining; Data slicing algorithm; Radix Astragali; associating rules

I. INTRODUCTION Radix Astragali (short for RA, Huangqi in Pinyin) is the  root either of Astragalus membranaceus (Fisch.) Bge. var.

mongholicus (Bge.) Hsiao (MGHQ) or A. membranaceus (Fisch.) Bge. (MJHQ)[1]. In traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), RA is a traditional Chinese herb, which is frequently and widely used in clinical practice.

Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) is used under composition rules called Chinese herbology, which is the theory of traditional Chinese herbal therapy[2]. Although described elaborately in literature, for researchers, it is impossible to read all the records in literature on RA.

With the newly developed techniques of text mining,  powerful computers, and high speed internet, it is now possible to read them by machines and then report these results through text mining [3, 4].

In this study, based on the principle algorithm of data slicing [3, 4], we explored the associated rules of RA within the framework of TCM. These associated rules include RA-syndrome, RA-disease and RA-formulae which were tightly associated with RA in clinical practices.

In this study, the associated rules of RA was explored and reported. As these results came from the mass literatures on medical database, therefore, they might be a good reference for clinicians and researchers.



II. MATERIAL AND METHODS A. Data collection  The dataset was downloaded from SinoMed (http://sinomed.cintcm.ac.cn/index.jsp) with the query term of ?Radix Astragali? on December 29, 2012. This dataset contains 21,891 records of literatures on clinical practices or theoretical researches on RA. In this dataset, each record was tagged with a unique ID. These records contained the title, keyword and abstract of published papers [4], which were the resource of data mining.

B. Construction of co-occurrent keyword-pairs  According to the knowledge of TCM, we built the keyword lists of TCM syndrome, disease name and formulae.

Based on these keyword lists, we filtered the title, keyword and abstract of papers downloaded from literature database of SinoMed.

Then, based on the principle of co-occurrence, we built the keyword-pairs [3-5]. For example, in one particular paper, if two keywords of disease concurrent, then, there was a concurrent pair of disease.

In the construction of keyword-pairs, not only keyword-pairs of the same category were built, keyword of different categories yet with connection based on TCM knowledge were also built. For example, syndrome and   Proceedings of 2013 ICME  May 25 - 28, Beijing, China    formulae were closely related, in order to get their relationships, we constructed the concurrent pairs according to the same paper ID.

C. Network construction  In the formulae of TCM (Fangji in Chinese Pinyin), some widely used formulae associated with RA were listed with TCM syndromes. Within these formulae, herbal medicines were composited strictly under the compositing theory known as sovereign, minister, assistant and courier (Jun, Chen, Zuo and Shi in Chinese Pinyin). Different roles of ingredients in prescriptions or formulae had different weights and usages in TCM formulae/prescriptions theory [2].

Based on the concurrent keyword-pairs constructed, we built the networks of TCM syndrome and formulae of CHM.

With these networks constructed, they were demonstrated in figures 1 to 3. In Fig. 1, network of RA-syndrome-disease was demonstrated. In Fig. 2, network of RA-formulae-disease was demonstrated. In Fig. 3, network of RA- syndrome-formulae was demonstrated.



III. RESULTS  For simplicity and clarity, only limited nodes with significant weights were presented in network figures. In these figures, the sizes of the nodes represented the importance of items. What?s more, nodes with the same shape and color indicated the same group of items.

(1)RA-Syndrome-Disease Network  RA-syndrome-disease network was demonstrated in Fig.

1, the bigger the node, the more tightly the item was associated with RA. In this figure, red big node represented RA which was at the upper center position of the figure. In Fig.

1, nodes of yellow in shape square on the left were the top 6 TCM syndromes associated with RA, in which, blood stasis due to qi deficiency was the most significant one.

On the right side were the nodes of diseases network associated with RA, and diabetes was the main disease associated with RA. Among the top 6 TCM syndromes, blood stasis due to qi deficiency and deficiency of both qi and yin had connections with diabetes, cancer, nephropathy, myocarditis, infection and heart failure.

Fig.1 Networks of TCM syndrome and disease associated with Radix Astragali  (2) RA-Formulae-Disease Network RA-formulae-disease was demonstrated in Fig. 2. This  network demonstrated the connections of associated diseases and formulae with RA. In Fig. 2, for formulae of blue nodes shaped in rhombus on the left section, nodes tagged as Huangqi-Guizhi-Wuwu-Tang, Huangqi-Jian zhong-Tang, Huangqi-Tang, Buyang-Huanwu- Tang, Buzhong-Yiqi-Tang  and Fangji?Huangqi- Tang were directly associated with RA because they all contained it as their sovereign drug.

In Fig. 2, the top 6 TCM formulae were tightly associted with diseases on the right side. Among these formulae, Huangqi-Guizhi?Wu wu-Tang, Huangqi-Jianzhong-Tang, Huangqi? Tang, Buyang-Huanwu-Tang and Buzhong?Yi qi-Tang could cure diabetes and cancer.

Fig.2 Networks of formulae and disease associated with Radix Astragali  (3) RA- Syndrome-Formula Network The network of RA-syndrome-formulae was  demonstrated in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3, the left part was the yellow nodes of TCM syndrome shaped in square, the right section was the blue rhombus of TCM formulae. In this figure, Huangqi-Guizhi -Wuwu-Tang could be used in blood stasis due to qi deficiency, deficiency of both qi and yin, deficiency of kidney yang, syndrome of blood stasis and deficiency of both qi and blood. Huangqi-Jianzhong-Tang could cure blood stasis due to qi deficiency, deficiency of both qi and yin, deficiency of kidney yang and deficiency of both qi and blood.

Moreover, blood stasis due to qi deficiency and deficiency of both qi and yin were connected with Huangqi?Guizhi?Wuwu-Tang, Huangqi?Jianzhong-Tang,  Huangqi-Tang, Bu yang-Huanwu?Tang and Buzhong?Yiqi-Tang.

Furthermore, syndromes in the left part could be divided into excess syndrome (syndrome of blood stasis), syndrome of intermingled deficiency and excess (blood stasis due to qi deficiency), and deficiency syndrome (deficiency of both qi and yin, deficiency of kidney yang, deficiency of both qi and blood, syndrome of qi deficiency), which were separated by red dashed line. At the same time, formulae in the right part could be divided into two categories to cure the syndromes represented by red arrows. The formulae could be consistent to cure the corresponding syndromes based on traditional Chinese medicine theory, as to down-regulate  the excess, and to supplement the deficiency.

Fig.3 Networks of TCM syndrome and formulae associated with Radix Astragali

IV. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION  In this study, by executing data slicing algorithm which was based on the principle of co-occurrence, we constructed  networks associated with precious CHM RA. These networks focused on three aspects in TCM:  syndrome, disease and formulae. Following the interconnections among these     networks, the associating rules between prescription and syndrome on RA were revealed intuitively.

(1) TCM networks were found  In this study, through mass calculations on dataset of RA, the main aspects of TCM networks were found. These networks included TCM syndrome, disease and herbal formulae. Checked knowledge points demonstrated in Fig. 1, 2 and 3. These knowledge points covered the range of CHM[6], herbal formulae[2], and disease syndrome[7] within the framework of TCM.

(2) Triangle networks is a clear way for network  demonstration In order to balance the expressiveness and simplicity, we  chose the triangle model for the demonstration of associated networks on RA. Also, limited by the model of triangle, only three groups of information could be demonstrated separated figures.

Centered by red node RA, Fig. 1, 2 and 3 demonstrated the associating rules between prescription and syndrome on RA. For example, Fig. 1 demonstrated the TCM syndromes and diseases associated with RA. Fig.2 demonstrated the formulae and diseases associated with RA. Fig.3 demonstrated the syndromes and formulae associated with RA. In Fig.3, syndromes were divided into three categories, following which, the formulae were divided. Due to syndrome of blood stasis in Fig.3 was caused by syndrome of qi deficiency, so the formulae coule be divided into two categories.

