?

Abstract? From 2006-2012, George Mason University?s  (GMU) division I men?s and women?s volleyball teams were  outplayed by their top competitors within their associated  conference. Analysis of historic data showed that the GMU?s  men?s and women?s volleyball teams have a lower probability  of scoring points on average of 0.21 and 0.05 respectively. The  win/loss outcome is a function of the combinations of sequences  of events caused by team?s actions and coach?s tactics.

The data is so complex that no human can comprehensively  conduct the analysis. A Computer-Aided Analysis Tool (CAAT) is needed to analyze the underlying trends contributing to the  wins and losses as well as provide a meaningful  recommendation to improve the overall team performance in a  volleyball game. The CAAT determines the probability of each  transition that can occur in a volleyball game, uses an  Absorbing Markov Chain to evaluate how events influence the  point scoring probability, and runs a Monte Carlo Simulation  to analyze how random variations in transition probabilities,  caused by extreme conditional scenarios can affect the team  performance and end result of a game.

Four design alternatives were identified through analysis of  historic data and evaluated for improving team performance  through specific skill improvement training: 1) Increasing aces;  2) Increasing kills; 3) Increasing blocks; 4) Decreasing errors.

A utility analysis was conducted to determine the most  effective design alternative to achieve the target level of  performance. Based on the utility analysis, the GMU?s women?s  and men?s teams must focus on increasing their blocks. Out of  10 blocks, at least 9 should lead to a point for the men and 3  should lead to a point for the women in order to achieve the  target level of performance.



I. INTRODUCTION  HE largest national non-profit collegiate sports  organization in the United States is the National  Collegiate Athletics Association (NCAA). Its main  mission is to promote student athlete development alongside  higher education. Over 1,000 colleges are affiliated with the  NCAA and over 400,000 student athletes participate every  year. These colleges and universities invest large  percentages of their auxiliary budget, equating to thousands,  some even millions of dollars into their sports? programs.

Manuscript received April 1, 2013. George Mason University?s Patriots,  Intercollegiate Athletics Association, and head coaches of the volleyball  programs at George Mason University, Coach Chao and Coach Kendrick in addition to Mr. Juan Mantilla supported this work. All authors are students  at the Volgenau School of Engineering, Dept. of Systems Engineering and  Operations Research, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030 USA.

S. Almujahed (email: salmujah@gmu.edu), N. Ongor (email:  nongor@gmu.edu), J. Tigmo (email: jtigmo@gmu.edu), and N. Sagoo  (email: nsagoo@gmu.edu).

The NCAA divides teams into Division I, II, or III  based on each school?s choice of competition level that best  fits its mission. NCAA strives to ensure fairness within the competition. Divisions are further divided into regional  conferences. Each university that participates in the NCAA  must affiliate all of its sports programs with one of the three  divisions [4].

Historical trends show correlations between D-I team?s  competitive success with respect to their associated large  fiscal budgets, high expectations, high coach?s salary and  quantity of athletic scholarships [7][8]. This created a need  for coaches to come up with new methods to assist in  making sound judgments and quick decisions on and off the  playing field, to win against the best competitors and meet  the expectations of their school.

While some stakeholders, in the field of sports, use small  data and basic analysis to assist with strategic development,  others use observational performance as a general rule of  thumb in making decisions. These approaches are limited by  their small data sets and or their subjective theories that  correlate the actions performed in a game with the  quantitative outcome [9].



II. CONTEXT AND STAKEHOLDERS  A. Collegiate Sport Specific Study  Every season, the GMU?s men?s program competes in the  Eastern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association (EIVA)  conference and the GMU?s women?s volleyball program  competes in the Colonial Athletics Association (CAA)  conference. The winning percentage of each conference  match is used for bracketing and seeding criteria for post-  season championship bid decisions. The winning percentage  is calculated using the win/loss record and is used to  measure competitive success.

GMU?s intercollegiate athletic department (ICA)  committee and the athletic director, use an evaluation to  assess and quantify the coach?s job performance relative to  outcomes desired and other performance criteria of the  program (Fig.1).

The coach?s evaluation is comprised of two main  categories: Leadership which constitutes 75% of the  evaluation, and Management which constitutes 25% of the  evaluation. With respect to the coach?s evaluation,  competitive success is a sub-category of leadership. It holds  one of the largest weights, 30%. (Fig.1). Thus, competitive  success is the focus of study.

Sports Analytics: Designing a Volleyball Game Analysis Decision-  Support Tool Using Big Data  Sarah Almujahed, Nicole Ongor, John Tigmo, Navjot Sagoo  T  Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Systems and Information Engineering Design Symposium, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA, April 26, 2013  FridayAMData&Sim.4          Fig.1. Intercollegiate Athletics Department?s Coach?s Evaluation, used to measure the  outcomes anticipated and how success will be measured.

B. Focus of Study  In 2011-2012, GMU?s men?s volleyball was ranked 16 th    out of 27 Division I teams. Since 2000, GMU?s men?s  volleyball program has averaged a winning percentage of  55%, which is a 5% higher average than that of all the teams  that make up the EIVA conference. However, their winning  percentage record is decreasing with a slope of -0.0074  (Fig.2).

In relation to GMU men?s volleyball program, PSU?s  men?s volleyball (PSU), also, participates in the EIVA  conference and has an average winning percentage of 79%.

PSU?s men?s volleyball is consistently improving, as their  yearly winning percentage increases with a slope of +0.0068  (Fig. 2), thus, making PSU the most competitive team in the  EIVA conference.

PSU?s men?s volleyball team?s winning percentage varies  by only 0.78%, unlike GMU men?s volleyball team, whose  winning percentage varies by 2.85% (Fig. 2). The winning  percentage gap between GMU and PSU, quantifies the  approximate target winning average GMU has to increase  their current winning percentage by, in order to consistently  maintain a lead over PSU and other EIVA conference teams.

Fig.2. The line graph (right graph) shows the Men?s volleyball performance variability  shows the extent to which the winning percentage data points differ from each other in  any given season in comparison to Penn State, a rival competitor   In 2011-2012, GMU?s women?s volleyball was ranked  th  out of 327 Division I teams. Since 2000, GMU?s  women?s volleyball program has averaged a winning  percentage of 47.8%, which is a 2.2% lower average than  that of all the teams that make up the CAA conference  (Fig.4). Moreover, GMU?s winning percentage record is  decreasing with a slope of -0.0283 (Fig.5).

Northeastern University women?s volleyball team (NE)  competes within the CAA conference with a winning  percentage of 61.4%, well above the average of the  conference. NE?s women?s volleyball team is consistently  improving, as their winning percentage is increasing with  slope of +0.0102 (Fig.3), making them a top competitor of  the CAA conference.

NE?s seasonal winning percentage varies by only 0.94%,  whereas GMU?s winning percentage varies by 4.17%  (Fig.3). The winning percentage gap between GMU and NE,  quantifies the approximate target winning average GMU?s  women?s volleyball team has to increase their current  winning percentage by, in order to consistently maintain a  lead over NE and other CAA conference teams.

2000-2012.

Fig.3. The line graph (right graph) shows the Women?s volleyball performance  variability shows the extent to which the winning percentage data points differ from  each other in any given season in comparison to Northeastern, a rival competitor.



III. PROBLEM AND NEED STATEMENTS  A. GMU?s Women?s Volleyball Team  GMU?s women?s volleyball team?s average conference  winning percentage between years 2000-2012 is below the  average conference winning percentage of NE (Fig.4).

Compared to NE, they have a, higher variance in their  winning percentages for those years (Fig.5). According to  official NCAA box scores, GMU?s women?s volleyball team  only won 3 out of 13 matches against NE between years  2006 and 2012, equating to a 23.07% winning percentage  against Northeastern?s women?s volleyball team.

Overtime, GMU?s women?s team needs to increase their  overall conference winning percentage by more than 27.15%  to compete, as a top contender, for the lead in their  conference. Moreover, there is a need to reverse the  decreasing trend and maintain consistency by reducing the  variance of their winning percentages by about 77.5%. In  order to satisfy this need, GMU?s women?s volleyball team  needs to win at least 50% or more of their matches, each  season, against their top competitor.

B. GMU?s Men?s Volleyball Team  GMU?s men?s volleyball team?s average conference  winning percentage is above the average of the conference  teams by 5%. However, compared to PSU, they have a lower  winning percentage average and a higher variance in their  winning percentages. According to official NCAA box  scores, GMU?s men?s volleyball team only won 2 out of 26  matches against PSU between years 2006 and 2012,       equating to a 7.7% winning percentage against PSU?s men?s  volleyball team.

Overtime, the men?s volleyball team needs to increase  their average overall winning percentage by more than  43.7% in order to take the lead in their conference. They also  need to reverse the decreasing trend and maintain  consistency by reducing the variance of their winning  percentage by about 72.25%. In order to satisfy this need,  GMU?s men?s volleyball needs to win at least 50% or more  of their matches, each season, against their top competitor.

In both the men?s and women?s cases, objective and  comprehensive assessment of game event performance is  required to identify the skills that could be improved to  enhance each volleyball program?s win/loss record.



IV. DESIGN ALTERNATIVES  A trend analysis was conducted, using historical data from  196 box scores of matches played against several teams from  2002-2012. The trend analysis was used to determine which  transitions directly lead to points and their level of  contribution to point scoring. The analysis was done for both  GMU?s teams and the top competitor?s teams and was used  to derive the design alternatives of transitions that directly  lead to points.

A. Increasing Aces  A service ace occurs when a team serves the ball and that  ball transitions directly to a point for that team without  undergoing any other transitions.

B. Increasing Blocks  Blocks are used to strategically land the ball in the  opposing team?s side of the court or deflect the ball from  being spiked by the opposing team, resulting in a point.

C. Increasing Kills  A kill is a particular type of an attack that results in a  direct point by grounding the ball in the opposing team?s  side of the court.

D. Decreasing Errors  Errors include multiple transitions because an error can  occur between multiple actions. This design alternative  includes service errors; ball-handling errors, from passes and  sets; blocking errors; receptions errors; and attacking errors.

These errors made by a team are transitions that directly  contribute to points for their opposing team.

In 2011-2012, both GMU?s men?s and women?s  volleyball programs had a point scoring probability of less  than 0.5. Northeastern and Penn State?s point scoring  probability was greater than 0.5 against GMU?s volleyball  programs.  Official NCAA box scores were used to validate  the baseline distribution for these design alternatives. In  order to assess the sensitivity of the winning percentage  outcome, for each design alternative, the simulation is  required to replicate all transitions between the two teams.



V. METHOD OF ANALYSIS  A. Simulation  The analysis conducted, to assist in determining the most  beneficial design alternative, utilizes a stochastic Monte  Carlo simulator. As a mathematical system, the simulation  models an Absorbing Markov Chain (AMC) process that is  representative of a volleyball game?s actions and transitions.

Multiple states and transitions occur, where states are  independent actions and transitions are dependent events.

The simulator defines serves, pass/receives, sets, and  blocks as transient states and points as absorbing states.

Thus, there are 10 transient states and 2 absorbing states  (Fig.4). The simulation accounts for two teams, representing  GMU as ?A? and their associated top opponent as ?B?.

Each state represents an action that occurs in the  simulated game. A transition occurs to and from a state, and  the chances of a transition occurring is referred to as a  transitional probability. A game is won, once one of the two  teams obtains a total of 25 points and is 2 points ahead of the  other team?s score. The match is won, once 3 out of five  games have been won by one of the two teams. The  simulator parsing processor function quantifies the  experimental probabilities into actual values of occurrences.

Fig. 4 Volleyball Game Simulation is modeled by an Absorbing Markov Chain, in which all the states and transitions are depicted in the model and  simulation.

B. Methodology  A video analysis was conducted, using a sample size of 6  matches that were watched for both GMU?s men?s and  women?s volleyball. This analysis was used to collect  transitional data between events such as serves, sets, passes,  attacks, blocks and points. An estimated 1,400 transitions  occurred per match. The data accumulated for each video  analysis was used to calculate the average for a baseline  distribution for each type of transition. Refer to Fig.5.

A random number is generated, within the simulation,  after each transition. The random number that is generated  falls within a respected distribution interval of a given  transient or absorbing state. The transition probabilities of a  transient and absorbing state must sum up to 1. Therefore,  the parameters of each transient state?s transitional  probabilities are measured within 0 to 1.  This represents the  likelihood of an event occurring between states and or within  a state. Refer to Fig.4.

This process is continued until a transition goes to an  absorbing state. An absorbing state is one that once reached,  no further transitions can occur from it to any other state.

Once the ball has reached an absorbing state of either team,       a count keeps track of the score and the rally starts again  with a serve by the team who won the point. Finally, the  simulation outputs the point scoring probability, the winning  percentage and number of occurrences for each transition for  each team. Refer to Fig.5.

Fig.5. Functional Block Diagram Process representing the input and outputs  of the system.

The simulator is used as a testing and verification  mechanism, in that it quantifies the probability and number  of occurrences needed to reach a target and optimal winning  percentage. The random variables were based on a uniform  distribution with associated mean and standard deviation for  each match. The simulator runs 5,000 matches per second.

The study conducted 10 runs per unit of probability  increment or decrement, depending on the type of design  alternative. The simulation completed 4,000,000 iterations in  total, in order to ensure statistically significant model values  when comparing it to the NCAA official box score data. The  percent error of the simulation relative to the data is 2.11%  for men?s volleyball and 2.56% for women?s volleyball.

C. Absorbing State Matrix Calculations    From the following matrix properties, listed in the Table I.

The following matrix was used to obtain probability of  points being scored in a match [2].

(1)  An AMC matrix?s entries reflect the probabilities of  transitioning from any state i to any state j. The following  equation (2) was derived to determine the average  probability of points scored in a given match.

(2)  Thereby, increasing or decreasing the probability of one  or more transition(s) can prove different cause-and-effect  scenarios that can alter the way a team can play in future  games. The value of a probability determines the sensitivity  of an outcome. Probabilities in that matrix are adjusted to  analyze the outcome of the match within the simulation.

D. Changing Transitional Probabilities  The sum of the transitional probabilities for each state has  to equal one, if one transitional probability increases, the  sum of all the transition probabilities within that state must  still add up to 1. The formula used to determine the changes  needed for the other transitional probabilities within a state  of each design alternative was calculated using the following  equation:  (3)   For this study, Wj is the new transitional probability for  element j. Wj is the priority probability, which is the  adjusted value made in element i, Wk o is the original  transitional probability value of element j. ?Wk o is the sum  of all other (original) transitional probabilities within that  specific state (excluding the priority transitional probability).

This assures that all values are normalized relative to the  design of experiment?s value for each design alternative?s  state?s probability (s).



VI. RESULTS  A. Extreme Variations in Input Assumptions  In this study, the top teams in both the men?s volleyball  EIVA conference and the women?s volleyball CAA  conference are defined as the most competitive and  consistent teams within the conference. The assumption is  that, if GMU?s volleyball teams are able to defeat their  associated top competitors within their conferences; then,  they will be able to defeat all other teams within their  conferences.

The design alternatives were tested under the assumption  that the opposing team?s performance remains consistent in  transitional distributions with low variations in performance  (Fig.1) and (Fig.2). If the distributions of either team  changes over the year, these changes will need to be refined  within the tool in order to obtain accurate information.

TABLE I  ABSORBING MARKOV CHAIN (AMC) MATRIX PROPERTIES  Symbol Quantity  i states in matrix row  j states in matrix column a absorbing state probability  s number of transient states  m (s -m) x (s -m) matrix that represents transitions between transient states  Q m x m identity matrix reflecting the fact that we can never  leave an absorbing state I (s x m)  m matrix representing transitions from transient  states to absorbing states  R (s x m)  m matrix representing transitions from transient states to absorbing states  0 m  (s x m) matrix consisting entirely of zeros. P correspond  (in order) to the states t1, t2, . . . ,ts-m, a1,a2,?am P resulting probabilities           B. GMU?s Men?s and Women?s Volleyball Team?s Sensitivity Analysis     Fig.6. Sensitivity Analysis.

The sensitivity analysis illustrates the cause-and-effects of  the changes made to the original transitional probabilities.

The sensitivity analysis was used to determine the design of  experiment?s transitional probabilities analysis. (Fig.6).

C. GMU?s Men?s and Women?s Volleyball?s Design of Experiment Simulation Results  For GMU?s volleyball teams to compete as a top  contender, solely based on the merit of improving skills,  GMU?s volleyball teams needed to start by winning at least  half of their matches played against their top competitors.

Thus, the first set of simulation runs was based on improving  skills that will always yield a 50% winning percentage  outcome. To provide a range for the GMU coaches, another  scenario was tested. The second set of simulation runs was  based on improving skills that will always yield a 90%  percentage winning percentage.

TABLE II  GMU MEN?S VOLLEYBALL DESIGN OF EXPERIMENT     TABLE III  GMU WOMEN?S VOLLEYBALL DESIGN OF EXPERIMENT      The tables shown above represent the design of  experiment for the GMU men?s and women?s volleyball  teams. The first column lists all the design alternatives that  were tested for this study.  The table is then sub-divided into  three sections.  The first section lists the current transitional  probabilities based on the current winning percentage of  GMU against associated top competitor. These values are  raw transitional data that was obtained by the video analysis  conducted earlier in the study. The second and third sections  list the experimental probability, which is the change in  transitional probability from current transitional probability.

The experimental probability is the value used in the  simulation to achieve the associated winning percentages.

The sections also list the number of occurrences needed to  obtain the winning percentage of its associated experimental  probability.

All sets from GMU?s men?s volleyball team transitioned  to the state of an attack for GMU?s men?s volleyball team,  thus, no set errors occur. When GMU men?s volleyball  team?s blocks to points transitional probability was increased  to a probability of 1 for their team, the maximum winning  percentage considering all other factors remain at their  current status was 63.17%. Thus, blocks, as a design  alternative for men was consider not applicable because it  could not reach a 90% winning percentage at its maximum  transitional probability.

D. GMU?s Men?s and Women?s Volleyball Team Comparative Analysis  A comparative analysis was performed to find differences  and similarities between the results of the two simulated  scenarios. These two scenarios were then compared to the  average transitional probabilities that yield the current  average winning percentage of GMU?s volleyball teams  against their associated top competitor. There were not any  comparative-analyses of combinations of alternatives  conducted in this study. Each design alternative was  analyzed independently and tested independently. All other  transitions that were not related to the design alternative  remained at their original probabilities.

Fig.7. GMU men?s simulated run based on conditional scenarios.

Fig.8. GMU women?s simulated run based on conditional scenarios.

The comparative analysis indicates that each type of  alternative will need a significant amount of improvement in  order to achieve a winning percentage of 50% and 90% from  the current winning percentage (Fig.7) and (Fig.8).

E. Utility  A utility function was developed to weigh the importance  of three main aspects in decision-making done by the  coaches, which are maintainability (MA), trainability (TR),  and modifiability (MO). The utility values are based on  achieving a 50% chance of winning because this is the  minimum target outcome that will address the problem and  satisfy the need. The weights for the utility were determined  through discussion with GMU coaches, since they are the  primary decision-makers.

Maintainability is defined as consistency in performance,  which addresses the long-term problem of decreasing the  variability of GMU?s men?s and women?s conference  performance. Trainability, of existing players, is sub-divided  into efficiency (EFFY) and effectiveness (EFFT). Efficiency  is defined as the time, effort, and resources needed for the  intended task to achieve new standards. Effectiveness is  defined as the capability of the team producing the desired  results. Modifiability is the amount of change needed to  obtain target winning percentage. The utility is denoted as  U(x), which equates to the following:   (4)  (5)     Fig. 9. GMU men?s and women?s volleyball utility values for design  alternatives.

The results of the utility function, (Fig.9); show that for  both the men?s and the women?s teams, increasing blocks is  the best alternative as it has the highest utility value.



VII. RECOMMENDATIONS  In order to determine the best alternative to recommend to  the coaches, Table IV was developed to rank the alternatives  from most effective to least effective based on the amount of  change required to achieve the target performance and the  utility analysis results for each design alternative.

The left column of the table ranks the alternatives based  on the amount of change is required while the right column  of the table ranks the alternatives based on the utility of each  alternative as explained previously. Refer to Table IV.

TABLE IV  RANKING OF DESIGN ALTERNATIVES   Based on the rankings provided in the table for the  women?s and men?s teams, it was determined that the  coaches should focus on increasing blocks. By referring to  Table II and Table III we can see that out of 10 blocks, at  least 9 should lead to a point for the men and 3 should lead  to a point for the women in order to achieve the target level  of performance. Moreover, it was determined that decreasing  errors is the second best alternative given that the teams  focus on decreasing all errors simultaneously. Given that  increasing kills and aces occupy the bottom ranks, the  recommendation to the coaches would be to recruit players  that are already good at hitting and serving.



VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The authors thank Coach Fred Chao, Coach Patricia  Kendrick, Mr. Juan Mantilla, Mrs. Paula Lewis, Dr. Lance  Sherry and Dr. George Donohue for their advice and expert  assistance.

