RT2M : Real-time Twitter Trend Mining System

Abstract?The advent of social media is changing the existing information behavior by letting users access to real-time online information channels without the constraints of time and space.

It also generates a huge amount of data worth discovering novel knowledge. Social media, therefore, has created an enormous challenge for scientists trying to keep pace with developments in their field. Most of the previous studies have adopted broad- brush approaches which tend to result in providing limited analysis. To handle these problems properly, we introduce our real-time Twitter trend mining system, RT?M, which operates in real-time to process big stream datasets available on Twitter. The system offers the functions of term co-occurrence retrieval, visualization of Twitter users by query, similarity calculation between two users, Topic Modeling to keep track of changes of topical trend, and analysis on mention-based user networks. We also demonstrate an empirical study on 2012 Korean presidential election. The case study reveals Twitter could be a useful source to detect and predict the advent and changes of social issues, and analysis of mention-based user networks could show different aspects of user behaviors.

Keywords?social media mining; real-time Twitter trend miming system; topic modeling; network analysis; Korean presidential election

I.  INTRODUCTION Social media is a representative form of the Web 2.0  services which has undoubtedly contributed to the emergence of Big Data, based on voluntary and active participation of users. Throughout the world, social media receives spotlights by a lot of Web users because of the benefits in that 1) no professional knowledge and skills are required to produce and share contents in real-time and 2) social network among users with similar interests can be easily formed [2]. Facebook and Twitter, representative social media services, have estimated users of each 850 million and 500 million people all over the world [30].

On the other hand, a variety of research areas such as social network analysis, opinion mining, and so on has paid attention to extract the meaningful information among vast amounts of data daily produced in social media. For example, the presidential election camp which led U.S. President Barack Obama to be successfully re-elected recruited many data experts for the analysis of social media data while preparing the last presidential election. Like this instance, social media has been main foci to the field of Information Retrieval and  Text Mining from its first advent because not only it produces massive unstructured textual data and user relations in real- time but also it could be used as an influential channel for opinion leading such as agenda-setting and public opinion formation. This creates an enormous challenge for scientists trying to keep pace with developments in their field.

Until now, however, most of the previous studies have focused on somewhat limited approaches including 1) retroactively designed experimental conditions which give dynamic queries to static data collection [6][12][15][22], 2) generic issue modeling [6][15][30], and 3) social network analysis based on simply visible connectivity such as follow/following relationship in Twitter [3][13]. These approaches could face with following daunting challenges in finding and analyzing new information. First, enormous social media data is being generated in real-time. It could be, therefore, ineffective for using static data to detect continuously changing social trends such as users? interests and public issues. Second, a specific issue is likely to be composed of several subordinate events. Thus, it needs to examine formation and extinction of the related events, and users? reaction for effective analysis of the issue from various angles.

Finally, user network in Twitter has different characteristics from those of other social media. In other words, users in Twitter can make relations with others by sending-receiving mentions. Hence, only concentrating on the follow/following connection cannot properly reflect the trait of the user networks in Twitter. In addition, there is a growing need to identify dynamic changes of user networks accompanied by those of social issues in the real world.

Therefore, our study aims at designing and developing the RT2M (Real-time Twitter Trend Mining) system which allows in real-time to 1) crawl and store every textual data (?tweets?) generated in Twitter into a local database, 2) keep track of social issues by temporal Topic Modeling, and 3) visualize mention-based user networks. We also demonstrate a case study related to 2012 Korean presidential election carried by the RT?M system.

The rest of the article is organized as follows: Section 2 surveys on related works. Section 3 provides the detailed descriptions of the proposed methodology. Section 4 reports a case study, and Section 5 concludes the paper.

This study was supported by National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (NRF-2012-2012S1A3A2033291).

DOI 10.1109/SOCIETY.2013.19

II. RELATED WORKS Social media draws every attention from  communities for it offers a whole new understand the social practices. Diverse acad therefore, focus on various methodologies su network analysis, opinion mining, and etc. w discover unrevealed knowledge and informa backdrop, initial studies on social media focu understand user behavior in social media an community [8][11]. They, however, simply f connectivity represented by follow/followin could not properly take a view of user ne because those in Twitter can make relation sending-receiving mentions without visibl addition,  other studies revealed that connection could not be a useful indicator to [3][13], and contents and sending-receiving be considered to properly calculate distan among users [14][22]. We, therefore, a mentioned-based user networks to tackle t proper manner. In other words, we concentr thematic coherence among users resided sending-receiving mentions. Meanwhile, rese employ various approaches for mining unrev from social data. Among them, LDA is of g field of Text Mining for modeling lat unstructured textual data such as the Web [5][30]. Contrary to its sound mathema however, it has a fatal limit that there do validated method for evaluation. In this study LDA to compare and analyze relationship extracted from tweets on 2012 Korean presid related events in the real world. At the same that modeled topics based on term co-occurr time twitter trend mining system emplo occurrence retrieval technique to trace ch occurred terms to compensate the limita suggesting double-layered Topic Modeling.

In addition, , the SCAN [28] algorithm techniques than other community detectio identifying hub nodes connecting commu removing outliers that play any significant ro In reality, a hybrid approach combining To community detection was devised for identi between research topics and scholarly comm work also employs modularity and algorithm to detect invisible community exist  On the one hand, some studies regarded b as forum and opinion channel where users issues, and evaluated their political po Recently, not only researches on how micro the actual political events [7][25] but al utilizing social media for predicting th presidential elections [15][18][24] w Nonetheless, they failed to make valid appropriate prediction, because they d influential variables such as temporal factor features [12][15][23]. In the present study, w temporal changes of topical trends in Twitte  various scholastic w opportunity to demic community, uch as text mining,  with social media to ation. Against this used on attempts to d structure of user focused on generic ng relations which etworks in Twitter ns with others by le connection. In  follow/following find an influencer  g messages should nce and similarity aim at analyzing this problem in a rate on identifying in the action of  earch communities vealed information great interest in the tent issues from and social media  atical foundation, oes not exist any y, we hire temporal p between topics  dential election and e time, like a study rence [6], our real- oys the term co- hronologically co- ation of LDA by  m suggests faster on approaches in  unities as well as oles in the network.

opic Modeling and ifying relationship munities [29]. Our Voltage-clustering ting among users.

blog and microblog s discuss political  otentials [10][26].

obloging affects to lso studies about e results of the  were conducted.

explanation and  did not consider r and length of the e also demonstrate  er on 2012 Korean  presidential election by using R tried to explain user?s behavi media, and make prediction indicated that supporting for a c could be an indicator to pre sentiment analysis with socia voter?s political disposition [1 addressing temporal change presidential election with real-t with mention-based social netw

III. MET In this section, we introdu  RT?M, which operates in re datasets available on Twitter Twitter data on 2012 Kore demonstrate the usefulness of specifically focus on topic tren to examine presidential issues e  Figure 1 shows the system o system description is provided i  Fig. 1. System Overview of RT2M  A. Twitter Mining System & D As aforementioned earlier,  develop a real-time Twitter tre collection and various text ana collects tweets on Twitter in K user ID, and time stamps with Twitter4J. We store keywords, user and a set of mentions, pair in Redis DB. Redis is an ope database (http://redis.io). The memory so it is extremely fast store because it provides a high multiple processes, multiple ap  RT2M. Various studies also have or on political issues in social  by mining social data. [24] certain candidate in social media edict a result of election, and al data would properly explain 8][24]. We, therefore, focus on  es of topical trend on the time data streaming basis along  work analysis.

THODOLOGY uce our Twitter mining system, al-time to process big stream  r. By utilizing RT?M to mine ean Presidential Election, we f RT?M. For demonstration, we nd analysis and network analysis embedded in Twitter data.

overview of RT?M. The detailed in Section A.

Data Collection , the goal of this system is to end mining system by effective alysis of big stream data. RT?M Korea (http://www.twitter.com/), Twitter Stream API provided in , mentions, as well as pairs of a s of a user and a set of keywords  en source based key-value store entire data set is stored in- t. We chose Redis as key-value hly scalable data store shared by pplications, and multiple servers.

Along with Redis, we employ the My-SQL relational database to store tweets and time stamps information in disk for further analysis. Redis makes it easier to do the real-time Twitter mining, term co-occurrence retrieval, mention-based Twitter network visualization, and TFIDF-based user similarity. To store keywords, we use the KTS (http://kldp.net/projects/kts/), a probability based Korean morphological analyzer, for spotting important terms. The main reason to use KTS is because it provides sophisticated, well-defined probabilistic rules. However, since tweets contains idiosyncratic terms or jargons, we build a customized lexicon.

The main page of RT?M is shown in Figure 2. Functions provided in RT?M are as follows:   Fig. 2. RT2M System  1) Term Co-occurrence Retrieval: Given a query, the system retrieves the list of terms co-occurred with the query term. Once the list is obtained, it sorts co-occurred terms by co- occurrence frequency and can display the result with an option of 100, 500, 1,000, and 2,000 terms. Like other functions provided in the system, co-occurred terms are dynamically updated and displayed as more Twitter stream data is received.

Figure 3 below shows one part of the result of term co- occurrence retrieval.

Fig. 3. Term Co-occurrence Retrieval with the Query Term ?Guen Hae Park?  2) Visualization of Twitter Users by Query: Upon the query term, the system visualizes the social network graph of Twitter users mentioned together with the query term. The visualized graph is bidirectional. The social network analysis for the mention-based Twitter users is provided in the next section.

Figure 4 below shows one part of the result of visualizing Twitter users by query.

Fig. 4. Visualization of Twitter Users by the Query Term ?Jae In Moon?  3) Similarity Calculation between Two Users: It computes cosine similarity between two users comparing terms they use in their tweets, weighted by their tf-idf index. TF-IDF, which stands for term frequency multiplied by inverse document frequency, is a well-received weighting scheme in information retrieval to produce a composite weight for each term in each document [20]. The tf-idf weighting scheme assigns to term t a weight in document d given by ?? ? ????? ? ????	 ? ???? . In our work, we count a raw frequency of every term t in one tweet posting, excluding stopwords. Then, we calculate the tf- idf weighting of a certain term, multiplying a tf by an idf dividing the total number of tweets by the number of tweets containing the term, and then taking the logarithm of that quotient.

4) Topic Modeling: The system generates N topics specified by a user along with topical terms for the time period that the user selects. For the topic modeling technique, we employ the Multinomial Latent Dirichlet Allocation technique.

The detailed description of the technique is provided in the next section. Figure 5 below shows one part of the result of temporal Topic Modeling. If a start time and end time are entered, the system returns chronological topic trends related to queries which were used upon data crawling.

Fig. 5. Multinomial Topic Modeling Result  To examine the performance of RT?M, we collect 1,737,969 tweets with the query term ?Geun Hae Park?, ?Jae In Moon?, ?Chul Su Ahn?, and ?Presidential Election? for one month from October 1, 2012 to October 31, 2012.

B. Text Mining Techniques This section describes text mining tec  integrated into RT?M. Some basic minin explained in Section III.A and henceforth, important mining techniques of RT?M: M Modeling and Community Detection for Analysis.

1) Multinomial Topic Modeling: Docum information retrieval or text mining is expresses an individual document and t documents in terms of term appearing in modeling is one of the document modelin LDA, standing for Latent Dirichlet Alloca Blei at al. [1], is one of the earliest topic mo that is based on a graph model with an assum prior-based topic distribution. In other word documents as mixtures of topics that spit certain probabilities. The topic modeling tech paper is Dirichlet-multinomial regression (D Mimno and McCallum [16]. DMR is an ex Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) proposed by B allows conditioning on arbitrary docum including a long-linear prior on document- that is a function of the features of the d author, publication venue, references, and document d, let 	 be a feature vector repre Given the prior distribution of ???? ??and hy the generative process for documents and follows:  (1) For each topic t, draw ?t~Dir(?) notin distinct Dirichlet distribution with the the topic-word distribution (a.k.a. hyp  (2) For each document d, a) Draw ?	??????	? ??????  noting that a per-document ?	 , the Dirichlet distribution and ?	 is a co ???	? ?? where ?	  is the observed document d and ? is a vector of me  b) For each word w, - Draw ?	??? !"????	? noting t  assignment of a word ?? and ?	 i of a document d  - Draw #	??? !"????$%?&?  noting word of a document d and ??  i topic t over the vocabulary with '    For DMR topic modeling, we set three ?2, the variance of the prior on parameter distribution; ?, the Dirichlet prior on distributions; and |T|, the number of topi representation of the aforementioned descr generative model shows in Figure 6.

chniques that are ng techniques are  we describe two Multinomial Topic r Social Network  ment modeling in a technique that the collection of documents. Topic  ng techniques, and ation proposed by odeling techniques mption of Dirichlet ds, LDA represents t out words with hnique used in this  DMR) proposed by xtension of Latent  Blei et al. [1], and ment features by topic distributions document such as d dates. For each esenting metadata.

yper-parameters ?, their words is as  ng that Dir(?) is a e Dirichlet prior on per-parameters), ?  ??	???(??)??	 * ? e parameters of a ovariance function attribute vector of  etadata  that ?	??  is topic is topic proportion  that #	??  is w-th s preference of a ' ???++ ,  fixed parameters: r values for prior  the topic-word cs. The graphical  ription of a DMR  Fig. 6. Graphical Representation of D  2) User Network Analys (SNA) has been widely used individuals, groups, or societie or a group is represented as a dependent relationship with ea since the inter-dependent rel service, extensive studies have However, the majority of stud conduit of social media follow/following as the analy Twitter has different characteri media. In other words, us relationship by acting ?follow interests in their own without Hence, only concentrating on t cannot properly reflect the t Twitter. In addition, dynam accompanied by those of social be identified. To this end, we u and their directness for the ana and visualization, we use an JUNG standing for Java Unive http://jung.sourceforge.net/), an for detecting user community.

In graph theory, meanwhil group of nodes, any of which other node. In our mention-ba that there are 1,537 component and 136,754 nodes. The com carry great scientific and practi correspond to behavior or fu such as social groups in a soc densely connected subset of no to the remaining network. Com valuable tool to analyze n   DMR Generative Process Model  sis: Social Network Analysis to analyze the relationship of  es in terms of network. A person a node, and each node has the ach other (tie). In social media, lationship is the core of the  e been done in the field of SNA.

dies on Twitter, a representative a, have adopted Twitter?s ysis unit. The user network in istics from those of other social ers in Twitter can make a  w? with others whom they have the consent of the other party.

the follow/following connection trait of the user networks in ic changes of user networks l issues in the real world need to  utilize mentions by Twitter users alysis unit. For network analysis open source visualization tool, rsal Network/Graph Framework nd Voltage-clustering algorithm  le, a weak component means a h would be reachable from any ased twitter network, we found ts consisting of 4,668,343 edges  mmunities from large networks ical value because they typically  unctional units of the network, cial network. A community is a odes that is only sparsely linked mmunity detection provides us a network structure and better     understand complex networks as well as provide better exploration and browsing tools for very large collections. In this paper, we employ the Voltage-clustering algorithm, which is suitable for a large social network. This algorithm is based on a priori that the clusters are of approximately the same size, and uses a more complex method than k-means for determining cluster membership based on co-occurrence data [27].



IV. CASE STUDY: 2012 KOREAN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION In this section, we discuss our case study related to 2012  Korean presidential election carried by the RT?M system. By utilizing RT?M to mine Twitter data on 2012 Korean Presidential Election, we demonstrate the usefulness of RT?M as a real-time text miner. The demonstration is made by comparison of term co-occurrence by query, topic trend, and mention-based user network analysis for presidential issues embedded in Twitter data.

A. Comparison of Term Co-occurrence by Query Table 1 below compares the partial results of term co-  occurrence retrieval by using influential candidates? name, ?Geun Hae Park?, ?Jae In Moon?, and ?Chul Su Ahn? as query terms.

TABLE I.  TERM CO-OCCURRENCE COMPARISON BY QUERIES  RK Query Term and Frequency1)  ?Park? TF ?Moon? TF ?Ahn? TF  1Presidential Election 634,540Moon 143,663Moon 62,770  2Declaration of Support 589,728 Presidential Election 92,062Ahn 53,554  3Park 530,307Declaration of Support 62,766Park 38,750  4Opinion Poll 492,762Ahn 57,420 Presidential Election 35,468  5Support 82,428Opinion Poll 54,494 Declaration of Support 11,672  6Declaration 80,904Park 49,785Opinion Poll 10,630  7Ahn Nonparty 52,990 Democratic United Party 8,552  Democratic United Party 6,858  8Moon 46,614Saenuri Party 7,818Saenuri Party 6,752  9Ahn 40,078Moon?s Camp 7,796 Moon?s Camp 6,540  10SNS Page 38,748Extension of Voting Time 7,192Moon?s Wife 5,740  11Park?s Mother 20,326Moon TV 5,916 Down Contract 4,678  12Park?s Father 13,059Moon?s Wife 5,768 Single Candidate 3,240  13Park?s Policy 10,210 Single Candidate 4,140  Discerning Interview 2,702  1) The query terms ?Park?, ?Moon?, and ?Ahn? stand for presidential candidates?Geun Hae Park?, ?Jae In Moon?, ?Chul Su Ahn?.

Across the board, general terms related to the event of the presidential election such as ?Presidential Election?, ?Declaration of Support?, ?Opinion Poll?, and each candidate?s counterparts? names were occurred in common and frequently.

On the other hand, unique terms by queries also appeared - they are bolded above. Terms such as ?Park?s Father and  Mother? from the query ?Guen Hae Park?, ?Extension of Voting Time? and ?Single Candidate? from the query ?Jae In Moon?, and ?Down Contract? and ?Single Candidate? from the query ?Chul Su Ahn? are the distinct features. In reality, events related to these unique key-words were main issues to each candidate. In particular, what is worth observing carefully is that in tweets which mentioned ?Jae In Moon? and ?Chul Su Ahn?, each other?s name was occurred with higher frequency and ranking than those on postings which mentioned ?Guen Hae Park?.  This is because ?Jae In Moon? and ?Chul Su Ahn? have discussed single opposition candidacy.

B. Social Issue Trend Analysis with DMR Temporal topic trend on 2012 Korean presidential election  shows in Figure 7 and Table II (t = 10, n = 20). Depending on the change of the probability distribution, each topic shows two types of patterns: 1) Rising tendency - topic #1, 2, and 2) Falling tendency - topic #3, 4.

Fig. 7. Topic Trends on the Presidential Election Overview     TABLE II.  TOPIC ANALYSIS  Topic Description  Label Terms Type1)  01 Jeongsu Foundation Park, Jeongsu Foundation, MBC, Pillip Choi R  02 Candidate Park, Moon, Ahn, Candidate, Election R  03 Park?s Approval Rating Park, Single Candidate, Approval Rating F  04 Suspicion on Ahn Dissertation, Plagiarism, Down Contract F 1)? Type? indicates ?R?ising or ? F?alling tendency of a specific issue.

To identify relationship between topical trend in Twitter and changes of social issues in the real world, we compared the topic #1 and #3, with actual events for the same period.

First, related to the topic #1 labeled as ?Jeongsu Foundation?, scandals on ?Jeongsu Foundation? and resignation of its board of directors received with media coverage on October 15. At increasing pace, the probability distribution of the topic in Twitter also changes, and even grows faster from October 10. Based on this observation, it indicates that controversial issues are propagated faster in Twitter than other media, and Twitter shows a predictive nature.

Second, during this period, suspicion on ?Chul Su Ahn? (Oct. 1), and Ahn?s elucidation for the truth were covered by mass media. This social issue, however, evened out soon because of the explanation of the Ahn?s election camp. The topic #3 also shows falling tendency. Based on this, we identified that Twitter would be useful for keeping track of changes of topical influence.

C. Mention-based User Network Analysis User network in Twitter has different characteristics from  those of other social media because users in Twitter can make a relationship by sending-receiving mentions between them. This study, therefore, aims at visualizing and analyzing content- based networks of 136,754 users. Mention-based user network is analyzed by the following process. First, we use a query such as ?Geun Hae Park? to retrieve tweets that contain the query term. Then, we extract the list of users who posted those tweets.

Finally, directed user network is visualized, based on the list of users who mentioned them or were mentioned by them.

Network Visualization by Queries ?Guen Hae Park? shows in Figure 8. Based on analysis of user profiles and mentions, it turns out that A and B clusters of Park?s network are a set of users who have political leaning toward conservation. The other clusters consist of progressive ones. This result reveals that unlike a certain candidate?s political identity, users in Twitter also mention about those who are different from their political dispositions. In addition, conservative-minded users interact with each other, consisting of a few large communities, while the counterparts forming several small groups are connected by some nodes with high betweenness.

Fig. 8. Network Visualization by Queries ?Park?  In addition, we examine how strongly the groups of the mention-based network are structured. To this end, we use modularity. Networks with high modularity tend to show a dense connection between the nodes within groups where a low modularity indicates sparse connections between nodes in different groups [17]. Modularity calculation for the entire network by JUNG and detected communities by the Voltage- clustering algorithm are shown in Table III.

TABLE III.  RESULT OF COMMUNITY DETECTION  No Community Size Modularity1)  01 33,393  1.25E-04  02 27,666  03 38,987  04 32,648  05 3,760  06 208  07 20  08 15  09 16  10 1  11 1  12 3  13 1  14 35 1) The value of the modularity lies in the range between -0.5 and 1  As shown above, we generated fourteen distinguished communities by the Voltage-clustering algorithm where the entire network has the value of 1.25E-04 in terms of modularity. This community structure reveals that 1) the user communities on the issue of the presidential election are quite densely connected with a few sparse connections between groups and 2) the network of social interests divides naturally into subgroups. This result also indicates that detecting  B  C A  D  E  F  G     community structure is a useful approach of as a data analysis technique used to shed light on the structure of large-scale network data sets.



V. CONCLUSION In this study, we empirically developed the Real-time  Twitter Trend Mining (RT2M) system that is designed for in real-time to 1) crawl and store every tweet produced in Twitter, 2) keep track of topical trend, and 3) visualize mention-based user networks. The major contribution of the study is making it possible to mine dynamic social trends and content-based networks generated in Twitter through adequate integration of state-of-the-art techniques. We also demonstrated the case study on 2012 Korea presidential election. Our empirical study revealed some new findings. First, based on the observation of the temporal Topic Modeling, we identified that Twitter would be a useful medium for keeping track of topical trends. In particular, we found that controversial issues could be propagated faster in Twitter than other media. Second, the mention-based user network provides a basis for identifying any nodes with high betweenness because users in Twitter tend to send/receive mentions each other, not depending on their positive/negative attitude towards a certain issue. This behavioral trait also affects to density of the user community.

Through additional sentiment analysis on tweets and sent- received mentions, however, we need to properly measure connectivity among users which could vary based on personal leaning or attitude on a certain issue in Twitter.

In the future, we will study how to apply sentiment analysis to Twitter data to observe changes in public opinion and the formation process of a certain issue, and ultimately design the prediction model of social issues on social media. In addition, by applying the concept of citation to Twitter, we may be able to discover content-based influencers and opinion leaders. We will also explore whether the community structure detected is co-related with the results of topic modeling reported in this paper. In addition, it is one of the interesting research problems to examine the social network patterns varying with the change of different terms over time that we hope to tackle in the future.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This study was supported by National Research Foundation  of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (NRF-2012- 2012S1A3A2033291).

