2012 IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference Record (NSS/MIC) MIO-14

Abstract-This work shows an Association Rule (AR)-based approach in order to design a computer aided diagnosis (CAD) system for the Alzheimer's disease (AD) detection with a 18F?  FDG and Pittsburg Compound B (PiB) PET (Positron Emission Tomography) biomarker analysis. The AD Neuroimaging Ini? tiative (ADNI) 1 dataset is used for testing and a comparison is conducted in two different sets: controls versus AD or controls versus Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) subjects. 3D Regions of Interest (ROls) are obtained with an activation estimation method for both biomarkers considered independently or in a combined way without repetition. These ROls are used as input for an Apriori algorithm in order to obtain ARs from controls.

Classification is performed taking into account the percentage of verified rules by each subject. Although PiB is distinguished from FDG in providing differential information, the combination of biomarkers shows positive results for both sets: while in the first, FDG results get better reaching an accuracy of 94.74%, in the second set both FDG and PIB rates are improved reaching a maximum accuracy of 92.86%; outperforming the results of other recently reported methods.



I. INTRODUCTION  Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia in the elderly [1] and has important and dramatic health as well as socio-economic implications. Furthermore, the incidence and prevalence of these diseases is increas? ing due to the aging population, particularly in the United States, Europe, and Japan. In order to improve the prediction accuracy especially in the early stage of the disease, when the patient could benefit most from drugs and treatments, computer aided diagnosis (CAD) tools are desirable [2].

The use of Positron Emission Tomography (PET) imaging provides a non-invasive way to detect functional brain changes in people who are at high risk of developing clinical AD [3]. While [18 F]- Fluorodeoxiglucose (FDG) demonstrates glucose metabolism, Pittsburg Compound B (PiB) shows amyloid deposition. Association Rules (ARs) are typically used in market basket analysis [4] and although applied to image analysis, its application to Alzheimer's Disease is still a challenge. ARs are proposed in this work as a methodology which takes the associations and/or relationships in PET data considering the possibility of a diagnostic approach predicated on the concept of certain combinations of biomarkers provid? ing complimentary information [5].

1 Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.ucla.edu).

As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the de? sign and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete list? ing of ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.ucla.edu/wp? content/uploads/how _to 3Pply/ ADNCAcknowledgemenCList. pdf

II. MATHERTALS AND METHODS  A. Databases  PET data was obtained from the ADNI Laboratory on Neurolmaging (LONI, University of California, Los Angeles) website (http://www.loni.ucla.

edU/ADNII). The ADNI was launched in 2003 by the National Institute on Aging (NIA), the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), private pharmaceutical companies and non-profit organizations, as a 60 million, 5-year public- private partnership. The primary goal of ADNI has been to test whether serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), PET, other biological markers, and clinical and neuropsychological as? sessment can be combined to measure the progression of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and early AD. Determination of sensitive and specific markers of very early AD progression is intended to aid researchers and clinicians to develop new treatments and monitor their effectiveness, as well as lessen the time and cost of clinical trials. The Principal Investigator of this initiative is Michael W. Weiner, MD, VA Medical Center and University of California - San Francisco. ADNI is the result of efforts of many co- investigators from a broad range of academic institutions and private corporations, and subjects have been recruited from over 50 sites across the U.S. and Canada. The initial goal of ADNI was to recruit 800 adults, ages 55 to 90, to participate in the research, approximately 200 cognitively normal older individuals to be followed for 3 years, 400 people with MCI to be followed for 3 years and 200 people with early AD to be followed for 2 years. For up-to-date information, see www.adni-info.org.

Determination of sensitive and specific markers of early AD progression is intended to aid researchers and clinicians to develop new treatments and monitor their effectiveness, as well as lessen the time and cost of clinical trials. The used database consists of baseline [18 F]-FDG and PiB PET data from the same 103 ADNI participants conditioned to in? clusion/exclusion criteria which were acquired from different scanners. PET data was separated into 3 different classes: 19 controls (CTRL), 65 Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and 19 AD.

1) Preprocessing .' Every subject PET image is co? registered to the AC-PC line, averaged, standardized spatially and in intensity, and with uniform resolution in order to make possible a direct comparison between images [3]. Subjects were spatially normalized using SPM5 software normalizing each [18 F]-FDG image volume with a general affine model with 12 parameters and a cost function to the MNI template [6]. One of these parameters were obtained for the [18 F]? FDG image. The same preprocessing for both modalities is    Fig. I. ARs depicted (as squares) in coronal slices at minsupp, minconf=lOO% for PET database: a) FDG, b) PIB, c) FDG plus PIB (over FDG mean image) for the CTRL versus AD set.

(a) (b)  (c)  Fig. 2. ARs depicted (as squares) in coronal slices at minsupp, minconf=IOO% for PET database: a) FDG, b) PIB, c) FDG plus PIB (over FDG mean image) for the CTRL versus MCI set.

guaranteed as each coregistered PiB image was normalized using them.

B. Description of the Method  The method consists of four stages: masking, activation estimation for the selection of Regions of Interest (ROls), AR? mining and classification. After preprocessing, an average of CTRL images or mask is firstly applied in order to discard noisy regions. Each PET image is subsequently divided into 3D v x v x v cubic voxels centered in (x,y,z) coordinates which    ? 60 >-? 50 :::J ? 40  10 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 % verified rules  Fig. 3. Accuracy results for the set CTRL versus AD at 100% of minconf and minsupp when FDG, PIB or the combination of both are used.

are inside of the 3D mask. In the activation estimation stage, it is considered that a block is activated defining ROls if the ratio of activated voxels inside of it is greater than a given threshold of 90%. The experiments considered training and testing the system in two different sets: AD versus CTRL (set 1) and CTRL versus MCI (set 2). The CAD system is analyzed using separately [18 F]-FDG or PIB biomarker and the combination of both. In the latter case, the ROls of the same subjects (FDG and PIB) are merged without repetition in order to study the effect of the biomarker (F DG+ PI B) combination. The ROIs obtained are used as input in the AR-mining stage, which is performed by means of Apriori, which is a state-of-the? art algorithm since most of the AR algorithms are variations of this [7]. Apriori works iteratively in order to identify the frequent item sets for generating strong association rules.

AR implications are established in terms of antecedents and consequences between the previously obtained 3D activated blocks I = {i 1, i2, ? . ?  , im} in order to define implications of the form X =} Y, where X c I, Y c I. To perform a search, the user has to specify min support (minsupp) and min confidence (minconf) for frequent itemsets. Each rule has support s if s% of the transactions contain X U Y and a confidence c, if c% of the transactions that contain X also contain Y, that is [4]:  f(X Y) - supp(X U Y)  (1) con =} - (X) supp  In addition, ARs are obtained from CTRL as generally speaking, control pattern is less variable than AD pattern. It is remarkable that ARs are mined following leave-one-out (100) cross-validation strategy, that is, if a given control subject is being evaluated, it is not considered in the AR mining process in order to avoid overtraining. In the test stage, the number of ARs verified by each subject is checked. If a subject verifies more or equal number of ARs than a class threshold, it is classified as CTRL otherwise as AD (set 1) or MCI (set 2).



III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  The proposed system was analyzed by means of its Accu? racy (Acc), Sensitivity (Sen) and Specificity (Spe). Firstly, 3D 9 x 9 x 9 ROls are defined by activation estimation. Figures 1 (for control versus AD group) and 2 (for control versus MCI group) show the ARs in the the coronal slices of a mean control PET image (or mask). FDG-PET masks are depicted    in figures La, 2.a, I.c and 2.c, and PIB-PET masks in figure

I.b and 2.b illustrating the 4 x 4 x 4 grid locations (crosses) and the activated regions involved in ARs (squares) in terms of antecedents and consequences of the rules.

Note that, when combined both FDG and PIB biomarkers on FDG mask (figures I.c and 2.c), more crosses appear depicted as some new rules were mined outperforming results with just FDG ROIs.

? 70 U ? 60 ? 50  30 . ,- 20 t--:--;:---:-,:=??:r::--:,-=;=-:--:_::::-J o 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100  % verified rules  Fig. 4. Accuracy results for the set CTRL versus MCI at 100% of minconf and minsupp when FDG, PIB or the combination of both are used.

As 100% of minsupp and minconf is used, maxima results are obtained when 100% of ARs are verified as the most discriminant rules for classification are obtained (see figures 3 and 4). According to this, for the CTRL versus AD group, accuracy results versus the percentage of verified rules are shown in figure 3 reaching maxima (Acc/Sen/Spe) rates of (92.11 %/84.21 %/100%) for FDG and (97.37%/94.74%/100%) for PIB biomarker. The combination without repetition of the ROls obtained from both FDG and PIB biomarker databases for each subject, improves the FDG results as maxima rates of (94.74%/89.47%/100%) were obtained.

On the other hand, for the CTRL versus MCI group, accuracy results versus the percentage of verified rules are represented in figure 4. Maximum results (Acc/Sen/Spe) turned out to be better for PIB (90.48%/87.69%/100%) in comparison with FDG biomarker (77.38%/70.7%/100%) showing the same tendency than for the CTRL versus AD set. However, the combination of F DC + PI B biomarkers is very positive in the evaluation of this set as maxima results of (92.85%/90.77%/1 00%) are obtained improving the ones with solely one biomarker.

In comparison with other reported methods, AR-based pro? posed technique outperforms Principal Component Analysis (PC A) in combination with Support Vector Machine (SV M) [3], in which maximum Acc of 86.11 % was reached.



IV. CONCLUSION  In this work, an AR-based classification method is applied over a PIB and [18 F]-FDG PET databases. A comparison by means of (Acc/ Sen/ Spe) is conducted in the sets AD versus CTRL and CTRL versus MCI. PiB is distinguished from FDG in providing differential information for the early diagnosis of AD, reaching maxima accuracies (Ace = 97.37% for CTRL versus AD and Ace = 90.48% for the CTRL versus MCI group). In the light of the results, it is concluded that   the combination of FDG and PIB biomarkers shows positive results for both groups: while in the first set FDG results are outperformed reaching Ace = 94.74%, in the second set both FDG and PIB rates are improved reaching maxima of Acc=92.86%.

