Secure and efficient mutual authentication protocol for RFID conforming to the EPC C-1 G-2 Standard

Abstract?As low-cost tags based on the EPC C-1 G-2 s- tandard are much limited in storage capacity and computation power, most of the existing authentication protocols are too complicated to be suitable for these tags, and the design of authentication protocols conforming to the EPC C-1 G-2 standard is a big challenge. Recently, a mutual authentication protocol for RFID conforming to the EPC C-1 G-2 standard was proposed by Yeh et al., and it is claimed that this protocol has solved all security vulnerabilities in the existing RFID protocols. However, in fact, it is proven that this scheme is vulnerable to the tag tracing attack and suffers from the information leakage issue, and the complexity of the successful attack is only 216. To address these issues efficiently, a novel secure RFID authentication protocol conforming to the EPC C-1 G-2 standard is proposed. In the new scheme, the attack complexity is raised to 232 without changing the length of any protocol data. Analysis shows that our protocol can not only efficiently resist the tag information leakage and the tag tracing attack, but also have a significant advantage in performance over Yeh et al.?s protocol.

Keywords?RFID; EPC C-1 G-2 standard; privacy; security;

I. INTRODUCTION  Nowadays, with the development of logistics and ecom- merce, the Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technology has been employed in many applications such as public trans- portation pass, supply chain management, e-passport, access control system and etc. The RFID technology is a passive automatic identification technology that uses radio signals to automatically identify the target and obtain its relevant data without human intervention and can work in all kinds of harsh environments. In an RFID system, the reader communicates wirelessly with a RFID tag via radio frequency signals, which makes the RFID system vulnerable to the tag impersonation attack, the tracing attack, the replay attack, the DoS (denial of service) attack, the eavesdropping attack, and so on. So, the security problem has become an obstacle to using the RFID technology widely.

To heal these security weaknesses existing in the RFID system, many researchers have paid more attention to the RFID authentication protocols based on cryptographic mech- anisms in the early research of the RFID security mechanism.

Nevertheless, due to the storage and computation limitation of the low-cost tags, it is not realistic to design a protocol based on complicated cryptographic algorithms. At present, it is commonly accepted to use the Hash function, whose  computation overhead is relatively small to authenticate tags and the reader, in low-cost RFID security authentication schemes [1], [2]. However, the EPC Class-1 Generation-2 (short as EPC C-1 G-2) standard, which is suitable for low-cost RFID tags and proposed by EPC (Electronic Product Code) global organization [3], defines a much stricter framework including the tags? functions and operations. In the EPC C- 1 G-2 standard, the allowable operations of tags are restricted to some simple operations such as CRC (Cycle Redundancy checksum Code), PRNG (Pseudo Random Number Generator), and bitwise XOR, and even the Hash operation is not avail- able under this definition [4], [5]. In this case, those RFID authentication protocols based on the Hash function are too complicated for EPC C-1 G-2 tags [6]. Therefore, the design of RFID authentication protocols conforming to the EPC C-1 G-2 standard becomes one of hot topics of the RFID security protocol.

Most of the existing RFID authentication protocols con- forming to the EPC C-1 G-2 standard have undergone some difficulties to provide the security. It usually introduces new problems when trying to solve some potential ones. Juels [7] proposed an anti-cloning and anti-counterfeiting RFID authen- tication protocol conforming to the EPC C-1 G-2 standard in 2005. However, Duc et al. [5] pointed out that there are some weaknesses related to privacy and information leakage in Juels? scheme. And at the same time, Duc et al. [5] proposed a new scheme, which only used CRC, XOR and PRNG to guarantee the interactive information security, and declared it can achieve mutual authentication between the tag and the reader as well as the synchronous updating of secret key. But later, researchers found that Duc et al.?s protocol is prone to the de-synchronization attack and it cannot ensure the forward security. Chien and Chen [8] proposed an improved RFID authentication protocol (referred as CC) in 2007. But soon after that, Lopez et al. [9] pointed out that the CC scheme cannot resist the tag and reader impersonation, tracing and de-synchronization attacks. Han and Kwon [10] also showed clearly in another way that the above attacks of the CC scheme results mainly from the linear attributes of CRC. In 2010, Yeh et al. [11] proposed a secure RFID mutual authentication protocol (referred as SRP). The SRP scheme uses the tag index number to search the target tag from the database, and it improves the efficiency of the database to identify tags. However, Habbie et al. [4], [17] found its drawbacks   2013 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC): NETWORKS2013 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC): NETWORKS     TABLE I. NOTATIONS  Name Meaning EPCs A 16-bit value which is built by XORing six 16-blocks of the EPC code Ki The authentication key stored in a tag and used to authenticate the tag at (i+1)th authentication by the database Pi The access key stored in a tag and used to authenticate the database at the (i+1) authentication by the tag Ci The database index stored in the tag and used to find the corresponding record of the tag by the database  RID The identity number of the reader Pold The old access key stored in the database Pnew The new access key stored in the database Kold The old authentication key stored in the database Knew The new authentication key stored in the database Cold The old database index stored in the database Cnew The new database index stored in the database Di The detailed information of the tag stored in the database  soon as well as Eun-Jun Yoon [16]. Besides, we find that the SRP scheme may leak the secret key and an adversary can easily get the shared secret key via a simple passive attack. In addition, the SRP protocol does not accord with the common assumptions of the RFID authentication protocol, and the authentication operations between the reader and the back- end server are not necessary, because they are usually wired connected, and the communication between them is assumed to be secure [3], [5], [8], [12], [13].

Motivated by these concerns, a new RFID authentication protocol conforming to the EPC C-1 G-2 standard is proposed.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the authentication process of the SRP protocol is introduced and some analyses are made on them. Then, our RFID authenti- cation protocol conforming to the EPC C-1 G-2 standard is proposed in Section 3. In Section 4, the security and privacy of our protocol is analyzed with given security models. Finally, we put forward the related conclusions in Section 5.



II. VULNERABILITIES OF THE SRP PROTOCOL  A. Review of the SRP protocol  The notations used in the SRP protocol are introduced in Table I, and the process of the SRP protocol [11] is simply described as follows:  1) Initialization For each tag, the database is preloaded with the entry  [Kold,Pold,Cold,Knew,Pnew,Cnew,EPCs,RID,Di]. The values K0, P0 and C0 are generated randomly by the manufacturer.

And initially, we set Kold = Knew = K0, Pold = Pnew = P0, Cold = Cnew = C0. Each tag records the entry [Ki = K0, Pi = P0, Ci = C0, EPCs] which have the same values as those recorded in database.

2) The (i+ 1)th authentication round First, the reader queried the tag T with a random number  NR. Then, the tag T responds to the reader?s query by computing  M1 = PRNG(EPCs ?NR)?Ki D = NT ?Ki  E = NT ? PRNG(Ci ?Ki)  and sending M1, D, E and C to the reader. Then, the reader transmits M1, D, E and C to the server.

The server computes M2=PRNG(EPCs?NT )?PX (where X=new or old) and Info=Di?RID, and sends them to the reader after successfully authenticating the tag, and at the same  time updates Ki, Pi and Ci as follows: If X=new, it updates the stored values as follows:  Kold = Knew,Knew = PRNG(Knew)  Pold = Pnew, Pnew = PRNG(Pnew)  Cold = Cnew, Cnew = PRNG(NT ?NR)  If X=old, it only updates Ci as Cnew =PRNG(NT ?NR).

At last, the reader transmits M2 to the tag.

After authenticating the server successfully, the tag updates  Ki, Pi and Ci as follows:  Ki+1 = PRNG(Ki)  Pi+1 = PRNG(Pi)  Ci+1 = PRNG(NT ?NR)  B. Vulnerabilities of the SRP protocol  Habibi et al.[4] shows that the SRP protocol does not provide the forward security (or called the backward untrace- ability) and the untraceability. Aside from the tracing attacks, it is presented that an adversary can obtain the most important secret information value called EPCs by impersonating the reader to perform two consecutive sessions with the target tag.

Upon having got the correct EPCs, the adversary can figure out the shared secret value of Ki and successfully impersonate the tag for ever. In addition, the reveal of EPCs can lead to the DoS attack and the Server Forgery attack (see [4], [16], [17] for details).

In addition to the above attacks proposed by Habibi et al., we present a simple passive attack which also can break the SRP protocol, and this attack makes it possible for an adversary to get the Ki. Here, we will present this attack. In the SRP protocol, it is mentioned that the value EPCs is a 16-bit string which is constructed from XORing six 16-bit blocks of the EPC code. Since NR and NT are XORed with EPCs, it is concluded that the bit lengths of NR and NT are the same as the bit length of EPCs which is 16. Since Ki, Pi and Ci are updated by PRNG, the bit lengths of them must be equal to the output length of PRNG which is 16.

The process of the simple attack is shown as follows: 1) The adversary intercepts the responding message  (Ci,M1, D,E) of the tag in the i-th session, and the structure of the messages D and E are as follows:  D = NT ?Ki     E = NT ? PRNG(Ci ?Ki)  2) The adversary omits NT by XORing D and E:  D ? E = NT ?Ki ?NT ? PRNG(Ci ?Ki)  = Ki ? PRNG(Ci ?Ki) = ?  where ? is a 16-bit string equal to D ? E in value.

3) Let L = {l1, l2, ..., l16} be the set of all bit strings with  length 16. Since Ki is a bit string with length 16, we have Ki ? L. With ? and Ci, the adversary continues the below algorithm:  a) Choose li ? L, for 1 ? i ? 216; b) Compute ? = li? PRNG(Ci ? li); c) If ? = ?, then return li as Ki.

After at most 216 executions of the algorithm, the adversary  can find the correct Ki. As a result, it is easy to see that the SRP protocol cannot resist the tag information leakage and the tracing attack. In addition, we can see the attack complexity of our method is equal to that of Habibi et al.?s, i.e. 216.



III. THE PROPOSED PROTOCOL  The SRP protocol is not suitable for practical applications because it does not accord with the common assumptions of the RFID authentication protocol. Thus here, the common assumptions of RFID authentication protocol are introduced first, and then the RFID privacy model is given in this section.

And at last, the proposed protocol is described in details.

A. Common Assumptions  Our protocol works under the following assumptions [3], [5], [8], [12], [13]:  1) Each tag has a unique initiator (for example the manu- facturer), which creates and maintains security parameters for the tag.

2) Each tag and the reader have a PRNG function. The tag can generate random numbers and perform the CRC operation, and their memories are assumed to be secure.

3) The channel between the server and the reader is secure.

This assumption is reasonable because unlike the tag, the reader?s performance is unlimited and thus it can set up a secure channel with the server by using those known security protocols which have been proved secure (or directly using wired connection). So, the algorithm used by them is not restricted to the equipments? performance, and the use of the complicated and secure cryptographic algorithms can raise the system security largely as a result. After all, the simple algorithm and the protocol?s security are relative to the cost of the equipments when designing some security protocols related to tags.

4) The reader and the tag communicate over an insecure channel and the communication between them is subject to eavesdropping or modification.

B. Privacy Model  The privacy model [4], [14], [15], [17], [18], [19] is described as follows:  The protocol parties are composed of tags (T ) and readers (R) which interact each other in each protocol session. In this  model, an adversary A controls the communication channel between all parties either passively or actively. The Adversary A is allowed to run the following queries:  1) Execute(R, T, i) query: This query models the passive attacks. The adversary A eavesdrops over the communication channel between T and R and gets the read access to the exchanged messages between them in session i of a truthful protocol execution.

2) Send(U, V,m, i) query: This query models active attacks by allowing the adversary A to impersonate some readers U ? R (respectively V ? T ) in some session i and send a message m to some tag V ? T (respectively reader U ? R).

Furthermore, the adversary A is allowed to block or alert the message m.

3) Corrupt(T,K ?) query: This query allows the adversary A to learn the stored secret K of the tag T , and which further sets the stored secret to K ?. Corrupt query means that the adversary A has physical access to the tag, i.e., the adversary can tamper with the tag?s permanent memory.

4) Test(i, T0, T1) query: This query does not correspond to any of the A?s capabilities, but it is necessary to define the untraceable test. When this query is invoked for session i, a random number b ? {0, 1} is generated and then, A is given Tb ? {T0, T1}. Informally, A wins if he can guess the bit b correctly.

Untraceable privacy (UPriv) is defined by using the game g played between an adversary A and a collection of session instances between the reader and the tag. The game g is divided into three following phases:  Phase 1 (Learning): A is given T0 or T1 randomly and A is able to send any Execute, Send and Corrupt queries at will to T0, T1 and readers.

Phase 2 (Challenge): 1. At some point during g, A chooses two fresh tags T0 and  T1 to be tested and sends a Test(i, T0, T1) query. Depending on a randomly chosen bit b ? {0, 1}, A is given a tag Tb ? {T0, T1}.

2. A continues making any Execute, Send and Corrupt queries at will.

Phase 3 (Guess): Eventually, A terminates the game g simulations and outputs a bit b? ? {0, 1}, which is the guess value of b.

The success of A in winning the game g and thus breaking the notion of UPriv is quantified in terms of A?s advantage in determining what A receives is T0 or T1. The advantage is denoted by AdvUprivA (k):  AdvUprivA (k) = |Pr(b ? = b)? 1/2|,  where k is the security parameter.

Definition 1: A protocol is secure, if the advantage AdvUprivA (k) of the adversary is negligible.

C. Description of the proposed protocol  The notations used in the proposed protocol are the same as the SRP protocol (in Table I). Based on the common assump- tions presented in Section III-A, a new RFID authentication protocol conforming to the EPC C-1 G-2 standard is proposed to solve the security problems existing in the SRP protocol.

Fig. 1: The process of the proposed protocol  The protocol is summarized in Fig. 1. The process of the protocol is divided into the initialization and the authentication process.

1) Initialization For each tag, the database is preloaded with the entry  [Kold,Cold,Knew,Cnew,EPCs,Di]. The values K0, P0 and C0 are generated randomly by the manufacturer. Then, we set Kold = Knew = K0, and Cold = Cnew = C0. Each tag records the entry [Ki = K0, Ci = C0, EPCs], whose values are equal to those recorded in the database. The reader, which is trusted as a party by the server, does not need to store any identity information.

2) AuthenticationProcess a) Reader : A reader R generates a random number N1  and sends it to a tag Ti.

b) Tag : The tag Ti generates a random number N2, and  computes: M1 = EPCs ?N1 ?Ki  CN2 = N2 ? PRNG(Ki)  M2 = CRC(EPCs ?N2 ? Ci)?Ki  c) Reader : The reader R transmits (Ci,M1, CN2,M2, N1) to the server.

d) Server : The server completes the following steps upon receiving (Ci,M1, CN2,M2, N1):  (i) Based on the received value Ci, the server retrieves the database for a Cinew or Ciold equal to Ci and picks up EPCs of the correct tag, and then recovers Ki by Ki =EPCs?N1 ? M1. If Ki =Kold or Knew, the server figures out the temporary key N2 = CN2?PRNG(Ki) and checks whether the equation M2?Ki =CRC(EPCs?N2?Ci) holds or not. The execution of the above process is repeated until the matched tag is found. Otherwise, the server sends an error message to the reader and stops this session.

(ii) After authenticating the tag successfully, the sever computes M3 =CRC(EPCs ? (N2 ? l/4))?Ki, and sends  (Di,M3) to the reader R.

(iii) The server updates the records as follows:  Ciold ? Ci, Cinew ? PRNG(N1 ?N2)?Ki Kiold ? Ki,Kinew ? Ki ? (N2 ? l/4)  e) Reader : The reader R receives (Di,M3) and then sends M3 to the tag Ti.

f) Tag : The tag Ti computes CRC(EPCs ? (N2 ? l/4))?Ki and checks whether the equation and checks whether the equation  M3 ?Ki = CRC(EPCs ? (N2 ? l/4))  holds. If it holds, the tag authenticates the server successfully and updates the records as follows:  Ci ? PRNG(N1 ?N2)?Ki Ki ? Ki ? (N2 ? l/4)  If it does not hold, the tag Ti stops the session.



IV. ANALYSES AND DISCUSSIONS  A. Security Analysis  Based on the privacy model described in Section III-B, we will analyze the privacy and security of the proposed protocol in this section.

1) Forward Security In the proposed protocol, to trace the previous behavior of  the target tag, an adversary can perform the following steps: Phase 1 (Learning): The adversary A sends a Cor-  rupt (T0,K ?) query in the round (i+1) and thus obtains (EPCT0s,i, C  T0 i ,K  T0 i ).

Phase 2 (Challenge): The adversary A chooses two fresh tags T0 and T1 to be tested and sends a Test (i, T0, T1) query. Depending on a randomly chosen bit b ? {0, 1}, A is given a tag Tb ? {T0, T1}. A makes an Execute (R, Tb, i) query in the round (i) and as a result, A is given messages     {NTb1,i?1, C Tb i?1,M  Tb 1,i?1, CN  Tb 2,i?1,M  Tb 2,i?1}.

Phase 3 (Guess): Finally, A terminates the game g and outputs a bit b? ? {0, 1} as the guess value of b. A computes EPCT0s ?N  Tb 1,i?1 ?M  Tb 1,i?1 = ? where ? is a 16-bit string.

Theorem 1: During the above game g, if A cannot derive the value of ? from the tag?s responding messages, i.e., A cannot judge what he received is T0 or T1, that is, A is unable to determine the value of b?. Thus, the A?s advantage AdvUPrivA (k) is negligible.

Proof: By the fact that EPCs is a permanent value in the all rounds of the protocol, we have EPCT0s,i=EPC  T0 s,i?1. By  performing the first two steps (Learning and Challenge), the adversary A obtains the above messages including the tag?s responding message in the round (i):  MTb1,i?1 = EPCs ?N Tb 1,i?1 ?K  Tb i?1  CNTb2,i?1 = N Tb 2,i?1 ? PRNG(K  Tb i?1)  MTb2,i?1 = CRC(EPCs ?N Tb 2,i?1 ? C  Tb i?1)?K  Tb i?1  The adversary A computes EPCT0s ?N Tb 1,i?1?M  Tb 1,i?1 = ?.

From the structure of the tag?s responding message above we can see: it is infeasible to derive the secret key KTbi?1 without the temporary privacy key NTb2,i?1, although we know M  Tb 1,i?1,  CNTb2,i?1 and M Tb 2,i?1. Therefore, the adversary A couldn?t  distinguish T0 from T1, i.e., A can not determine the value of b?. So, the advantage AdvUPrivA (k) is negligible, i.e., our protocol guarantees the forward security.

2) Privacy of tags In our protocol, to trace the target tag, an adversary can  perform the following steps: Phase 1 (Learning): The adversary A sends an Execute  (R, T0, i + 1) query in the round (i + 1) and thus obtain (CT0i ,M  T0 1,i , CN  T0 2,i ,M  T0 2,i ).

Phase 2 (Challenge): The adversary A chooses two fresh tags T0 and T1 to be tested and sends a Test (i + 1, T0, T1) query. Depending on a randomly chosen bit b ? {0, 1}, A is given a tag Tb ? {T0, T1}. A makes an Execute (R, Tb, i+ 1) query in the round (i+1) and as a result, A is given messages (CTbi ,M  Tb 1,i, CN  Tb 2,i,M  Tb 2,i).

Phase 3 (Guess): Finally, A terminates the game g and outputs a bit b? ? {0, 1} as its guess of the value of b.

Theorem 2: During the above game g, if A cannot make sure whether the obtained messages come from the same tag, i.e., A cannot distinguish T0 from T1, that is, A is unable to determine the value of b?. Then, A?s advantage AdvUPrivA (k) is negligible.

Proof: The responding messages obtained by the adver- sary A in Phase 1 are as follows:  MT01,i = EPC T0 s ?N1 ?K  T0 i  CNT02,i = N T0 2,i ? PRNG(K  T0 i )  MT02,i = CRC(EPC T0 s ?N  T0 2,i ? C  T0 i )?K  T0 i  And the received messages in Phase 2 are as follows:  MTb1,i = EPC Tb s ?N1 ?K  Tb i  CNTb2,i = N Tb 2,i ? PRNG(K  Tb i )  MTb2,i = CRC(EPC Tb s ?N  Tb 2,i ? C  Tb i )?K  Tb i  From the structures of these messages, we can see: The query message N1, which will be used in the expression of M1, is chosen randomly, and in addition, the message M1 is relative to the secret key Ki, where Ki = Ki?1?(N2 ? l/2).

So, the message M1 varies dynamically each session because of N1 although the shared secret key Ki is not updated. In addition, the random number N2, which then is used in the expressions of CN2 and M2, is chosen randomly by the tag.

So, it is absolutely possible to guarantee that the value of CN2 is different in each session, as well as M2. Therefore, the adversary A couldn?t distinguish T0 from T1, i.e., A doesn?t determine the value of b?, and the advantage AdvUPrivA (k) is negligible. So, our protocol achieves the untraceability.

B. Performance Analysis  From the structure of the protocol messages, we can see that the complexity of deriving EPCs and Ki from the message (N1,M1) is 232, where M1 =EPCs?N1?Ki. The complexity of deriving EPCs and Ki from the message M2 is 248 where M2 =CRC(EPCs ? N2 ? Ci) ? Ki and N2 is secure. In addition, since the M1 and M2 are independent of each other, the adversary needs at least 232 executions of the exhaustive search operations to derive EPCs and Ki. Compared with the complexity of the SRP protocol 216, our protocol is effective to resist the exhaustive search attack.

TABLE II. STORAGE REQUIREMENTS  Storage SRP Our protocol Server 7l 5l  Tag 4l 3l  l: The bit-length of a tag identifier  TABLE III. COMPUTATION REQUIREMENTS  computation SRP Our protocol  Serve  On receiving the 2nd flow 2F 2F On sending the 3rd flow 1F 1F  On updating or refreshing 3F 1F Total 6F 4F  Tag  On sending the 2nd flow 2F 2F On receiving the 3rd flow 1F 1F On updating or refreshing 3F 1F  Total 6F 4F  F : A computationally complex function (such as PRNG, CRC)  Here, we make comparisons between our protocol and the SRP protocol in terms of the storage and computation requirements respectively as shown in Table II and Table III, which show that our protocol reduces the storage overhead and the computation overhead.



V. CONCLUSION  To heal the weaknesses existing in the SRP protocol, a novel RFID authentication protocol conforming to the EPC C- 1 G-2 standard is proposed, which guarantees the tag?s privacy and satisfies the security requirements. This scheme further reduces the storage and the computation cost compared with     the SRP protocol. It is worth mentioning that the proposed scheme has the absolute advantage in the security, although we improve a little in terms of performance.

