A Case Study on Web Application Security Testing

Abstract?Web application security has become a big issue  because of common vulnerabilities found in web applications.

This paper illustrates a case study on conducting security testing  on an example application, Tunestore. The example application  was tested using a number of tools such as Paros, WebScarab,  JBroFuzz, Acunetix, and Fortify. Manual testing was also  conducted.  The testing results of different tools and manual  testing are compared and discussed. Our case study shows  manual testing is very important since some vulnerability types  can only be found through manual testing and tester?s  observations, and it is important to utilize a variety of tools as  well as conduct careful manual testing in order to find the most  number of vulnerabilities in a web application. Based on this case  study, hands-on labs can be developed for teaching web security, software security testing, and other topics.



I. INTRODUCTION  Web applications today are highly functional, and rely upon a two-way flow of information between the server and browser. Security becomes a big issue because no one wants to use a web application if they believe their information will be disclosed to unauthorized parties [1]. Vulnerabilities commonly found in web applications include injection, cross- site scripting, cross-site request forgery, security misconfiguration, broken authentication and session management, and more.

Penetration testing and static code analysis may be used to assess the vulnerabilities of web applications. Penetration testing is a method of security testing through the simulation of an attack. Static code analysis, also known as source code analysis is a code review process that examines the software?s source code for common coding errors and defects without execution [3].

This case study uses an example web application, Tunestore to conduct security testing. It illustrates web application security testing using tools and manual testing. The tools used to conduct testing on Tunestore are Paros, WebScarab, JBroFuzz, Fortify, and Acunetix. Our case study shows manual testing is very important since some vulnerability types can only be found through manual testing and tester?s observations, and it is important to utilize a variety of tools as well as conduct careful manual testing in order to find the most number of vulnerabilities in a web application.

Based on this case study, hands-on labs can be developed to  teach about web application vulnerabilities, software security testing, and other topics.

This paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses some common web application vulnerabilities. Section III describes the tools we used for web application security testing, Section IV gives a description of the example application used to conduct security testing, and Section V and VI discuss the results from testing the example application using tools as well as through manual testing. Section VII provides further discussion on the testing results and Section VIII concludes the paper.



II. COMMON WEB APPLICATION VULNERABILITIES  This section discusses common vulnerabilities of web applications. They include SQL injection, cross-site scripting, cross-site request forgery, broken authentication and session management. These vulnerabilities were listed in OWASP?s Top 10 Project as among the Top 10 critical web application security risks [4]. They also appear significantly in the Web Hacking Incident Database (WHID) [5]. A brief discussion is provided here. A more detailed discussion can be found in [6].

SQL injection is a vulnerability type where an application accepts malicious scripts that are later parsed and executed.

The fundamental way of attack involves the direct insertion of code into user-input variables that are concatenated with SQL commands and executed. A rare and indirect way of attack is where the malicious code is injected into strings that are destined for storage in a table or as metadata. Subsequently when the stored string is concatenated into a dynamic SQL command the malicious code is executed.  An attacker can anonymously read and modify data contained in a database as well as take full control of the server by exploiting the SQL vulnerability.

An application is vulnerable to cross-site scripting (XSS) vulnerabilities when it takes untrusted data and sends it to a web browser without proper validation and escaping. This allows attackers to embed malicious JavaScript, VBScript, ActiveX, HTML or Flash into a dynamic page to trick the user, executing the script on his machine in order to gather data, hijack sessions, redirect users to a malicious site or deface the website. Furthermore, a successful attack may result in the compromising of private information, manipulation or theft of cookies, creation of requests that can be mistaken for those of a  This work is partially supported by Department of Education under grant  P120A090049 and NSF under grant HRD-1137516. Any opinions, findings,  and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of  the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science  Foundation and Department of Education.

valid user. It might also cause the execution of malicious code on the end user systems. Three types of XSS exist. The first one is Reflected XSS, in which dynamic web pages take text submitted by a client or user and simply renders this text back to user within its response. The second type is Stored XSS. It occurs where some malicious user-submitted data is stored in a database to be used in the creation of pages that will be served to other users later. Thus, visitors of the web page fall victim for this attack. Lastly, Local XSS exploit targets vulnerabilities that exist within the webpage code itself. Usually, this happens when Document Object Model (DOM) is wrongly used in JavaScript. As a result, opening another web page with malicious JavaScript code in it at the same time might actually alter the code in the first page on the local system.

Broken authentication and session management is the vulnerability whereby the application does not implement its authentication and session management functions correctly.

The attacker uses leaks or flaws such as exposed accounts, session IDs and passwords in the authentication or session management function to impersonate users. When successful, an attacker is able to do anything the victim could do. The situation worsens when the administrator is the victim.

Cross-site request forgery usually occurs where HTTP cookies are primarily used to transmit session tokens. Where precaution is not taken against the misuse of the token, an attacker can trick an authenticated user to perform actions of his (attacker) choosing. Victims are forced to change data and perform functions they are allowed or authorized to do  Insecure direct object reference is a common web application vulnerability regarding access control. This occurs when an application wrongfully exposes a reference to an internal implementation object. An attacker, usually an authorized user, exploits this vulnerability by simply changing a parameter value that references a system object. This enables him to access unauthorized objects.



III. TOOLS USED IN THE CASE STUDY  This section briefly describes the tools used in this case study  which are: Paros, WebScarab, JBroFuzz, Acunetix and  Fortify.

A. Paros  Paros [7] is a free web application vulnerability assessment  tool written in Java by ProofSecure.com. It can be used as a  web spider, vulnerability scanner, proxy, and a fuzzer. The web  spider function is used to discover the content of a website by  parsing a webpage for links to other content, requesting these  pages, and continuing this process recursively. The scanner  function scans the web application to identify common  vulnerabilities such as cross-site scripting, SQL injection, forms with autocomplete enabled, old versions of files, etc.

Paros can also trap HTTP and HTTPS requests and responses  so they can be modified manually [1, 8].

B. WebScarab  WebScarab [9] is an open-source web application security testing tool written in Java. The tool is a part of the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) [10]. It can be used for  analyzing applications that communicate with HTTP and HTTPS protocols. WebScarab operates as an intercepting proxy, in which the user is allowed to review and modify intercepted requests that are created by the browser and responses from the server. Similar to Paros, it can be used as a web spider to discover the content of a website. The fuzzer feature of WebScarab allows a user to test a web page by taking a list of test strings and trying them in the input fields automatically [11].

C. JBroFuzz  JBroFuzz is a web application fuzzer written in Java and is  a part of the OWASP Project. The fuzzer is for requests made  over HTTP and HTTPS protocols [12]. The fuzzing feature is  used to create a HTTP request to send to the web application.

A fuzzer can be added to a parameter field to add attack  payloads. The payload feature has attack strings of several  vulnerability categories such as Injection, XSS, Integer Overflow, XPATH Injection, SQL Injection, and more. HTTP  responses are displayed in an output window showing the  payload and the HTTP response status code. The responses of  the web application to the attack strings are also shown. The  graphing feature can generate different types of graphs to  visualize the fuzzing results. There are six types of  graphs/charts: Status Code Pie Chart, Response Time Bar  Chart, Response Size Bar Chart, Jaccard Index, Hamming  Distance, and Response Header.

D. Acunetix  Acunetix is a product of the Acunetix Company [13]. It is a  web vulnerability scanner created to replicate hacker?s  methodologies to find vulnerabilities in web applications.

Acunetix crawls through the websites to analyze the content  including flash content, SOAP and AJAX. The scanner  includes features such as advanced and in-depth SQL injection  and cross-site scripting testing, penetration tools which include HTTP Editor and HTTP Fuzzer, and others. The cost  of the tool ranges from $1,000 - $12,995. It has a free trial  version that can only scan for cross-site scripting  vulnerabilities in a web application. In this case study, the free  trial version was used to test the example web application.

E. Fortify  Fortify is a static analysis tool used to find root causes of  security vulnerabilities in source code. Fortify supports a  range of languages, platforms, build environments and  software component APIs. Fortify can detect more than 480  types of software security vulnerabilities among 20 different  languages. The tool displays results sorted by severity of risk  and guidance on how to mitigate the risks [14]. The  demonstration version of the software that comes with the  book ?Software Security: Building Security In? [3] only scans  for SQL injection, buffer overflow, system information leak,  and HTTP response splitting vulnerabilities. In this case study, the demonstration version of Fortify was used to test the  example web application.

Table 1 summarizes the automated tools used for the case  study.



IV. THE EXAMPLE APPLICATION  The application used to conduct security testing is the Tunestore web application developed by Dr. Bei-Tseng Bill  Chu?s project team from the University of North Carolina at  Charlotte. The Tunestore web application is a .war file installed  on a server on an Ubuntu Virtual Machine to conduct security  testing. Tunestore is an online retail store of songs. A user has  to create an account to gain access to the store and its database  of songs, although users may view the list of songs without  being a registered user. Registered users are able to select  several options within the store: ?add balance?, ?friends?,  ?profile?, ?CDs?, and ?log out?. The ?add balance? option  allows the user to add money to their account by using a credit  card to purchase songs. The ?friends? option allows the user to add and view friends, as well as accept friend requests. The  ?profile? option provides the user with their username and their  current account balance. The user may also change their  password under the ?profile? option. The ?CDs? option  displays a list of songs the user can buy, send as a gift, or make  a comment under the CD. This option also shows the user?s  purchased CDs. The ?log out? option logs the user out of their  profile and redirects them to the homepage of the store.



V. SECURITY TESTING WITH TOOLS  The Tunestore web application was tested using the five  tools described in Section III. This section describes the testing results of using these tools.

A. Testing Results with Paros  Using the scanner feature of Paros, 37 potential  vulnerabilities were discovered in the Tunestore web  application. These vulnerabilities are listed below. The  number following the vulnerability refers to the number of occurrences of the vulnerability.

? Obsolete File (7): It indicates that miscellaneous items including files, backup, unused, or obsolete  files exist. If these files contain program source,  information such as server logic or ODBC/JDBC  user IDs and passwords may be revealed since these  file extensions may not be processed by the web server.

? Obsolete File Extended Check (7): It also indicates that miscellaneous items including files, backup,  unused, or obsolete files exist.

? Password Autocomplete in Browser (7): This vulnerability means the AUTOCOMPLETE attribute  is not disabled in the HTML FORM/INPUT element  containing password type input. Passwords may be  stored in browsers and retrieved.

? Session ID in URL rewrite (7): URL rewrite is used to track user session IDs. The session ID may be disclosed in the referer header. Besides, the session  ID can be stored in the browser?s history or server  logs.

? SQL Injection (4): SQL injection is possible. User parameters submitted will be formulated into a SQL  query for database processing. If the query is built by  simple string concatenation, it is possible to modify  the meaning of the query by carefully crafting the  parameter.

? SQL Injection Fingerprinting (4): SQL injection may be possible.

Tool Functionalities Cost Operating System  Paros [7] Web proxy  Web spider  Automated vulnerability scanner  Manual request with proxy, fuzzer  Free Linux, Apple Mac OS X, Microsoft Windows  WebScarab [8] Web proxy  Web spider  Manual fuzzer  Manual vulnerability scanner  Manual request with web proxy, spider,  fuzzer, history  Free Linux, Apple Mac OS X, Microsoft Windows  JBroFuzz [11] Automated fuzzing  Graphing  Built-in attack payloads  Free Linux, Apple Mac OS X, Microsoft Windows  Acunetix [12] Automatic client script analyzer SQL Injection and Cross-site scripting  testing  Fast scanner crawls  Port scans on web servers  Commercial $1,000 -  $12,995  Microsoft Windows, Microsoft Windows Server, Microsoft Windows 2008 Server  Fortify [13] Automated vulnerability scanner  Source code analyzer  Commercial Linux, Microsoft Windows, Mac OS, Oracle  Solaris, HP-UX  Table 1. Automated Tools used in the Case Study    ? Cross-Site Scripting (1): Malicious scripts may be injected into the browser which can appear to be  genuine content from the original site. These scripts  can be used to execute arbitrary code or steal  customers? sensitive information such as user  passwords or cookies.

B. Testing Results with WebScarab  Using the fuzzer and the proxy features of WebScarab, we discovered potential SQL injection and cross-site scripting vulnerabilities:  ? SQL Injection: An input attack file was created which included SQL injection attack strings. This attack file was submitted to the WebScarab fuzzer to test the login page of the Tunestore web application. Some of the attacks were successful.

? Reflected Cross-Site Scripting: Using WebScarab?s fuzzer feature, an input attack file was created which included cross-site scripting attack strings to test the login page of the Tunestore web application. The scripts were executed showing that the login page has XSS vulnerabilities.

? Stored Cross-Site Scripting: Using WebScarab?s proxy feature, comments submitted by the user was intercepted and changed to malicious scripts.

The malicious scripts were then saved on the server, and would be activated when someone views the comment on the CD.

Other input fields such as those related to the ?registration?,  ?friend?, and ?add balance? options could also be tested using  WebScarab. However, in this case study, those fields were tested using the manual approach instead of WebScarab?s  fuzzer feature.

C. Testing Results with Fortify (the Demonstration Version)  Using Fortify Source Code Analyzer, 30 potential  vulnerabilities were discovered. These vulnerabilities are  listed below. The number following the vulnerability refers to the number of occurrences of the vulnerability.

? SQL Injection (27).

? System Information Leak (2): It means system data or debugging information is revealed, which  can help attackers learn about the system and plan  attacks.

? HTTP Response Splitting (1): It means unvalidated data in HTTP response headers can  enable cache-poisoning, cross-site scripting,  cross-user defacement or hijacking attacks.

D. Testing Results with JBroFuzz and Acunetix  JBroFuzz was first used to test for SQL injection and XSS  vulnerabilities. However, a bug in the tool was discovered. For  some valid SQL injection attack strings, JBroFuzz generated  invalid requests to the web application, and thus could not  identify the SQL injection vulnerability. Because of this bug,  JBroFuzz was no longer used to test for other vulnerabilities in  the Tunestore web application. However, the payloads  embedded in JBroFuzz were used in manual testing to  discover some of the vulnerabilities in Tunestore.

Using Acunetix (free edition), cross-site scripting  vulnerabilities were discovered.



VI. MANUAL TESTING  Using manual testing, authentication, access control, injection, cross-site scripting, cross-site request forgery, and integer overflow vulnerabilities were discovered. Some of the vulnerabilities confirm those found through automated tools.

Others were not reported by the tools.

The vulnerabilities found through manual testing which confirm those reported by the automated tools are the following:  ? SQL Injection ? This allows illegitimate users to login as a legitimate user.

? Reflected Cross-Site Scripting ? Malicious scripts may be injected into input fields of the login page and be executed.

? Stored Cross-Site Scripting ? Using WebScarab?s proxy feature, a malicious script can be stored in the comment field.

Using manual testing, we were able to confirm some of the vulnerabilities reported by some of the tool. Acunetix indicated cross-site scripting vulnerabilities in the login page of the Tunestore web application. Although, the tool reported true positives, manual testing also revealed cross-site scripting vulnerabilities on the comment page. Malicious scripts were stored into the comment field and stored in the database. This indicates a typical case of stored cross-site scripting (XSS) vulnerability.

The vulnerabilities found through manual testing which are not reported by the automated tools are the following:  ? The application allows users to register with weak passwords. It does not have a minimum or maximum length for passwords. It does not give users? feedback on password strength.  This vulnerability can cause an attacker to carry out brute force attacks and enumerate existing users on the system.

? The application does not have a lockout policy for failed login attempts. This makes the application have a high risk of brute force attacks.

? Unencrypted credentials are transmitted over HTTP protocol.

? ?Forgot password? feature was not implemented.

Registered users will not be able to access the system if they do not remember their passwords.

? The application implements a ?stay logged in?? feature. This makes the application have a high risk of session hijacking.

? Insecure storage of credentials. Username and passwords stored in the database are not encrypted. As a result, an attacker can eavesdrop on the network and gain access users? unauthorized information. Thus, an attacker is able to gain access to the database to view users? data.

? Horizontal privilege escalation ? The application allows users to view friends CDs and view comments on CDs without logging into the application.

? Cross-Site Request Forgery ? Malicious scripts may be injected into the comment field of Tunestore which includes a crafted link. When a victim clicks on the link, it causes some actions to occur, such as logging the victim out, etc.

? Integer Overflow ? The submission of large numbered values will overflow the balance field  on the account. The ?add balance? option will no  longer operate correctly.

? An attacker can add an amount to the ?add balance? feature in their profile by using SQL  injection techniques. Hence, an attacker can  successfully create a new user account with a  substantial amount of money added to their account without providing valid credit card  information. As a result, the attacker is able to  purchase CDs for free. This vulnerability was  discovered through examining the source code.

? Insecure Direct Object Reference. Requests for protected resources, in this case the music files,  are made directly to the static resources, which  are located within the web root of the server. The  music filenames are predictable. The last names  of the artists are used. Changing the values in the  download link permits a user to download any song from Tunestore without purchasing them.



VII. DISCUSSION  Our case study shows that Tunestore is a good example  application for teaching students about web security. It can be  used to demonstrate various web application vulnerabilities to  the students. Limited by our academic environment, we do not  have the full versions of Fortify and Acunetix. Therefore the  testing results from the demonstration or the trial version of  the tools are very limited in this study. Universities can apply  for the Hewlett-Packard Company Educational Software  License Agreement to receive the full version of Fortify for  free for educational purposes.  However, we could not get the full version of Fortify because our university did not agree  with the user agreement for the license for the Fortify  software.

The web spidering and proxy features of Paros and  WebScarab are very useful for web application testing. The  web spidering functions allow testers to understand the  content and structure of the web application. The proxy allows  testers to intercept and modify requests and responses  transmitted between the client and server to conduct attacks.

The scanner feature of Paros is quite limited. It does report  some main vulnerabilities such as SQL injection, cross-site  scripting, and session ID in URL rewrite, etc. WebScarab?s fuzzer feature can be very useful because a large number of  attack strings can be submitted to test the application  automatically. Some of the manual testing conducted in this  case study, such as testing for buffer overflow, integer  overflow vulnerabilities, could have been done using  WebScarab?s fuzzer feature. JBroFuzz does not have good  documentation on how to use the tool. From our use of the  tool, we discovered a bug in the tool, and did not think the tool  worked properly as it is supposed to. However, the attack  types and payloads embedded in the tool can be useful. The  payloads can be used for manual testing, or testing with  WebScarab?s fuzzer feature.

Manual testing discovered most of the vulnerabilities  especially the design flaws. Some of them are the same as  those found using Paros, Fortify, Acunetix, for example, SQL  injection, and cross-site scripting vulnerabilities. Most of the  authentication and access control vulnerabilities can only be  found through manual testing based on tester?s observations.

Therefore it is important to utilize a variety of tools as well as  conduct careful manual testing in order to find the most  number of vulnerabilities in a web application.



VIII. CONCLUSION  This paper describes a case study of testing for security vulnerabilities of an example application ? Tunestore. It  provides an overview of web application security testing tools  such as Paros, WebScarab, JBroFuzz, Acunetix, and Fortify. It  presents the security vulnerabilities found within an  application by using these tools, and by manual testing. While  commercial tools are not easily available in an academic  environment, open source tools can be used to conduct  security testing with limited results. Our case study shows  manual testing is very important since some vulnerability  types can only be found through manual testing and tester?s  observations. It is important to utilize a variety of tools as well  as conduct careful manual testing in order to find the most number of vulnerabilities in a web application. Based on this  case study, hands-on labs can be developed for teaching web  security, software security testing, and other topics.

