Complex Modeling and Analysis of Workplace

Abstract?Complex networks arise everywhere. Online social networks are famous complex networks examples due to (a) revo- lutionizing the way people interact on the Web, and (b) permitting in practice the study of interdisciplinary theories that arise from human activities, at both micro (i.e. individual) and macro (i.e.

community) level. The vast scale (Big?data) of online human interactions impose certain challenges, such as scalable indexing and efficient retrieval of social data, which are by their nature intertwined in multiple dimensions. In our research we focus on modeling such multidimensional data, mining their intra and inter dependencies to uncover hidden structures and emergent knowledge. In particular, we examine informal interactions at the workplace. Through extensive empirical analysis of corporate communication logs we study users? communication behavioral patterns, dynamics and characteristics, statistical properties and complex correlations between social and topical structures. Our modeling and analysis are not limited to enterprise social data, but are extensible and applicable to other domains, offering a unified framework of complex network modeling and analysis, accurately modeling multiple symmetric or asymmetric, explicit and hidden interaction channels between people.

Keywords?Collaborative Knowledge Management; Collabora- tive Decision Making and Support; Collaboration Technologies in Industry and Businesses; Social Media Applications; Social Multimedia and Networks

I. INTRODUCTION  Social Networks have revolutionized the way people com-  municate and interact, while serving as a platform for informa-  tion dissemination, content organization and search, expertize  identification and influence. The popularity of online social  networks like Facebook and Twitter has given researchers  access to massive quantities of data for analysis. Such datasets  provide an opportunity to study the characteristics of social  networks in order to understand the dynamics of individual  and group behavior, underlying structures, and local and global  patterns that govern information flow.

Most of the analysis performed thus far has mainly focused  on publicly available online social networks [1]. However,  microblogging capabilities have been adopted by the enter-  prise as well [2], [3]. Contrary to online social networks,  microblogging services for enterprises are primarily designed  to support employees in connecting and learning about each  other through personal and professional sharing [4]. Organiza-  tions hosting internal social networking sites can benefit from  mining employees? informal interaction logs, as well as from  identifying reliable indicators of expertise.

Enterprise collaboration platforms mainly focus on the busi-  ness perspective and therefore their content revolves around  their main business and work culture, work practices, and  everyday problems. Being more focused and less noisy than  online social networks, enterprise microblogging platforms  offer unique opportunities for identifying experts, as well  as studying and understanding the processes of knowledge  generation and sharing. Studying collaboration media that are  internally used by organizations can result in multiple benefits  both for employees and corporations. Employees can ?get  help or advice, reach opportunities beyond those available  through existing ties, discover new routes for potential career  development, learn about new projects and assets they can  reuse and leverage, connect with subject matter experts and  other influential people within the organization, cultivate their  organizational social capital, and ultimately grow their repu-  tation and influence within the organization? [5]. Similarly,  enterprises can benefit from increased productivity due to  reduced time spend in team building and knowledge propaga-  tion, as well as expertise mining and preservation [6]. Further,  enterprises can utilize the results stemming out of informal  interactions analysis, to better understand how their employees  work together to complete tasks or produce innovative ideas,  reveal trends, identify experts and influential individuals, so  as to evaluate and adjust their management strategy, team  building and resource allocation policies.

Enterprises have been mainly relying on e-mail traffic to  share information among coworkers [7]. Analysis of enter-  prise communication networks [8], [9] has broadened our  understanding of information flow in the enterprise. Media     Figure 1. Holistic Modeling of Complex Networks  like SharePoint and Office Communicator are heavily utilized  as part of question-answering and problem solving processes,  while Active Directory provides a formal structure for employ-  ees to comprehend and navigate through the organizational  hierarchy, accommodating their need to identify potential  collaborators, research teams and business units around the  globe, as well as to discover ?interesting? projects that others  are currently working on. The wealth of information available  in the context of enterprises however, is not limited to formal  interactions and silos containing structured data. Informal  interactions through corporate micro-blogging services span  organizational charts, facilitating knowledge generation in the  form of direct problem solutions or links to external sources.

Knowledge in such cases may not have been formally modeled  and captured until a specific question is being asked and an  expert answer is provided.



II. HOLISTIC MODELING OF COMPLEX NETWORKS  We have proposed a formal model [6], [10] that abstracts  the semantics of informal communication into an integrated,  context aware, time sensitive, multi-dimensional space, en-  abling the correlation of seemingly different domains so as  to investigate them in conjunction. We introduce a novel  social graph representation, shown in Figure 1, which not  only contains social links between users but also maintains  integrated information regarding users dynamically changing  interests and activities, throughout collaboration tools used in  working environments.

a) Social Layer: captures users contextual and temporal  interactions. Nodes represent users and arcs represent explicit  relationships (links) between them. The social layer records  user relationships from multiple collaboration platforms: e-  mail correspondence, chat networks, blogging activity, shared  bookmarks and common ratings. An edge between users is  defined by the context under which it is created and has an  associated timestamp. A user u may be connected to user v  under multiple contexts (e.g sending e-mails and social status  updates) in multiple time instances.

In order to process enterprise communication effectively, it  is imperative to establish a comprehensive model of contexts,  and semantic links to structure them [10]. Various interpreta-  tions of captured scalar, hierarchical, and nominal, temporal,  or spatial data that differ with context (e.g. point of view) can  provide different insights or views (i.e. dimensions). Figure  2 shows various contexts that can be utilized for advanced  analysis of corporate communication data.

b) Content Layer: captures published content from mul-  tiple sources, including but not limited to resources shared  by users (e.g. photos or videos), bookmarked and/or tagged  resources (e.g. URLs), users? generated content (e.g. status  updates in Facebook), e-mails, chat messages, and blog posts.

c) Semantic Layer: contains meta-information about  content, and can be broken into several constituting layers,  each containing different metadata about content. This layer  may include, but is not limited to, domain ontologies, vocab-  ularies, and folksonomies and taxonomies, external sources  of formal knowledge, and linked open data. We use semantic  information providers and annotation enablers, such as Open-  Calais, AlchemyAPI, and Evri, WordNet, and Freebase, for  text analysis and annotation, entity identification and topic  discovery. Linked Open Data (LOD) can further be exploited  to link to external knowledge repositories.

Our novel model entangles structural information from  multiple heterogeneous networks, with arbitrary, multimodal  attributes originating from various information sources, and  content that has been generated under specific context [6],  [10]. Knowledge is discovered, captured and inferred based  on such complex information. Our social algebraic operators  [6] facilitate dimensional and contextual analysis and mining  of social data from multiple views and perspectives, enabling  deep exploration and understanding of both explicit and im-  plicit interactions and relations.

Our model is not limited to enterprise social data, but is ex-  tensible and applicable to other domains, accurately modeling  multiple symmetric or asymmetric, explicit and hidden inter-  action channels between people. It can capture multimodal,  heterogeneous attributes of users and their interrelations, and  facilitate complex mining and analysis of evolving, multidi-  mensional, intertwined, auxiliary social networking data.



III. APPLICATIONS  The full power of our model can be perceived at the context  of corporate networks that emerge from explicit formal rela-  tions as well as informal collaboration. Towards this direction,  we have instantiated our model with exogenous to the social  network information, i.e. (a) formal organizational structure,  and (b) hints about employees? interests and expertise areas  using latent topic descriptors, learned from enterprise com-  munication logs [10]. This facilitates multimodal, semantic,  temporal and adaptive analysis of roles along and across  dimensions, and permits micro?macro analysis [10].

We demonstrated the effectiveness of our framework on  a large scale dataset of corporate communication logs from  a Fortune 500 company [10]. Our dataset includes 9, 855     Figure 2. Contexts in informal interactions at the workplace  unique users, and 15, 200 messages with explicit reply links  to other messages, over a time span of 1.5 years. The dataset  contains users activity (message exchanges) and interactions  (e.g. comment/reply, tagging), but lacks explicit social rela-  tionships (followee/follower) between users. We compensate  the lack of social relationships with a snapshot of the formal  organizational hierarchy of users.

A. Enterprise Wisdom Captured Socially  Our model facilitates integration, capturing, search, and  retrieval of dynamic and constantly evolving enterprise knowl-  edge captured from informal interactions. In fact, our model  enhances collaborative data analysis in the enterprise, re-  vealing latent topics, expertise, and interests, both at micro  (single user) and macro (e.g department or business unit)  level. We have evaluated our system in the tasks of (a) expert  identification, (b) community detection, (c) trends mining, and  (d) communication dynamics [10].

1) Multidimensional Expert Identification: Employees?  level of expertise may vary from topic to topic and from  medium to medium. One might share innovative ideas and con-  tribute to discussions through emails, but not in microblogging  sites. We differentiate expertise according to communication  channels, time and content type.

2) Context?Sensitive Community Detection: Analysis of  employees? interactions reveals hidden dynamics at various  granularities. The topic?restrained ego?network of different  users may reveal patterns that vary across topics, whereas by  clustering users with similar interests, it is possible to detect  virtual communities (macro level).

3) Mining of Trends: Discovery of trending topics is a  typical application in social network analytics. Typically,  trending topics are identified for a single communication  channel for single network. Such analysis may be inefficient  for an enterprise. Instead, analysis at the macro level can prove  to be more useful in discovering, for instance, trending topics  and significant contributors in various collaboration platforms,  different departments and organizational positions.

4) Communication Dynamics: Organizational hierarchy is  static, and dated, whereas communication may create ?short-  cuts?, i.e. collaboration that spans hierarchical levels when  seeking for help, or offering guidance, etc. Studying communi-  cation may reveal hidden organizational dynamics. Our system  enables analysis of information propagation across the rigid  structure of formal organizational charts, providing insights  on the collaboration processes that employees devise in order  to tackle everyday problems and find solutions.

B. Predicting Intention of Communication in Social Media  Social media do not discriminate between users? relation-  ships. Acquaintance relationships invariably model broad rela-  tionship types, ranging from trusted friends to total strangers.

In reality, relationships fall everywhere along this spectrum  and are asymmetric with respect to users. Tie strength is  a complicated problem, that depends not only on structural  features, but also on user roles in a relationship (e.g. family  or friends), context (e.g. time, location) and content (e.g.

topic). Further, two users may concurrently maintain multiple  relationships (e.g. being friends and coworkers simultane-  ously). In this sense, tie type and strength is time-varying, and  situational, asymmetric and multidimensional. More complex  relationships can further been defined, once node types are  expanded to include not only people, but entities of any kind.

Our work bridges this gap by integrating various modalities  of social interactions and considering such aspects holistically,  entangling or disentangling dimensions (i.e. perspectives)  when appropriate, in order to perform accurate recommen-  dations. In particular, we examined communication process in  social media and the factors that affect this process. We have  evaluated our approach, examining its performance in the task  of accurate and timely prediction of intention of communi-  cation initiation between users in a corporate microblogging  service, which resembles Twitter [11]. Our accurate predictor  is able to achieve high performance with increasing statisti-  cal evidence, leveraging local structural proximity and user?  generated content.



IV. RELATED WORK  Online social network have been well studied, leading to  a vast literature around this area [12]. Here, we focus on  prior work that is mostly related to collaboration media at  the workplace. [3] discussed various challenges and solutions  in conducting social network analysis in the enterprise. [2]  provided a systematic examination of adoption and usage  of microblogging in a corporation environment, emphasizing  on the perceived benefits of corporate microblogging and  barriers to adoption. [13] explored the factors that influence  people?s tendency to share personal information in Twitter,  and examined microblogging?s potential impact on informal  communication at work. [4] investigated workplace relation-  ships built between coworkers using microblogging services  and determined interaction patterns that signal personal ver-  sus professional closeness between colleagues. [14] and [15]  examined users microblogging behavior at work as a function  of their motivation.



V. RESEARCH STATUS  Building models of complex networks, understanding their  rich properties, hidden structures and dimensional interdepen-  dencies are not trivial tasks. Our work has made several steps  towards these broad directions. We now have a robust model  that integrates multiple networks, each with rich properties  and hidden dynamics, facilitating multimodal analysis of time?  varying, complex social networking data [6], [10]. We also  have a better understanding of microblogging behavior in  the workplace, and the effect of formal structure in informal  communication [11], [16]. Last but not least, we have better  models for prediction and recommendation tasks in social  media [11].

However many research problems still remain open, and  offer prominent future directions. Information diffusion and  propagation of topics has been well studied in online social  media (e.g. [17]), but remains unexplored in the context of  workplace. Communication dynamics at the workplace are  relatively unknown. Knowledge capturing in the form of best  practices has not been automatically achieved. We plan to  address these issues in our future work, while at the same  time incorporating qualitative studies and expanding our work  to multiple datasets.

BIOGRAPHY  Charalampos Chelmis is a a PhD candidate in the De-  partment of Computer Science at University of Southern  California. He received his M.S. from the Computer Science  Department, University of Southern California in 2010. He  received his Bachelors and M.S. in Computer Engineering  and Informatics from Computer Engineering and Informat-  ics Departments, University of Patras, Greece in 2007. His  research interests include Complex Social Networking Data  Mining and Analysis, Semantic Enrichment of Social Network  Data, Collective Intelligence, Social Computing, Information  Networks, Big Data Analytics and Enterprise Microblogging.

