

Keynote Talk by Dr. Hong Jiang: An Application-Aware Approach to Systems Support for Big Data    Everyday 2.5 quintillion (2.5x1018, or 2.5 million trillion) bytes of data are created by people.

This data comes from everywhere: from traditional scientific computing and on-line transactions,  to popular social network and mobile applications. Data produced in the last two years alone  amounts to 90% of the data in the world today! This phenomenal growth and ubiquity of data has  ushered in an era of ?Big Data?, which brings with it new challenges as well as opportunities. In  this talk, I will first discuss big data challenges facing computer and storage systems research,  brought on by the huge volume, high velocity, great variety and veracity with which digital data  are being produced in the world. I will first introduce some new and ongoing programs at NSF  that are relevant to Big Data and to ASAP. I will then present research being conducted in my  research group that seeks a scalable systems and application-aware approach to addressing some  of the challenges, from the many core and storage architectures to the systems and up to the  applications.

Dr. Hong Jiang has been on leave as a Program Director in the CCF  division of the CISE directorate at the National Science Foundation since  January 2013 from University of Nebraska-Lincoln where he is Willa  Cather Professor of Computer Science and Engineering. He received the  B.Sc. degree and the M.A.Sc. degree, both in Computer Engineering, from  Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, and the  University of Toronto, Canada respectively; and the PhD degree in Computer Science from the  Texas A&M University, USA. His areas of research emphasis include computer architecture,  computer storage systems, high-performance computing, big data computing, and cloud   areas. He has graduated 12 Ph.D. students who upon their graduations either landed academic  tenure-track positions in Ph.D.-granting US institutions or were employed by major US IT   Distributed Systems.

