Mining Food Industry?s Multidimensional Data to

Abstract?The food industry sell a range of product  variations. The company want to take advantage to build  business strategy from huge information which is stored in data  warehouse. In this case, data mining technology needs to be  implemented to explore valuable information on transactional  data to assess customer's preferences for  products sold as a  business strategy.

Information about the way customers buy food products is  necessary, this can be done by mapping the transaction data  which is described as the pattern of consumer's taste. The  association method using apriori algorithm is used to map  customer's choice.

The challenge is in the data itself, multidimensional data has  to be prepared first before the data is fetched to the mining  process. Data reduction will be held to handle huge instances and  attributes between the data. Research focus on the way we handle  data until the rules is built. To reach this goal, three validation  levels will be implemented to verify the reliability of the  association rules shows by percentage support and confidence.

Keywords?Data Reduction, Apriori, Support, Confidence,  Association Rules, Three Validation Levels.



I. INTRODUCTION  The Food Industry that was founded in 2002  has a huge database stored in the transaction processing system. The company sells  variety of food products, there is 163 variations of  product. Usually when the consumer buys food A, they also buy food B, but in contrary they cancel to buy food A if  they buy food B or food C and vice versa.  Company wants to  build business strategy to address the customer?s taste pattern.

The solution can be solved by selling products that approach the tastes and consumer?s behavior base on the way  they selecting food product. Ability to read consumer?s taste is obtained by using data mining techniques with a method known associations with the term Market Basket Analysis [8][9][12], which explained  the  way people buy  product   or not,  where  the  decision   is   depended  on  the  number  of attributes such as: food A, food B and Food C.

The number of historical data briefly explained with association rules as follows, when symbolic  s means  support and c means confidence:  ?  if food_A = yes food_B = no then food_C = yes 4(s) 100%(c)  ? if food_A =  no then food_C = no 4(s)  100%(c)  ? f food_B= no  then food_A  = yes 3(s)  100%(c)  ? if food_C= yes food_B = yes then  food_A= yes 3(s) 100% (c)  ?  if food_C = no food_A = no then  food_B = yes 2(s) 100% (c)  Not all attributes that build rules, worthy enough to explain the pattern whether customer decide to buy food or not. So that to determine the most potential rules  that  explain the pattern that revealed in relation to a person's choice to buy food product  or not, this involves the level of accuracy based on confidence and support [9].

The  knowledge which is used as  business strategy obtained by searching the relationship or correlation between the set of items in large amounts of data or transaction data base called the basket data. The Market Basket Analysis  will form  relationships that becomes the rule: 'if consumers buy the X and Y then it will also buy Z'. The presence of item X and Y is believed as a part of characteristics in Basket Data which       reveal  a confidence while the correlation with the item itemset Z raises the ratio of transactions which is defined as a variable support [9][12]. Thus the data transaction can be mapped into a pattern that explains the consumer's taste for the product sold , then the information can be used as a reference to build business strategy [3][10].

But problems arise with the data obtained condition, there are 163 attributes with more than 90,000 records in only 5 months that will continue to grow along with the amount of data to be added in data preprocessing to be analyzed. Various techniques such as aggregation and dimension reduction, feature  selection and row reduction is used to  deal with multidimensional data without ignoring the important information in the data which is  analyzed [2][11].

Data preprocessing technique need to determine specifically to handle multidimensional data to pattern consumer's food product taste according sales transaction data in mining process using apriori algorithm.



II. HIPOTHESIS  Association rule or the Market Basket Analysis is procedured to find rules and relationships between variables in the data set, further more the rules commonly use to analyze business strategy targeting market, choosing how to promote, determine the behavior of consumers or  predict beneficial products [9][12].

Apriori algorithm is used as a procedure in applying the rules of the association, technically it will  search various combinations of items on a set of data with greater support than the mininum support, called frequent itemset. If the combination is less than a predetermined minimum support then the combination is feasible to be eliminated. Then, frequent itemsets which is found are used to construct the desired rule to match the pattern in order to collect as a frequent . Apriori algorithm is able to generate relations and rules on the  transaction data set that will reveal the pattern of customer?s taste towards other types of food products which used to be unseen and hard to measure [3][8].

Based on the characteristic of the data to be analyzed and the results obtained about the rules should be limited, because the rule will be used as a reference to limit the sheer number of items to be considered. Apriori algorithm is able to produce good rules, if appropriate attributes are available to be analyzed [1][10].

Extraction patterns of customer?s taste for food products using Apriori algorithm will produce association rule as a reference in limiting food material to be stocked and the way manager display  food product in store. But in this case we deal with massive data is with so many record and attributes. The way we chose approriate attribute will increase the quality of association rules.

Thus, the data preprocessing plays an important role, and the dimensional reduction has to be done to minimize the amount of data before mining process. Statistics and different kind of data reduction techniques will be implemented within attributes and instances to build preliminary rules based on  datasets that have been reduced. In the end, these rules will be tested to produce validation rules based on all the datasets including next month data as data testing [6].



III. DATA PREPARATION  Problems in this case focused on the process of preparation of data, this is done because of multidimensional data to be analyzed. Atomization process will turn out data with 92,555 instances and 163 attributes which is too much for mining process.

In this case, data reduction process should be done on multidimensional data.  There are many steps to be used together to prepare the data before mining [6]. Cleaning and integration are done after collect the data from the system , ensure data consistencies and integrate the data  into  a separate database from corporate information system.

Selection and transformation is used which includes procedures to handle the data which is transformed to standardize data for mining process.

Aggregation, generalization,  normalization and dicretization are the process to form the appropriate data to obtain valuable knowledge later. For example, aggregation process means the way we combine the data in particular period of time. Generalization may be necessary to make it more organized, as well as  nomalization to map the data within a certain scale.  Discretization is the way to develop new attributes that will describe the pattern of customer?s taste towards products that were analyzed depend on the mining process and the expected result .

Data reduction is an important  part of data preparation to handle the data in this paper. Data preparation process formed data which described consumer's choice of  goods  depend with the variations of the good offered and data transaction.

Thus the instance that will be analyzed based on the way selected food product is bought per transaction of every customer: The attribute entitled as follow :  kue1, kue2, kue3,..kuen,....kue163.



IV. MINING ASSOCIATION RULES  Data mining tool is used to learn data training using Apriori algorithm. So that it will result justify patterns base on minimum support and minimum confidences.

Multidimensional Data Handling will be different for each mining process, this occurs because the need of typical information  from mining the data. For example to establish the association rules, data reduction techniques such as selection and attribute selection row need to be chosen.

Multidimensional data handling procedures need to be establish first before build association rules. The implementation phase will be applied to the handling of data reduction which is followed by the building association rules, time series analysis to see the correlation among the association rules and pattern from other method [2][9][11][12].

The process of building association rules to multidimensional data will be conducted in two phases, the first phase will be reduced the data and build early association           Yes  Start  Validate Association Rules    End  Target Exceed  No  Build Association Rules        X = 163 atributes - nbest  Mark record which buy product from  X  food product ( 158 attributes)  Remove record marked  Delete none selling item  attributes  Build Association Rules  Start  Input n best food  product (5)  Association Rules  End      Start  Min Support &  Min Confidences  Build Itemsets  Build Association  Rules  End  Rules was Created     Fig. 3.  Flowchart association rule using apriori algorithm ? first validation   rules from the data reduced. In the second stage,  association rules will be tested first using the entire dataset. If the rule has a confidence percentage >= 70% then deemed worthy of association rules, but  if  it rules which is examined in 2nd stage are  less than 70% then the process is repeated back to the first stage to get another good rules.

Because of the reduction process will determine the names of the products which about to be analyzed, the data must be explored to get to know  the characteristics of the data from the atomic form.

To asses sold product characteristics is done by summing each product sold per product. The result will be ordered to determine the products which has the highest sales quantity.

There is 71,790 records and 163 attributes will be seen from the data to calculate the characteristics of each attribute, so it will know  kinds of product who has the good or bad selling quantity  After determining the products that are going to analyze the data dimension reduction then performed. Reduction process must be done because the number of records and attributes are very much attached 163 attributes with 71,790  records from 4 months data.

In this case the data preprocessing performed as early experiments with combining reduction techniques which are : attribute selection,  row selection and feature selection.

Row selection has done by deleting all signed record which related the way customer choice to  buy another products.

Feature selection will  remove all  the unwanted attribute to be analyze. The deleted attributes related to the row selection by mean  no transaction of the product or beneficial value according to the deleted attributes.

Three step of validations were used, the first is to build reliable association rules after data reduction which have high percentage of confidence, the second is validated assosiation rules use unreducted data and the last to validate association rules use data testing.   Briefly, figure 1 to figure 5 show association rules assesment in three different conditions.

Fig. 1. Flowchart build coverage two steps validated association rules.

Fig. 2. Flowchart dimensional reduction tobuild first validated association rules stage  Fig. 3. Flowchart association rule using apriori algorithm with  first validation rules after data reduction.

Yes  End  Validated Association Rules  Start  Association  c>=70%  Test  & Validate rules use all dataset  c >= 70% ?

No      Validated  Association Rule Evaluate the  accuracy  Data Test          Fig. 4. Flowchart validated association rule uses second validation rules using non reducted data  Fig. 5. Flowchart evaluate validated association rule  uses  third validation rules using data testing

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT  Based on the data five highest product above will be on trial manufacturing association rules to 5 products rated for the highest sales, thus the separation of data by means attribute selection and selection row. So that would be obtained record consisting of the five best-selling products, this process will eliminate records containing 158 products including the purchase of 5 products if exist in the record.

A. Data Reduction and Three Validation Levels  The 19,5% dataset consist of  five products sold will be analyzed to establish the rules of the association. Programing is made in doing filtration by marking sales transaction records consist of  158 attribute, assumed  five attribute which contains food products said to be best statistically.  Figure 2 will show how to mark records and delete the records as a reduction process.

Association rules obtained in correlation fkue59=0 fkue133=0 fkue138=0  ==> fkue72=1     has a history of events  as follows: 18.91% for the entire of the data within a period of five months which describe in Figure 7.

This is happen due to the wide variety of products and the way customer  purchased the products,  and so many possible combinations of customer buy other products. The test result number 6 shows value of confidence in the overall dataset with a low percentage which only exceed 18.91% below the standard to the apropriate rule that must be at least 70% of confidence. This is caused by the quantity of tb that is greater five times than ta. These conditions will not pass the validation test then the rule will be eliminated.

Some of the rules generated by the Data Mining Tool with appropriate confidence higher or equal to 70% will be translated as rules, then after validation of the entire dataset the rules which equal or exceed 70% confidence will be consider as valid  rules.

The test was done using whole dataset, the value of confidence  in general has increased thus thirteen best association rules are reliable to be used.

Fig. 6.  Dataset composition with 10,5% left after reduction process  Fig. 7. Test results for seven association rules                       Fig. 8. Results thirteen association rules with confidence more than 70% of the data is reduced and compare the overall dataset for evaluation  Fig. 9. Real test using data testing from the next month real dataset         with 20765 instances  This seems simple arrangement but the way we chose the appropriate rule really matters. Conditioned reading rule:   A? B thus: if A then B, which ta represent the number of instances consists of A and B on the whole dataset and tb represent the number of instances that contain the entire dataset A. For example if the rule chose randomly then the wrong doing can be seen as the result :  fkue72 = 0 ==> fkue114 = 1  ta: 1434  tb: 16496  the truth value only exceed : 8,69%      It is different from the real rule which is built from multi level apriori algorithm with this account below:  fkue72 = 0 ==> fkue114 = 0  ta: 14990  tb: 16496  the truth value exceed : 90,87%  B. Time Series with Association Rule  In time series data, the sequence  data must be descretized to explore the rule format  as : if A occurs, then B occurs within time T. A and B are basic shapes, the rule A ==> B must be read in time base context. Briefly F(A,B,T) = | {i | ai = A ? B ? { ai+1, ..., ai+T-1}} | is the number of occurences A followed by  the existance of B within T [4][6].

Fig. 10. Comparison of data timeseries for kue114 compare to kue133  Fig. 11. Comparison of data timeseries for kue72 compare to kue114  Interpretation according to the association rules as described below :  ? 1. fkue133=1 2629 ==> fkue114=0 2424    ? if buy meat bread #1 then do not buy choco bread.

? 8. fkue72=1 2832 ==> fkue114=0 2572    ? if buy cheese bread then do not buy choco bread.

In the first rule, that if  buy meat bread #1 (fkue133) then do not buy choco bread (fkue114) shows fkue133 have a number of sales transactions far more than fkue114, so the association rules give such impact to the selling point of the product by mean customer who buy fkue133 product more likely not to buy fkue114 product.

More over, special day such Sunday or Saturday  bring positive impact for the increasing selling product, so does the regular day, there is decreasing product selling. For example, in day 1, 7, 8, 22 and 23, which show customer behaviour to buy       products much more than regular day, such behaviour has similarity to the second association rule.

In this case, association rules shows patern looks more clear in time series analysis. The association rules bind the products and reflect the gap range  between the competion of two product and  reveal the truth of association rules.



VI. CONCLUSION  Multidimensional data requires different handling depending what the rules are about to make, for example to build association rules, feature selection should be associated with attributes which wants to build rules. Reduction of association rules consider the presence of other information in the dataset then the reduction should be done systematically consider the linkages between attributes, named briefly as FSA-Red algorithm, which are forwarded to the analysis of the whole dataset. The result remains the rule-making association based on the whole dataset available so that no information lost. In this paper three steps of validation  were used to analyze whether the association rules which been built is reliable to describe the whole data, in three different conditions : data training after reduction, data training without reduction and data testing.

Many advantage according to the association rules. For example in business point of view, product recommendation is a mature strategy and still effective nowadays, collection of association rules can be used to build such strategy for example the way product will be displayed or sell few products as a packages which is easier to reach to increase sales[5].

Further development of this case can be done by:  ? Implement data reduction base on attribute correlation to construct rules with a certain pattern, eg: to analyze particular  product for example product Z which is not the best product, every transaction which buy product Z and any product is purchased in conjunction with product Z are included to examine, then all the attributes are correlated with the purchase will be used as a reference for data reduction to obtained the transaction consist of Z and all products are purchased together with Z. This may not shows the best purchase amount products, but will result rich association patterns of the data.

? Exploring multidimensional data handling methods followed by analysis of time series or clustering can be used as a reference to build association rules more spesific to the product that are expected to improve the  efficiency and effectiveness in multidimensional data[4][6][7].

? More data is needed  to get better result for example a year data which expose the complete event in a year according to the special day, trend or  the seasonal impact[5].

