Detecting Unfolding Crises with Visual Analytics and Conceptual Maps

Abstract?Detecting the emergence of a political crisis is a key goal of security informatics. Big data provides us with valuable information on the many socio-economic indicators of crisis dynamics, ranging from unemployment to the trustworthiness of political institutions. However, it is currently challenging to link information on these factors in order for analysts to assess the possible directions of a conflict. At present, while some solutions offer theoretical frameworks for understanding those indicators in the abstract, these frameworks cannot easily be operationalised to the level needed for automatic processing of big data streams.

Alternative solutions do automatically code political events, but only offer a high level picture that cannot support the analysis of deeper conflict processes. In this paper, we combine Visual Analytics with Concept Maps to support analysts in monitoring conflicts. Visual Analytics allows the interactive visual exploration of data, while Concept Maps keep this exploration focused by linking data patterns (e.g., occurrence and frequency of keywords) to underlying dynamics (e.g., coordination of activism, salience of violence). We illustrate the potential of our approach through a discussion of how it could be used to study the on-going Syrian crisis. While this approach still requires validation with analysts, we fully specify the technical structure of our approach and exemplify its use to detect shifts in political stability.

Keywords: Civil War, Complex Social Systems, Fuzzy Cognitive Maps, Insurgency, Terrorism Informatics

I. INTRODUCTION For the intelligence and defence community, the prediction  and mitigation of terrorist threats calls for a nuanced under- standing of the dynamics of political crises and conflicts [1], [2]. An essential element of this task is to develop deep insights into the processes that generate significant transitions into violent modes of political action. Doing so, however, is challenging due to the downside of big data: ?information overload? and the difficulty of detecting ?signal within noise?.

Therefore, intelligence professionals have called for improve- ments in information management [2].

There are currently two types of solutions. First, political events may be coded into a system either in a fully automatic way [3], [4], [5] or with the assistance of field monitors [6].

Second, analysts may use refined concept models representing dynamics of conflict [7], [8], [9], [10]. The former provides analysts with numerous categorized events and an aggregate level of threat, but offers limited support in understanding the  deeper dynamics of these events. The latter can shed light on how events may be connected, but is difficult to operate due to the interrelatedness and dynamicity of the causes that shape conflicts [8], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14].

A. Contribution of the paper  Our project aims at developing the foundations for new intelligence tools that will allow analysts to interactively explore coded events using concept models. This will be accomplished by pairing Visual Analytics (VA) with Concept Mapping (CM) and is expected to yield three benefits.

First, we provide a method for exploring ?big data? such that conflict processes and transitions will be more apparent to analysts. VA allows the interactive visual exploration of large volumes of heterogeneous data, which supports an analyst in connecting the patterns they observe to deeper dynamics in the object of study. CM enhances the traditional VA approach by structuring the connections between factors, which allows an analyst to navigate a large search space in a focused way.

Second, we contribute to the development of automated tools for monitoring conflicts in real-time. Using VA and CM on past conflicts enables an analyst to identify specific flags in data that inform on conflict dynamics (e.g., changes in pat- terns of mobilisation as religious terms becomes politicised).

Software built upon this knowledge can monitor transitions in ongoing conflicts by scanning selected flags in data streams coming from sources such as diplomatic and informant reports, social media, journalistic media, and official statements.

Finally, the system designed here can be used to improve our theoretical understanding of the processes driving political crises. The analyst will tailor the initial CM as new patterns are observed or hypothesised connections are found to be absent or irrelevant. Analysing data using our VA+CM approach thus results in an evidence-based model of the connections between social factors for the situation at hand, which can be used to update an intelligence picture and inform policy.

B. Organization of the paper  Section II provides a summary of how the analyst could interact with information and the technical solutions involved.

A practical example is developed in Section III for the conflict in Syria, by structuring the salient dynamics of that conflict into a concept map and then linking this map to data sources.

Finally, we discuss how the innovative combination of VA and CM can be adapted both to support analysts in understanding conflicts, and to perform real-time monitoring.



II. THE ANALYST?S INTERACTIVE EXPERIENCE  A. Overall architecture  Developing a systematic understanding of the causal dy- namics of conflict is an essential goal in scholarship on the subject [14]. By interacting with our proposed system, an analyst can use an initial map to start exploring conflict data and, as patterns are witnessed, modify the map accordingly.

The map keeps a history of the patterns considered relevant by the analyst and, most importantly, supports the analyst in their exploration. It does so by providing a concise graphical rendering of the data sliced along two axes: time of the events, and level of processes or operating causal mechanisms. Each factor in the map - representing the state of a process at a given time - has a size and colour that represents its salience to the events that occurred during the selected period. This allows the analyst to identify different phases in the conflict, since salient factors at a given time may become more peripheral as shifts occur in the conflict [14]. To best understand these shifts, factors must be organized at several levels. Using a soci- ological framework, we consider that macro-level phenomena are caused by and can be explicated through the aggregations of micro-level factors. These micro-level phenomena can be inferred from data aggregated from several sources. A multi- level causal approach allows the analyst to understand changes in higher levels in terms of the activity at lower ones; an analyst can select one factor and view how it sits within a broader and multi-level array of operating causal mechanisms.

This interactive experience is summarized in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. Architecture of the proposed solution. Color online.

The content of the five planes depicted in Figure 1, from top to bottom, is as follows:  ? Macrodynamics: macro-level factors that the analyst ultimately seeks to explain and predict, such as levels of violence or insurgent organization. These are akin to indicators of global level of threat as provided by FAST [6].

? Microdynamics: processes that are performed by individ- uals in a conflict environment, such as a military action or organisational development. These are of great interest for the analyst who seeks to refine their understanding of the link between micro and macro-dynamics.

? Data Patterns: acts as an intermediate between the front-end that guides the analyst?s exploration (macro and micro dynamics) and the back-end that pools data.

Patterns of interest which make visible the otherwise opaque micro-dynamics, include the frequency of certain terms found in social media and summaries of economic data such as market prices.

? Data constellation: cluster documents using either top- ics or document categories. This allows the analyst to understand the type of evidence that supports selected processes, which can be particularly useful to detect bias.

? Data sources: relevant sources selected by the analyst, ei- ther publicly available (e.g., EMM NewsExplorer, Nexis) or provided to the analyst only (e.g., intelligence reports, results of crawls on the dark web [15]).

B. Technical solutions  Several techniques are used to enable the connections be- tween these different planes:  ? Fuzzy logic. The factors underlying conflicts, at both the micro- and macro-level, can be inherently vague and/or uncertain. Therefore, deriving the value of a factor (e.g., protest march) from other ones (e.g., slogan, place names) requires a mathematical approach that is able to deal with the vagueness of these factors. Fuzzy logic is a technique of choice, as ?it is designed to mathematically represent uncertainty and vagueness, and to provide for- malized tools for dealing with imprecision in real-world problems? [16]. Examples of how fuzzy logic can build and operationalize maps for complex social problems can be found in our previous work on conflicts [7].

? Data mining. Quantitative data can be extracted auto- matically from standardized web pages (e.g., values of stocks and commodities prices to provide economic data) and aggregated. However, sophisticated techniques are needed when aggregating qualitative data. Specifying a list of keywords that should be searched for each data pattern is not sufficient because of the ?vocabulary prob- lem?, also known as ?semantic barrier?: vocabulary differs between fields, and the probability that two persons use the same term to classify the same object is less than 20% [17]. Therefore, suggested keywords are expanded using thesauri derived from data [17] and using EMM NewsExplorer, which provide synonyms for key persons     and places in several languages, allowing for a multi- lingual database. The patterns found will be an under- estimate of the actual patterns, for example because of ?aggregation conflicts? [18]: an entity may be explicitly mentioned and later implicitly identified (e.g., ?Minister A. was present?, ?all ministers present?).

? Data aggregation. Several software solutions are readily available to organize and render document clusters. A description of how a typical solution is used can be found in [19] for the case of InSpire?s Galaxy view, while details of how such solutions are built are provided in [20] via the example of InfoSky.



III. A PRACTICAL EXAMPLE: THE SYRIAN CASE  A. Background  One method of understanding the dynamics of conflict that is particularly supportive of the goals of the intelligence community is to divide a case into significant phases or transitions. Doing so allows the analyst to focus on the mechanisms or processes that are most salient in driving escalations in violence or instability during political crises.

However, conducting this kind of analysis is made challenging by the dilemma of ?information overload? and the difficulty of detecting ?signal within noise?. Our innovative pairing of Visual Analytics and Concept Maps addresses this challenge, illustrated here for the ongoing conflict in Syria.

B. Phases of conflict  The conflict in Syria appears to have gone through three phase changes. The conflict emerged in March 2011, Protestors then gathered to demand the release of teenagers recently arrested and tortured for writing a popular slogan of the uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt, which called for revolution. These protestors did not call for greater democratic and personal freedoms and received minor concessions from the government [21]. The conflict then escalated as the government?s response was to open fire on protestors, leading to street protests in other parts of the country, with protestors taking an increasingly hostile and hard-line attitude towards the regime [22]. Despite continued lethal attempts at repression by military and paramilitary units against the largely non- violent public street protests of the insurgent movement, the government was unable to put an end to the growing pop- ular insurrection [23]. By late autumn 2011, protestors were universally demanding comprehensive political change and the resignation of President Assad [22]. Finally, the militarisation occured by early 2012, as insurgents reorganised into guerrilla units and activism started to take on a military character, while regime repression began to make substantial use of artillery, heavy weapons, and indiscriminate punitive attacks upon non- combatant populations in ?opposition? territory [23].

C. Designing the Conceptual Map  Having divided the Syrian case into three conflict phases, we now seek to facilitate the detection of transitions between these phases. This relies on the joint use of VA and CM, where the  latter operationalises the processes through which transitions are obtained from finer grained or micro-level data. The first step in designing a CM is to refine the transitions of interest.

These are informed by the literature on contentious politics, social movements, and insurgency:  ? Crisis Emergence occurs when a social movement be- gins to develop sufficient support to challenge a govern- ment [8], [24]. Examples of crisis emergence indicators include the entrance of political elites into a protest movement [8], [25] or expressions of dissent [26] and mobilisation [27] such as street protests.

? Crisis Escalation is produced by a shift from contained contention, where activism occurs through established institutional and legal channels, to transgressive con- tention where activism involves the use of innovative means that violate existing conventions [8]. Examples include staging acts of civil disobedience such as ?sit- ins?, vandalism, or confrontations with police [28].

? Crisis Militarisation results from the increased violence of transgressive activism and the reorganisation of ac- tivist organisations into ?military? command and control structures. This change into armed action [29], [9], [12] is illustrated by the Second Intifada, which very quickly shifted from mass protests to guerrilla warfare [30] or more recently the ouster of Muammar Qaddafi in Libya, where street protesting gave way to civil war.

While the above provides a valuable understanding of trends and processes, it cannot be directly applied to a fine-grained study of unfolding events [8], [26], [10]. The CM allows us to conduct a deeper analysis of Syria by connecting the salient insights found within scholarly literature to patterns in the data which otherwise would remain obscure. Following a top-down approach (Figure 1), the second step identifies the macro level factors. Three factors were identified:  ? Salience of violence (S) in interactions between activists and government forces. A high S means that most protests and confrontations are violent.

? Insurgent radicalness (R) refers to the type of demands that have been put forth by activists; a high R means that activists demand substantial changes in regime structure and leadership.

? Coordination of activism (C) is the level of organisation and strategy of the activist groups; a high C means that activists are tightly organised and subject to extensive command and control.

These factors have stable arrangements for a given phase of the crisis. Therefore, changes in that arrangement can be indicative of substantial shifts in the organisational structure of insurgent or protest groups and in type of methods used by both government forces and activists. Possible values and arrangements for a given phase could be as follows:  ? Crisis emergence. Protest movements comprise people who switch between normal activities and activism. Ac- tivism is not highly organised, and consists primarily in marches or demonstrations of unity, numbers, righteous-     Fig. 2. Macro-dynamics, micro-dynamics, and data patterns of the Syrian case.

ness, and commitment. Demands are not revolutionary, as protestors desire limited changes in policy. Salience of violence is low, because activists are generally not employing violent strategies, and government repression is limited to civil policing and containment.

? Crisis escalation. Activists face increasing costs for continued protests, leading to greater commitment and organisation, as well as the use of violence in both self- defence and as a proactive strategy. Protestors begin to demand significant shifts in regime structure, severely threatening elite interests. Government repression inten- sifies, making public protests or civil disobedience a dangerous action of limited strategic value.

? Crisis militarisation. With comparatively disorganised modes of activism proving increasingly limited in value, activists reorganise into paramilitary units.

It should be noted that the three factors may not increase in parallel. The 1979 Iranian revolution provides an example of a high salience of violence with relatively low insurgent radicalness and coordination of activism, at least until its latest stages. An increase in one of the factors relative to the others can thus be indicative of a transition.

Six factors have been retained at the micro-level. The lethal- ity of violence and the insurgent military capacity captures the particularly violent and militarised nature of the Syrian civil war. Combatant mobilisation stands for the capacity of parties to attract and field combatants. Claim diffusion represents the extent to which insurgent demands have crystallised and harmonised into a coherent platform for change. Insurgent consolidation takes into account the convergence of insurgents organisations towards a single organisational structure. Finally, we also capture the insurgent coordination with regards to their actions. These factors, together with their connections based on the literature on dynamics and mechanisms of conflicts, are illustrated in Figure 2. Connections upwards (to macro- dynamics) are further clarified by Table I, and connections downwards (to data-patterns) are summarized by Table II.

TABLE I RATIONALE FOR THE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN MICRO- AND MACRO-  DYNAMICS IN FIGURE 2.

Link Rationale for a link in the Syrian case 1 The prevalence of extrajudicial executions of various types appears  highly relevant to the overall construction of conflict narratives both domestic and foreign.

2 The rapid increase in counter-insurgent brutality by the govern- ment, along with the insurgent?s own brutal actions, has contributed to the intractability of demands.

3 The extent to which government and rebel forces are able to mobilise combatants highly determines the effects of violence.

4 The ability to mobilise combatants in this case is closely connected to the efficacy and breadth of government and rebel organisational structures.

5 The capacity of rebel forces to challenge the Syrian state is highly deterministic of the challenge that the insurgent movement poses, and the political fallout of its actions.

6 Rebel military capacity to a large extent will determine how much insurgent groups will demand, as higher capacity enables greater coercive power.

7 The consolidation of insurgent groups correlates to increased command and control.

8 Claim diffusion is closely connected with protest organisation and media campaigns.

9 The diffusion of revolutionary messages has contributed to the crystallisation of demands.

Figures 3 and 4 use STARLIGHT Information Visualization System to examplify how to visualize the connections from data sources to data patterns based on the information in Tables I and II; this corresponds to the lower half of our architecture, specified in Figure 1. Such visualizations can allow analysts to immediately find all documents relevant to a given term or data pattern, which is valuable to assess whether sources are diverse or there is an over-reliance on a few sources. In our architecture, analysts could also select a window of time, and see the importance of various terms and data patterns (e.g., via the size of bars in Figures 3 and 4). The connection of data patterns to micro-dynamics and mechanisms is specified in Figure 2, and its operationalization requires the use of Fuzzy Logic as detailed in [7].

TABLE II LIST OF TERMS USED TO IDENTIFY THE PRESENCE OF DATA PATTERNS.

Data Pattern Terms Reports of Vio- lence  Massacre, shabiha, shelling, casualties, killings, death toll.

Military Terms Tanks, snipers, clashes, exchanges, offensive, rebels, guerrilla, bombing.

Organisation Names  Free Syrian Army, FSA, Syrian National Council, SNC, units.

Demand Terms Step down, regime change, democracy, elections, ceasefire.

Fig. 3. Clicking on a document will highlight its relationship to terms and data patterns. Visualization using STARLIGHT. Color online.



IV. DISCUSSION  In this paper, we raise the relevance of using Visual Ana- lytics tools and Concept Maps to help the task of the Analyst in identifying societal shifts into insurrection and insurgency.

To validate this paradigm, we propose to use existing data from a known conflict: the Syrian crisis as it escalated into civil war. The technique we propose fits well into wider ongoing intelligence efforts to improve how political crises are predicted, analysed, and conceptualised. First, efforts to expand and improve ?big data? collection through scanning social media will provide higher-quality informational inputs for analysis via a method such as ours [31]. Second, using our method, analysts can determine which information sources are more salient to a conflict at a given time - both type (religious, economic, military, etc) and token. This can not only inform other intelligence collection targets, but also aid in the use of computational methods for selecting targets, for example through the increasingly popular use of network analysis [32].

Third, and perhaps most importantly, our method overlaps in both theme thinking with existing projects, such as Lockheed  Fig. 4. Clicking on a term will highlight all relevant documents as well as connected data patterns. Visualization using STARLIGHT. Color online.

Martin?s ?Integrated Crisis Early Warning System? [33] or the US Air Force project to develop a ?social radar? [34], [35].

While many aspects of these projects are opaque to foreign academics not connected to the US defence community, it is very likely that methods such as ours will augment, serve as counterpoints to, or creatively aid other projects such as these, providing alternative or innovative perspectives on translating ?big data? into useful insights.

Concept Maps have a rich history in the creation of static models of complex systems [36], and particularly in intel- ligence research [37], [38]. They are also the first step in creating simulations that will generate synthetic data, such as System Dynamics or Fuzzy Cognitive Maps [7]. Despite shared roots in visualization and information management, Concept maps have only recently entered the sphere of Visual Analytics [39]. In this paper, we presented a visually interac- tive framework that combines the two approaches to face the challenges raised by the increased relevance and availability of real-world data. In this framework, Concept Maps support the analyst in the process of extracting knowledge from big data.

Practically, maps structure the relationships between different factors deemed key to the analyst; this provides a valuable focus in terms of identifying key data sources and finding connected factors. Visual Analytics then allows analysts to conveniently and interactively explore data, which may lead to validating of refining the concept maps. Successive changes in the maps provide a path of analysis, which may then benefit new phases of exploration as data is continuously acquired.

The benefits of using concept maps for visual analytics are similar to that brought by the Unified Modelling Language (UML) for software design. UML can help structure complex projects, and can be used to automate a portion of the coding.

Concepts Maps also bring structure to data by formalizing     the relationships between factors. Consequently, it will be important during the implementation phase to take an Agile approach and regularly assess how our framework can best automate a portion of the knowledge discovery process. This faces numerous challenges, particularly as big data does not equate good data and cleaning is essential [40]. However, automation will be key to the design of tomorrow?s Situational Awareness Systems, which have to detect and predict to an increasingly accurate extent the particular conditions leading to events of interests, such as political unrest.



V. CONCLUSION  Using Visual Analytics to explore big data prior and during conflicts can be used to create, refine and validate a complete, multi-level Concept Map that will highlight the main drivers of conflicts. This innovative combining of readily available visual analytics tools with interactive Concept Maps can contribute to building the fundamentals that will allow for the development of algorithms that automatically detect and anticipate shifts into political unrest.

COMPETING INTERESTS  The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

The views expressed by the authors does not necessarily reflect the views of the Vancouver Institute for Visual Analytics.

AUTHOR?S CONTRIBUTIONS  JSM provided the initial idea of combining Conceptual Maps with Visual Analytics. PJG designed the technical framework to support that combination, and SFP provided field expertise to apply this combination to the study of political crises. PJG and SFP jointly wrote the manuscript, and JSM provided feedback. All authors approved the manuscript.



VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  The authors would like to thank the Vancouver Institute for Visual Analytics for its support for this research. The authors also acknowledge technical support from Kyle Melnick in visualizing the Syrian case.

