xi

Abstract  Modern high performance computers have speeds measured in petaflops and handle data set sizes measured in terabytes and petabytes. In the next decade (or less) we will see exascale computational resources. Although these machines offer enor- mous potential for solving very large-scale realistic computa- tional problems, their effectiveness will hinge upon the ability of human experts to interact with their simulation results and extract useful information. One of the greatest scientific chal- lenges of the 21st century is to effectively understand and make use of the vast amount of information being produced.

Visual data analysis will be among our most important tools in helping to understand such large-scale information.

Bio  Charles (Chuck) Hansen is an IEEE Fellow and a Professor of Computer Science in the School of Computing and an Associate Director of the Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute at the University of Utah.

He received a BS in computer science from Memphis State University in 1981 and a PhD in computer science from the University of Utah in 1987. Since 1998, he has been on the faculty in Computer Science at the University of Utah. He was a visiting professor at the University Joseph Fourier Grenoble in 2011-2012 and a visiting scientist at INRIA-Rhone Alpes in the GRAVIR group in 2004-2005. From 1997 to 1998, he was a Research Associate Professor in Computer Science at the University of Utah. From 1989 to 1997, he was a Technical Staff Member in the Advanced Computing Laboratory (ACL) located at Los Alamos National Laboratory, where he formed and directed the visualization efforts in the ACL. He was a Bourse de Chateaubriand PostDoc Fellow at INRIA, Rocquencourt France, in 1987 and 1988.

Chuck Hansen has published over 140 peer reviewed journal and conference papers and has been a co-author on three papers recognized with ?Best Paper Awards? at the IEEE Visualization Conference (1998, 2001, 2002). He was co-author on the Best Paper at IEEE Pacific Visualization 2010. He was awarded the IEEE Technical Committee on Visualization and Graphics ?Technical Achievement Award? in 2005 in recognition of seminal work on tools for under- standing large-scale scientific data sets.

He has been Associate Editor in Chief of IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics and is currently an Associate Editor. His research has made contribu- tions to the fields of scientific visualization, computer graphics, parallel computation and computer vision.

