2013 Eleventh Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST)

Abstract?We propose a novel anonymous access control pro- tocol which is formulated as a series of coalitional games, where the players are the owners of shared private resources (big volumes of data) in online social networks (OSNs). Basically, co- owners cooperate to generate by themselves an attribute-based boolean formula to control access to their shared resource.

By means of this boolean formula, co-owners are able to secretly express their privacy preferences over a common shared resource and requesters can anonymously access the secured private resource. In this paper, we formally analyze our protocol?s fairness from a cooperative game theory point of view, and how OSN users, which are mostly cooperative, evaluate their expected gains and costs to adopt such cooper- ative privacy management scheme in many different settings.

Keywords-Social networks; coalitional game; privacy-aware access control; Shapley value; system?s fairness; cooperative game theory

I. INTRODUCTION  Online social networks (OSNs) provide users with a form  of self-expression and with a highly accessible channel for  their interactions. Recently, the formation and structure of  online social communities where users engage with each  other in the sharing of (mostly private) data have attracted  considerable research interest. Studies are specially exten-  sive in analyzing the evolution of such communities and the  factors influencing their rapid growth: their structural fea-  tures (i.e., shared content, near locations, trusted friendship  connections, etc.), the sociological aspects such as political  and/or religious movements or professional factors, to name  a few [1][2].

Cooperation and collectiveness are fundamental concepts  for the success of OSNs, however, most proposals in this  domain lack of a relevant analysis of the collaborative (but  rational) nature of OSN users [3]. Moreover, there exist  operations that are still addressed as local and individual pro-  cesses. For instance, current OSN sites provide insufficient  and inaccurate controls to restrict data sharing, hindering  users from applying appropriate fine-grained access policies  over who may view their shared data [4][5]. And more  importantly, users have limited control over the privacy  settings applied by other users to the shared private data  [6]. As a consequence, the privacy preferences of users who  share contents may be conflicting.

In this work, we focus on the cooperative game under-  lying the cooperation-based management of user privacy  preferences in OSNs. In this regard, a simple analytical  model based on Cooperative Game Theory provides us with  a metric to evaluate the feasibility of the formation of  coalitions in OSNs, i.e., groups of allied users (the owners)  joining forces together to protect a shared private content.

We introduce an anonymous access control protocol which  the game theoretical framework is built upon. Basically,  throughout our protocol, co-owners of a common private  resource (for instance, a collection of documents, a photo  album, or a collection of movies) will be able to define in  a joint and distributed manner the policies to control the  anonymous access to the common resource. Motivational  examples range from a large number of attendants to a  conference who wish to share testimonial photos or articles  of the event to a small group of friends sharing summer  pictures.

A. Related Work  Cooperation-based approaches to privacy protection in  OSNs have been slightly tackled [6][3]. Traditionally, pri-  vacy in OSNs has been addressed as a matter of locally  and manually introducing personal privacy preferences, most  in the way of expressions built over generic predicates  referring either to user set of attributes or to a set of content  categories [6][7]. In this scenario, users can individually  dictate access control policies which can be implemented  by using different languages, like XML-based languages.

Although non-cooperative, several access control schemes  have been recently proposed in OSNs based on public key  cryptography. For example, resources? access control lists  (ACLs), which contain the owner?s public key, the public  keys of the members who can access the resource, and the  social relationship amongst the members, have been applied  to define different levels of access to the resource [5][8].

A decentralized and collaborative rule-based access con-  trol for OSNs is proposed in [3]. In this case, access     conditions are a function of the relationship type, depth and  trust level between providers and requesters. Owners issue  and sign statements on these properties using relationship  certificates based on what authors called ?onion signatures?.

Moreover, the application of game theory to analyze the  rational behavior of the participants in OSNs has been  sparse. To the best of our knowledge, only a few works  have modeled so far the formation of coalitions in OSNs in  an appropriately defined cooperative game. In particular, an  interesting work to address co-ownership in OSNs is pro-  posed in [6], where Clarke-Tax voting protocol was adopted  to enable the collective enforcement of access policies for  shared contents. Individual preferences are aggregated in the  group policy using a voting procedure which maximizes  the global social utility and promotes fairness encouraging  truthfulness among the co-owners.

Finally, the work presented in [9] deals with the analysis  of the structure of the relationships that exist among the  nodes in a social network towards determining how the  information spreads in the network. Algorithms proposed are  based on the Shapley values of the nodes to compute their  influence in the network. Another approach which explores  the cooperation of nodes in OSNs is described in [10] to  study the structural and communication patterns aimed at  predicting the links that are likely to appear in the future.

B. Our Contribution  This article offers the following main findings, contribut-  ing to any previous related work as follows. On the one  hand, our access control protocol completely differs from  the aforementioned approaches in OSNs since it is based  on a fully decentralized anonymous credential system. In  particular, the anonymous credential system presented in  Persiano et al.?s work [11] is combined and adjusted to recent  advances in (dealer-less) secret sharing [12] mechanisms  and threshold RSA signatures [13]. Briefly, owners of a  shared private resource can secretly express their privacy  preferences over that resource and control external access  by means of an attribute-based boolean formula, which is  defined involving every owner. Additionally, owners must  collaborate in granting access to the resource requesters.

Finally, the protocol preserves anonymity and unlinkability  of requesters accessing a common shared resource who  must prove, in a zero-knowledge fashion, that their attributes  satisfy the boolean formula which protects the resource.

On the other hand, the formal analysis of the proposed  protocol requires the study of the coalition formation com-  prising all co-owners. We formally give foundations of  how the proposed cooperative protocol might induce the  formation of an stable group of participants. To the best  of our knowledge, no work has focused yet on cooperation?  based privacy?aware access control for OSNs from a coali-  tional game point of view, which includes considerations  for the fairness of such cooperative coalitions. Furthermore,  all social networking systems impose, on every participant,  certain constrains in terms of engagement with time and/or  computational capabilities. Novel to the related work is  also the capacity of our formal analysis to capture and  interpret the differences in the hardware used by entities  when connecting to the social network (smartphones, low  capabilities; PCs, high capabilities) and the different types  of users (beginners, buddies, socializers, etc.) Organization: The rest of this article is organized as  follows. In Section II, the main phases of our protocol  are described in detail. Additionally, Section III introduces  a formal analysis of the proposed protocol by applying  coalitional games. Section IV describes the results of the  fairness of our protocol in different scenarios. Finally, in  Section V, some final conclusions and research directions  are established.



II. COOPERATION-BASED ANONYMOUS ACCESS  CONTROL PROTOCOL  In this section, we introduce a cooperation-based anony-  mous access control protocol for OSNs, which is based on  the Persiano et al.?s anonymous credential system [11]. In  Persiano et al.?s work, a user obtains a multi-show credential  from a central organization and uses it, in a zero-knowledge  fashion, to gain access to the resources which are restricted  to authorized users. Our proposal eliminates the organization  role and allows a group of co-owners to issue RSA-signed  access credentials to requesters in a fully decentralized way.

We start describing the roles performed by the actors of our  protocol and its phases.

A. Roles  The protocol defines four different roles:  ? Founder: a user who participates in the system set-up to  jointly generate all the necessary parameters to execute  the protocol.

? Owner (or co-owner): a Founder user who joins a  coalition of co-owners to generate the access control  policy of a shared private resource ?.

? Signer: an Owner that cooperates with other co-owners  of the same resource ?, on the construction of user  anonymous credentials to access ?.

? Requester: a user who, having been issued an anony-  mous credential by a group of signers, makes use of it  to anonymously access ?.

B. Phases  Our protocol consists of four phases as follows:  1) System Set-Up:  A community of n founders comes together to gener-  ate all the global parameters required by Persiano et  al.?s system [11] which consist of publicly verifiable1  1Publicly Verifiable Secret Sharing plays an important role in the design of protocols for secure multi-party computation as everybody is able to verify that the shares have been correctly distributed.

parameters and the corresponding private information  that is used to issue credentials to requesters. Thus,  we distribute the process of generating such global  parameters between the n founders by applying the  algorithm Joint Random Secret Sharing2 (JRSS) de-  tailed in [12, Section 6.3]. Basically, the n founders are  able to generate, in a joint and decentralized manner,  all the RSA elements described in [11, Section 4.2]-  System Set-up. As a result of this phase, each founder i  holds a tuple Pubi containing all the public parameters  and a tuple Privi containing all private parameters for  each founder. In particular, Privi contains shares of  all private values, allowing a group of at least (t+1) owners (with t < n) to jointly use their shares and  generate valid signatures in the Credential Assignment  phase. Parameter t is the threshold security parameter3  of our protocol which applies the RSA (t, n)-threshold signature scheme4 proposed in [13].

2) Policy Establishment:  In this phase, the co-owners of a shared resource  ? form a coalition to jointly generate the access  control policy for ?. For instance, from a propositional  logic point of view, an access control policy can  be represented by a linear boolean formula over the  specific predicates and/or variables (or a conjunction  of them) and their relations, for a certain resource.

The semantics attached to defining predicates should  be adapted to each specific case such as age, gender,  nationality and affiliation to name a few. In a general  setting, the owners of a given resource ? may define  an access policy ?? as a linear equation in a series of  predicates (x1, . . . , xl).

For simplicity reasons, we assume users to hold two  attributes (x1, x2). Also, for simplicity purposes, in our work, ??s co-owners secretly and jointly generate  two integer values ? and ? as a way to express their  privacy preferences over resource ? (? and ? are  generated by executing the JRSS [12, Section 6.3]. The  reasons behind the generation of these parameters in a  joint and secret manner are mainly two: (1) Resource  owners can secretly impose privacy preferences on the  access to their private common resources (co-owners  will learn nothing about each others? preferences) and,  (2) the resulting parameters are the combination of the  2The implications of deploying threshold-based secret sharing in a distributed online social network have been recently tackled in [14]. In particular, the JRSS algorithm allows n parties to jointly generate a random integer secret value r with no information about r revealed to any party or coalition of at most t parties.

3The security parameter is chosen amongst the group of co-owners of a particular private resource. However, experiments in Section IV show how the value t influences the system and the expected gain of each participant.

4A number of (t + 1) nodes, each holding a valid private key share, can generate partial signatures which can be efficiently assembled into a complete signature.

U(requester) i (co?owner)R (sponsor)?? Sends attributes (x1,x2)required ? Stores AA CU  ? Verifies attributes (x1,x2) in? Computes m containing allcrypto materials as in [11]? Generates:M= (U,? Collects tpartial signaturesi(m)? Computes its own signatureon m0 Constructs valid RSAthreshold signatureas in [13]? Constructs AACU ? Computes i(m) whichis the isignature on m, byusing [13]1 234  Figure 1: Credential Assignment phase in which the coop-  eration of (t+ 1) owners is needed to grant a new user the access. This phase will be formalized as a coalitional game  in Section III.

preferences of all owners. Furthermore, we represent  access policies as straight lines in two variables such  that ??(x1, x2) = 1 ? ?x1 + ? = x2. Finally, ?? is made public.

3) Credential Assignment:  The procedure used to provide a user U with a  valid5 anonymous access credential AACU , to gain  authorization on ?, works as follows. U asks a co-  owner R, known as the sponsor, for the access to ?,  so it is assumed that U and R have already built social  connections, i.e. U belongs to R?s trust circle.

Thus, R involves at least t more co-owners in sign-  ing the AACU . The following steps take place (see  Figure 1): (1) R verifies if U ?s attributes (x1, x2) are valid according to the predicates established in ??.

If verification succeeds, R creates a friend-request-  message, namely M = (U,m, ?is friend??), where m represents the cryptographic material required in  [11, Section 4.2]-User enrollment to generate a valid  user credential. M is sent to every other co-owner of ?.

In step (2), each co-owner i (also called signer) signs6  the received message m using his share of the RSA  private key encoded in Privi and issues his partial  signature ?i(m) to R. Next, in (3) R collects t partial signatures, performs its own partial signature on m  and generates a valid AACU . Finally, in the step (4),  R secretly sends AACU to U . From this moment  onwards, U can access ?, via any participant providing  ?, in an anonymous manner and as often as required  without being identified, linked or traced.

5AACU is valid if it encodes a tuple of attributes (x1, x2) that satisfy the control policy ?? , i.e., ??(x1, x2) = 1. Further details on the mathematical basis of the algorithms on which our protocol is based as well as their formal proofs are given in the cited publications.

6The algorithm to construct a valid RSA signature from (t + 1) partial signatures and the verification procedure can be found in [13, Section III.A].

4) Resource Access:  In this phase, to avoid traceability and linkability,  every single time that a consumer user U , who wants  to gain access to ?, must generate and commit to  a new set of session secret random values together  with commitments on the credential AACU . Thus,  once U has constructed and sent the corresponding  commitments to one of the co-owners P providing ?,  U and P engage in the following four zero?knowledge  proofs of knowledge (ZKPoKs) to prove the following  statements: (i) U proves that the private attributes  (x1, x2) encoded in its AACU satisfy the boolean formula ??(x1, x2) = 1, without disclosing the ac- tual attribute values (x1, x2), (ii) proves that all the session values and commitments are valid and fresh  to the actual instance of the Resource Access phase  (so no message is being relayed), (iii) proves that  the signature on AACU is valid (without disclosing  the credential AACU ), and (iv) proves that U knows  a newly chosen session value y involved in all the  previous the ZKPoKs and commitments. This session  value is newly and randomly chosen by U in each  instance of the Resource Access phase and offers  unlinkability between two different access sessions.

We refer the reader to [11, Section 4.2]-Showing  possession of credentials for a complete description  of this phase.

C. Discussion  Note that our protocol endorses the following important  properties:  ? Scalability on the number of resources: A user can use  its AACi to anonymously and unlinkably gain access  to either a single private shared resource or a collection  of resources which share both the access policy and the  group of owners.

? Scalability on the number of access control policies:  Since access control policies are represented as curves  in the plane, a tuple of attributes could be at the  intersection of two or more of these curves satisfying  two or more policies. This way owners can construct  a hierarchy of policies without having to issue new  credentials to all request users.

? Scalability on the number of owners. The system does  nor present restrictions on the maximum number of co-  owners of the same common resource.

? Security threshold parameter t. The security parameter  is chosen amongst the group of co-owners of a partic-  ular private resource. However, experiments in Section  IV show how the value t influences the system and the  expected gain of each participant.

In the following section, we apply Cooperative Game The-  ory principles to construct a coherent framework and also to  provide a formal analysis of the proposed protocol phases.

More precisely, we characterize the existing cooperative  requirements in the System Set-up and Policy Establishment  phases as coalitional games, in which it is reasonable to  assume that players (the owners) would converge to forming  the grand coalition (involving all players). Furthermore,  we also formalize the Credential Assignment phase as a  cooperative game using the Shapley value of each player  in the game to evaluate and analyze the different outcomes.

The properties inherent to the Shapley value will allow us  to make an estimation on the feasibility of the protocol and  the different possible outcomes, for many different real-life  settings.



III. GAME THEORETICAL ANALYSIS  We describe the game theoretical framework assuming  that the involved owners who form a coalition can reach  binding agreements to enforce coordinated behavior. In that  case, we also assume that they can share the benefits derived  from the execution of the protocol or the system globally.

The analysis will be performed by representing every system  phase as a separate cooperative game with transferable  utility (a TU game).

The System Set-up, Policy Establishment and Resource  Access phases are represented by simple games7 in which  the only ?winning? coalition is the grand coalition (when  all owners collaborate). Indeed, non cooperative behavior in  any of the aforementioned phases will prevent our protocol  from completion. In this article, we do not formalize the  study of those two simple games. By contrast, our focus  will be placed on the Credential Assignment phase, where a  group of (t+1) owners is the minimum coalition required to sign friend-request-messages. In particular, we represent the  Credential Assignment phase as a TU game in characteristic  function form. Furthermore, we define the notion of value  and in particular we rely on the Shapley value to provide  a fair evaluation of the game played by different types of  participants.

In the Credential Assignment TU game that we define,  not only the individual gains resulting from cooperation are  taken into account, but also the cost and other parameters,  such as the number of friends expected to require access to  the resource, etc. In other words, since some players may  contribute more to the coalition than others or may possess  different bargaining power, it is needed to measure how  important each player is to the overall cooperation, and what  payoff can he or she reasonably expect. These measurements  will let us reason about the suitability and rationality of our  protocol real deployment.

7Simple games represent situations in which coalitions are either winning or loosing assuming only two payoff values: 1 for winning coalitions and 0 otherwise.

A. Cooperative Game Theory and Shapley Value  In game theory, a cooperative game with transferable  utility is a game where groups of players (coalitions) enforce  the cooperation and coordination of the members of the  coalition and dictate the group behavior. Thus, a coalition of  players cooperates, and obtains a certain overall gain from  that cooperation. Moreover, if the players have a common  currency that is valued equally by all, then the overall gains  can freely be transferred among themselves. Formally,  Definition 1 (Cooperative Games with transferable utility  (TU games)). An n?player cooperative game in character-  istic function form with transferable utility (TU game) is an  ordered pair (N, v), where N is a finite set of n = |N | players and v : 2N ? R is a map assigning a real number v(S), called the value of S, to every possible coalition of players S ? N , and where v(?) = 0. The real number v(S) represents the reward that coalition S can achieve by itself  if all its members act together.

As previously mentioned, since some players may con-  tribute more to the coalition than others or may possess  different bargaining power, it is needed to measure how  important is each player to the overall cooperation, and  what payoff can he or she reasonably expect. Formally, let  (N, v) be a given TU game, the question to be answered is to determine how the power is distributed over the agents  involved in a situation. One possible answer to this question  is given by the notion of Shapley value [15].

Definition 2 (Shapley value for TU games). Let (N, v) be an n?player cooperative game in characteristic function form  with transferable utility, then the Shapley value is a function  ? : (N, v) ? Rn that associates (N, v) a vector ?(N, v) whose i-th component is given by the formula:  ?i(N, v) = ?  S?N i/?S  (  s!(n? s? 1)!

n!

)  (  v(S ? {i}) ? v(S) )  , (1)  ?i = 1, . . . , n where s = |S| denotes the cardinality of coalition S ? N .

The Shapley value is an index for measuring the power of  players in a game. It computes for each player the average  marginal contributions (mci(S) := v(S ? {i}) ? v(S)) in all possible coalitions.

Regarding the Shapley value?s ability to promote fairness,  Myerson [16] characterizes the Shapley value as the unique,  efficient, symmetric value verifying the balanced contribu-  tions property. Thus, we have the following properties:  ? Efficiency: implies that the vector of values exactly  splits the total payoff of the game.

v(N) = ?  i?N  ?i(N, v)  ? Symmetry: implies symmetric players to be paid equal  shares. If i, j ? N are symmetric (v(S ? {i}) = v(S ? {j}), for all S ? N \ {i, j}), then  ?i(N, v) = ?j(N, v)  ? Balanced Contributions: implies that player i con- tributes to player j?s payoff what player j contributes to player i?s payoff.

? i, j ? N,?i(N, v)??i(N \ {j}, v|N \ {j}) =  = ?j(N, v)? ?j(N \ {i}, v|N \ {i}),  where (N \ {j}, v|N \ {j}) is the TU game played by N \ {j} players.

B. The Credential Assignment Phase as a TU Game  In this section, a Credential Assignment TU game is  defined to represent the Credential Assignment phase. The  characteristic function will be determined by the total ex-  pected gain from the cooperation of (t+ 1) owners signing a new user?s access request, i.e., the benefits of protecting  the resource minus the costs imposed by running the process  of signing credentials. Additionally, the function will also  capture the level of satisfaction achieved by the members  of the coalition when the system is operating according to  their expectations.

1) Assumptions: We assume the following hypothesis in  order to constitute the characteristic function and players?  payoffs:  Assumption 1 (Gain). A successful execution of the Cre-  dential Assignment phase gives owners the opportunity of  executing their privacy requirements on common shared  resources and then preventing from non-authorized access.

Since every owner is cooperative, a value bi will represent  the gain for each participant i ? N in signing new friend- request-messages for friends of other coalition members.

This payoff captures the cooperative nature and the interest  of player i to assist other allied members? friends.

Assumption 2 (Costs). A successful execution of the Cre-  dential Assignment phase involves players in incurring a  computational and communication cost by signing friend-  request-messages of other coalition members for a given  resource and owner. The cost of signing one of these  messages is denoted by ci which depends on each owner?s  platform (i.e., PC, smartphone).

Assumption 3 (Global individual gain). A successful exe-  cution of the Credential Assignment phase gives owners a  personal utility ui, which represents the gain for participant  i ? N taking into account that the overall system is operating in a regular flow. The value ui represents the  gain for each participant expecting friend-request-messages  initiated by their own friends to be signed by the rest of the     co-owners. It also represents the overall level of satisfaction  or consideration for the global functioning of the protocol.

Assumption 4 (Friendship connections). The value ?i rep- resents the number of friends that player i has and that  are entitled to initiate the Credential Assignment phase by  requesting i to collect enough signatures on the friend-  request-message generated.

2) Credential Assignment Game Characteristic Function:  If a participant i ? N acts as the sponsor for one of his friends U , then i involves a group S ? N of co-owners in signing the anonymous credential. We define the total gain  of S by:  g(S) =  ?  ?  ?  ?  ?  0, if |S| 6 t  ui + ?  j?S j 6=i  (bj ? cj), if |S| > t  being |S| > t+1, where t is the threshold security parameter defined in Section II. Otherwise, its total gain equals 0, since  coalition S is not able to generate the necessary material to  construct an anonymous access credential. However, since  a highly connected owner (with high number of friendship  connections) will act as an sponsor with a high probability,  we define the expected total gain E of each coalition S ? N as follows:  E[g(S)] = ?  i?S ?i  ?(N) ? (  ui + ?  j?S j 6=i  (bj ? cj) )  = ?  i?S  (  ?i ?(N)  ui + ?(S\i) ?(N)  (bi ? ci) )  , (2)  where ?(S \ i) = ?  j?S j 6=i  ?j .

We get to define the Credential Assignment TU-Game  (N, v) with player set N = {1, ? ? ? , n}, and the charac- teristic function given by:  v(S) =  ?  ?  ?  0, if |S| 6 t ?  i?S  ( ?i ?(N)  ui + ?(S \ i)  ?(N) (bi ? ci)  )  , if |S| > t  Proposition 1. Let (N, v) be the Credential Assignment TU- game previously defined, then its Shapley value is given by:  ?i(v) = (n? t)  n  ?iui  ?(N) +  t  n(n? 1)  n ?  j=1 j 6=i  ?juj  ?(N) +  t(t ? 1)  n(n? 1)(n ? 2) ?  ? n ?  j=1 j 6=i  j?1 ?  ?=1 ?6=i  (  ??  ?(N) (bj ? cj) +  ?j  ?(N) (b? ? c?)  )  +  +   (  1? t(t ? 1)  n(n? 1)  )  (?(N \ i)  ?(N) (bi ? ci) +  ?i  ?(N)  n ?  j=1 j 6=i  (bj ? cj) )  ,  for all i = 1, . . . , n.

For the sake of completeness, we include the mathe-  matical proof for the computation of the Shapley value in  Appendix A.

3) Discussion: The interpretation of the Shapley value of  each entity involved in the protocol is related to the propor-  tion, on the part of that entity, of the total cost or losses  in terms of global resources consumed or invested, when  running one single instance of the protocol. The Shapley  value provides fairness to the distribution of the total benefit  (or cost), gained (or spent) globally for the functioning of the  system, amongst the members of a coalition. In other words,  each entity should contribute to the total amount of global  cost, overhead or resources needed to execute the protocol  successfully, according to the proportion dictated by its own  Shapley value. Thus, in our particular setting, the following  relations can be established:  ? Any increase in any of the ?i values increases the Shap- ley value of player i. Indeed, increasing the number of  friends of any of the members of a coalition increases  the global cost of the system (e.g., in terms of time for  executing the protocol). The entity imposing such extra  cost should then assume a bigger proportion of it.

? An increase in any of the ci values decreases the  Shapley value of player i. A participant with a high  individual signing cost is individually contributing more  to the global functioning of the system than other  participants with lower individual costs. Therefore, the  former should be compensated by the coalition by  reducing the proportion i has to pay of the global  system cost.

? An increase in any of the bi values increases the  Shapley value of player i. A participant benefiting  more than the rest when signing single credentials is  clearly more interested on the global functioning and  operability of the system. In those terms, it should  assume a bigger proportion of the overall overhead cost  than the less interested players.

? An increase in any of the ui values increases the Shap-  ley value of player i. Similarly, deriving bigger benefit  than the rest from the signing of one own friend?s  credentials implies a greater interest on the execution  of the protocol and this implies other participants can  force this one to assume a bigger proportion of the  global system overhead cost.



IV. OUTCOME OF THE FORMALISM  In this section, corresponding to the scope of this paper  and, as a way to illustrate the outcome of our formalism  (for the Credential Assignment phase), we choose a series  of small communities which allow us to individually analyze  and predict the expected contribution of different types of  rational participants to the overall system. Note that the  actual implementation and evaluation of the system is out  of the scope of this work.

In equal conditions, the Shapley value represents a fair distribution of global costs  and benefits in terms of global system resources and overhead.

Pi ui bi ci ?i Shapley Value Shapley Value in % P1 10 12 5 2 8 33.3% P2 10 12 5 2 8 33.3% P3 10 12 5 2 8 33.3%  Total Shapley Value 24  The Shapley value represents a fair distribution of global costs, assigning entities  with a larger number of friends a bigger proportion of the global cost incurred by  the coalition. In other words, P2 and P3 expect P1 to assume 51.04% of the total cost in terms of overhead and global resources consumed in running the protocol.

Pi ui bi ci ?i Shapley Value Shapley Value in % P1 10 12 5 20 12.25 51.04% P2 10 12 5 2 5.88 24.48% P3 10 12 5 2 5.88 24.48%  Total Shapley Value 24  Players with higher cost when signing a single credential (for example, using a low  powered device to perform the signature) are assigned the lower proportion of the  total cost incurred by the coalition. In other words, P1 expects P2 and P3 to assume  36.54% each, of the total cost in terms of global resources consumed in running the protocol.

Pi ui bi ci ?i Shapley Value Shapley Value in % P1 10 12 15 2 4.67 26.92% P2 10 12 5 2 6.33 36.54% P3 10 12 5 2 6.33 36.54%  Total Shapley Value 17.33  Players for who signing a single credential represents a higher potential benefit must  also be responsible for a higher proportion of the cost incurred by the coalition.

Similarly, P2 and P3 expect P1 to assume the 40.58% of the total cost or losses in terms of global resources consumed or invested in running the protocol.

Pi ui bi ci ?i Shapley Value Shapley Value in % P1 10 24 5 2 12 40.58% P2 10 12 5 2 10 29.71% P3 10 12 5 2 10 29.71%  Total Shapley Value 32  Players for who the well functioning of the system represents a higher potential  benefit must equally be given a bigger proportion of the total cost incurred by the  coalition. In other words, P2 and P3 can push or negotiate with P1 to assume up  to a maximum of 37.50% of the total price of running the service.

Pi ui bi ci ?i Shapley Value Shapley Value in % P1 30 12 5 2 12.44 37.50% P2 10 12 5 2 9.11 31.25% P3 10 12 5 2 9.11 31.25%  Total Shapley Value 30,67  Figure 2: A few examples for coalitions of 3 players.

Tables in Fig. 2 show simple and arbitrary values con-  sidered for a small scenario where n = 3 is the number of players or participants (denoted by Pi in the figure) and  t = 1 (at least two signers are needed) is the threshold parameter. In all cases the Shapley value is computed and  interpreted, giving a fair estimate of the gains and losses  incurred by each participant of a coalition in different  situations.

Furthermore, to illustrate the outcome of our formalism  with a larger number of co-owners, different groups of  n = 12 of co-owners are chosen. A formal evaluation is performed according to the following (see Table I):  ? Regarding the type of individual owners (two level  grading, Low and High, is considered for each variable  ui and bi):  ? A Beginner type of owner: a participant with  ui(Low) and bi(Low). Someone with no previous experience using our access control protocol.

? A Buddy type of owner: a participant with  ui(High) and bi(Low). Someone with previous experience using our access control system, who  assigns more individual benefit to having his/her  friends gaining access to the private shared re-  source than to having somebody else?s friends  gaining access to the same resource. A Buddy  favors his/her own friends.

? A Socializer type of owner: a participant with  ui(High) and bi(High). Someone with previous experience using our access control system, who  assigns an individual benefit to having his/her own  friends gaining access to a private resource that  is equal to the benefit of having somebody else?s  friends accessing the same resource.

? Regarding computational capacity (two level grading,  Low and High, is considered for each ci):  ? The value ci(Low) references a PC or any other device with high computational capabilities.

? The value ci(High) references a smartphone or any other low-powered device.

? Finally, ?i ? 1, . . . , n bi(Low) < ci(High).

? Regarding the number of friends, four level grading,  Very Low, Low, large or Very Large, is considered for  each ?i.

Note that the following series of experiments are also  trying to establish how t affects the outcome of each  simulation. For the sake of simplicity, we fixed n = 12 and t = {3, 6, 10}.

A. Scenario 1  Given a group of Beginners, equally connected in terms  of the number of friends, the curves in Figure 3?(a) show  that the proportions of global cost assumed by each co-  owner using a PC (solid lines) is greater than the one  assumed by smartphone co-owners (dashed lines). We see  how the proportions converge to be equals as t grows.

Similar experiments with a group of Socializers or a group of  Buddies also show that co-owners using PCs must contribute  more than those using smartphones.

B. Scenario 2  Figure 3?(b) shows the distribution of the cost given a  group comprised of the 3 types of participant, all equally  Table I: Parameters for the simulations with large group of  co-owners.

Type of co-owner Computational capability Number of friends  - Beginner - PC  - Equally connected - Buddy - Mixture on the number - Socializer - Smartphone of connections     3 6 10     t signers  S h a p le  y V  a lu  e i n %  f o r  e a c h p  a rt  ic ip  a n t  Group of 12 co?owners of type Beginner      PC  Smartphone  3 6 10     t signers  S h a p le  y V  a lu  e i n %  f o r  e a c h p  a rt  ic ip  a n  Groups of 12 co?owners using PC      Socializer  Buddy  Beginner  (a) (b)  Figure 3: Simulations 1 and 2 show the changes in the Shapley value per participant, as t increases for a fixed n = 12: (a) for a group of Beginner type of participants using PCs and smartphones, and (b) for a group which contains participants of  the different types defined, i.e., Socializers, Buddies, and Beginners (ordered as they appear in the graphic), using PCs.

3 6 10     t signers  S h a p le  y V  a lu  e i n %  f o r  e a c h p  a rt  ic ip  a n t  Group of 12 co?owners using PCs     P1  P2  P3  P4  P5  P6  P7  P8  P9  P10  P11  P12  3 6 10     t signers  S h a p le  y V  a lu  e i n %  f o r  e a c h p  a rt  ic ip  a n t  Group of 12 co?owners using Smartphones     P1  P2  P3  P4  P5  P6  P7  P8  P9  P10  P11  P12  (a) (b)  Figure 4: Simulation 3 shows the changes in the Shapley value, as t increases for a fixed n: (a) for users connected to  the system using a PC, and (b) for individuals using a smartphone. Participants who have Very Low number of friends are  depicted by reverse triangles (P1,5,9), Low by empty circles (P2,6,10), High by triangles (P3,7,11) and Very High by solid  circles (P4,8,12).

connected in terms of the number of friends and with equal  computation capability (all PC devices). We observe that  how this distribution is almost even although Socializers  must contribute more due to their desire to be highly visible  in social terms.

C. Scenario 3  Given a group of n = 12 co-owners in which P1?4 are Beginners, P5?8 are Buddies and P9?12 are Socializers, we  explore how ?i affects the distribution of the cost. In Figure 4?(a) we represent all individuals participating in the system  using a PC, whereas in Figure 4?(b) the device used is  a Smartphone. In particular, when the number of owners  involved in the signing process is low t = 3, we can see how participants who either by being Socializers (specially  P11,12) or by having Very high number of friends (P4,8,12),  must incur higher contribution to the global cost, in both  scenarios. Moreover, as shown in simulations above, the  Shapley value gets more evenly distributed as the number  of signers grow up to the maximum. These results can be  extrapolated to larger communities with similar distributions.

D. Scenario 4  Finally, we have also explored a mixed scenario of a group  of n = 12 co-owners with the same configuration of types as in Simulation 3 but also considering different devices.

Figure 5 depicts how participants with Very High number of  friends must again contribute more, and Smartphone owners?  contribution is generally lower than participants? using PCs.

These results can be extrapolated to larger communities with  similar distributions.

3 6 10         t signers  S h  a p  le y V  a lu  e i n  % f  o r  e a  c h  p a  rt ic  ip a  n t  Group of 12 co?owners of different types and devices     P1  P2  P3  P4  P5  P6  P7  P8  P9  P10  P11  P12  Figure 5: Simulation 4 with group of 12 co-owners of dif-  ferent types and platforms show the changes in the Shapley  value, as t increases.

E. Application  The simulations just shown serve as an example of the  direct application of the formal analytical framework, with  regard to the anonymous access control protocol proposed.

Before participating in the system, co-owners can assess the  level and cost of their contribution to the execution of the  system. Although for each particular scenario, fairness is  guaranteed (Shapley Value characteristic), owners can use  this tool to evaluate each particular instance.



V. CONCLUSION  In this article, we have formulated a novel anonymous ac-  cess control protocol as a series of coalitional games where  the players are the owners of a common private resource  in an OSN. Co-owners of a shared resource can generate  by themselves an attribute-based boolean formula to con-  trol the access to that common resource. This procedure  requires the cooperation of all co-owners in both defining  the access control policy to protect the shared content as  well as in granting access to requesters, via anonymous  access credentials. We have applied cooperative game theory  concepts, in particular the Shapley value which distributes  costs and losses in a fair manner, so assisting participants in  estimating their expected gains and losses in each instance  of the protocol. The application of this framework has served  to illustrate the way in which cooperative protocols can be  analyzed in OSNs. The same defined framework can be  used to analyze the outcomes of cooperative interactions in  other systems. Finally, as we illustrated the outcome of the  formalism applied to small real settings throw light over  the possibility of growth and expansion of the proposed  cooperative management of privacy in a social network  context.

