Analyzing Text-based User Feedback in e-Government Services

Abstract  In providing e-Government services, it is necessary to conduct a user-centric evaluation periodically, to improve the usability, accessibility, and effectiveness of e-Government services for citizens. In a qualitative evaluation, gathering user?s opinions and recommendations to the e-Government services are commonly used to get a real feedback from the citizens.

However, such the user feedback commonly is containing a big text data from diversity of the citizens. It is necessary to do a text mining to assist an analyzing to find out quickly the point of what the citizens recommended. This study proposes an application of Topic Models to do analysis of the big text datasets of the user?s feedback. Based on the qualitative analyses approach, the study analyzes user?s opinion and recommendation to the e-Government services. The paper also describe designing evaluation sheet, data collection and analysis strategies of a case study in e-Government portals evaluation.

Keywords: e-Government, user-centric evaluation, text-mining, topic models, LDA, qualitative analysis  1. Introduction A critical factor of success in today?s governments is  to effectively communicate their messages to citizens and build strong alliances with them by empowering their participation in the decision making process. Some countries have established promising e-Government initiatives with the objective of enhancing the accessibility of government services and information for their citizens. Since e-government can improve government management efficiency, it is very important to improve the public service by the public?s need to e-government?s development.

However, the e-government website design mainly concentrates on website features that would enhance its usability with the government centric approach. The governments tend to design and launch online services based on their understanding of what citizens need without actually measuring what increases citizens? willingness to adopt the e-Government services.

E-Government services should be the maximum from the needs of the public, based on the interests of the public as the center design services, and improve service efficiency, reduce service costs, improve service  quality, providing the public with the largest service efficiency. Government public services need to attach importance to the principle of demand-oriented and then carry out all system construction and services work. To achieve this goal, government institutions and the public must be interactive with information on the public information needs and study the real need of public.

This process needs to do the public opinion collections.

However, such the user feedback commonly is containing a big text data from diversity of the citizens.

The big data of the user?s feedback is about turning imperfect, complex, often unstructured data into actionable information. This implies leveraging advanced computational and analytical tools such as text mining tools, to reveal trends and correlations within and across large data sets that would otherwise remain undiscovered.

This study proposes an application of Topic Models to do analysis of the big text data of the e-Government user?s feedback. The topic models are a popular method for modeling the term frequency occurrences in text documents. Based on the qualitative analyses approach, the study analyzes user?s opinion and recommendation to the e-Government services. The paper also describe designing evaluation sheet, data collection and analysis strategies of a case study in e-Government portals evaluation.

2. Research Purposes The study of this project aimed primarily to investigate  the effects of cultural, social politic situation and other country-specific factors on the development and diffusion of e-government. Specifically, the project aimed to: ? Providing a model of evaluation for e-government  services.

? Examine the willingness and capability of Indonesia  people to use e-government to improve quality of resources and services of e-government sites.

? Provide assistance to Indonesia?s e-government project by providing a socio-technical, theoretical framework to adoption within which new initiatives might be evaluated.

The study of this paper addressed three questions; 1. What are the citizens? needs in e-government  services?

2. How to find priorities of the services that truly   DOI 10.1109/CISIS.2013.129         reflect the needs of the citizens?

3. How do the peoples fell about the utilization of  e-Government services?

3. Related Research Work  3.1. Evaluating e-Government Services  Many studies were conducted to evaluate e-government provision of services through the Web.

Those studies generally fall in two categories, those that borrow lessons and suggestions from the evaluation of the web characteristics with contents of services and performance approach; and those that concentrate on the characteristics of the web with web structural and network analysis approach. Both of the categories are focusing on measuring the rating of services to evaluate the website source, services and/or characteristics of the web. An evaluation model based on a rating of services and user needs/expectancy to evaluate user satisfaction of resources and services are never used in those studies.

The work of Wood et al [1] is a study that tries to utilize lessons and experiences from evaluation of a web site services performance. The authors suggested use of a multidimensional Web evaluation strategy, which includes methods such as usability testing, user feedback, usage data, and Web and Internet performance, etc. that are common in the evaluation of commercial Web sites.

A study of Wang et al [2] was aimed to develop and evaluate a model for e-government services that focuses on how characteristics of site interact with both the services and citizens to influence the efficient delivery services. It was also aimed to help answer why a government websites designed to be citizen-centric in service delivery succeeds or fails. A research was done by Wangpipatwong et al [3] is a study to investigate factors that influence the adoption of e-Government websites directly from citizens. This work typically focused on characteristic of information quality and system quality of the e-government websites. The authors suggested that characteristics of information quality significantly influence the adoption of the e-Government websites. The study concluded that efficiency, accuracy, relevancy and completeness are more significance factors than timeliness and precision of the information in the e-Government websites. The work of Hasigawa et al [4] is a typical study to examine the e-government progress level based on questionnaire survey. The authors suggested use three progress levels (input, output, and outcome) in measuring the e-government achievement. The authors considered that the progress level is high with achieving the outcome.

Those studies are focusing on measuring the rating of services, without evaluate user needs/expectancy to the resources and services.

Researches by Kojima et al, and Patricek et al, represent the second approach to evaluation of e-Government Web sites. The work of Kojima et al [5] proposed a method of websites grouping based on link  structure in order to compose the whole structure of a site by considering semantically related pages as one virtual document. The work of Patricek et al [6] is a study that tries to improve e-Government evaluation using arrange of techniques from web metric and social networks analysis. The authors examined two forms of structural characteristics of the websites: internal structure that is indicative of navigability of a site, and external structure that is indicative of hubness and authority of a site.

Above studies are focusing on measuring the characteristics of the web with web structural and network analysis approach, without evaluate user needs/expectancy to the services.

This paper presents a case study of Indonesian central government institutional e-Government services. Studies regarding Indonesia e-Government evaluation are still rare [7]; the Author found a few research studies.

Research performed by Sarosa [8] evaluated the level of e-Government adoption in Yogyakarta. Another research study was performed by Wahid to evaluate the content focus and quality of e-Government websites at the districts/cities level [9]. Author also already conducted previous study to evaluate the status of development and information quality and services, user preferences and behaviors of the Indonesia central government?s e-Government portals [10, 11, 12, 13]. However, information regarding user preferences and actual factors improving user to access the e-government services is very important but currently still not clearly understood.

This study presents an evaluation based on a quantitative analysis approach of the Indonesian central government institution?s e-Government services.

3.2 Topic Models for Text Mining  Topic models are a probabilistic generative model for discrete data, where each user has a probability distribution of selecting each topic, and each topic has a probability distribution overall data. An early topic model was proposed by Hofmann [15] who developed probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA). Blei et al [16] introduced Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model which is a Bayesian mixture model for discrete data where topics are assumed to be uncorrelated. In LDA, the generation of a document collection is modeled as a three step process. First, for each document, a distribution over topics is sampled from a Dirichlet distribution. Second, for each word in the document, a single topic is chosen according to this distribution. Finally, each word is sampled from a multinomial distribution over words specific to the sampled topic. The Correlated Topics Model (CTM) is an extension of the LDA model where correlations between topics are allowed [17].

Topic models have previously been used for a variety of applications, including information retrieval [18], geographical information retrieval [19], and analyzing log data of human behavior such as web usage [20], news article reading [21] as well as purchasing behavior         [22]. This study proposes an application of Topic Models to analyze of the big text data set of the user?s feedback.

4. Research Methodology The general research framework of this study adopted  a problem-based research cycle presented by Levy, et al.

[23]. In Levy?s research cycle, a research endeavor might best be viewed as a structure that incorporates a number of distinct but related elements, including the research problem that drives the research, along with the goals, research questions, literature review, methodology, results, and conclusions. The research problem serves as the starting point for the research, and is a unifying thread that runs throughout all of the elements of the research endeavor. Research goals essentially detail what the research study intends to do in order to address the problem, thereby answering the question: ?What will this study do?? Figure 1 shows the general framework of this study. To achieve the study goals described in Section 3, this study addresses the indicated research questions (Section 2).

This study employs both qualitative and quantitative data analyses to produce and explore new findings.

Qualitative analysis and literature review is conducted to support and validate all of the issues.

This paper presents an evaluation based on the concept of a public value methodology for e-Government portal evaluation. This concept is a new approach for performing an analysis and evaluation of governance quality. The key points of this concept were developed in the mid-90 [24]. This concept takes its root in public administration practice, as a basis for monitoring the efficiency of administrative reforms and the development of public service quality standards. Such purposes are perhaps most clearly identifiable in respect of universal entitlements such as health, education, housing and sanitation, personal security, and justice.

Moore argues that public values must relate to citizens? desires and perceptions.

One of the modern applications of this concept is the analysis and evaluation of various services and tools of governance quality improvement. Today, one of the most effective tools of government quality improvement is the development of e-Government. The Author has adapted and extended this concept to address e-Government, with application to the case study of Indonesia.

The Public Value can be defined as the value created by government activities, and the added value arising from these activities can be interpreted as the difference between the benefits received from and resources given to the government by society. In mapping the territory of what it is the public value, Kelly et al. [25] identify three categories; (1) public services, (2) public policy outcomes, and (3) public trust. By these three elements, the public value concept is closely interrelated with the good governance principles developed by the United Nations, and also with the governance quality criteria  used by the World Bank to calculate GRICS (Governance Research Indicator Country Snapshot) indices. The public value concept enabled an analysis and systemization of the characteristics used by different researchers to evaluate the level of development and quality of e-Government portals, which resulted in the specification of five major indicators for assessing regional government portals [26]: (1) Openness, (2) Transparency, (3) Interactivity, (4) Citizen-centricity, and (5) Usability. The Author has adopted and extended this concept to evaluate e-Government in Indonesia.

Figure 1: A General Research Framework  5. Data Collection and Analysis The study mainly used three types of data collections;  e-mail, online website, and in-person interview. Online data collection was undertaken trough mailing list of Indonesian societies, and government institution websites. In-person interview was conducted to the citizen in some area of Indonesia (Jakarta, Bandung, Surabaya, Malang, Gresik, Yogyakarta, Balikpapan, Samarinda, Makassar, etc). The online data collection took place between the beginning of August 2012 and the end of December 2012. The data collection in some internet caf?s started on 10 August and finished on 25 August 2012. More than 320 opinions from citizens were collected from the survey.

Table 1: Statistics of the collected text datasets  Respondents 320 Total of words 19,804  Docs 320 vocabulary 1,032  Empty docs 4 characters 172,712  Docs (<=5 words) 0 paragraph 1,528  Docs (> 5 words) 316 lines 6,749         Table 1 illustrates statistical characteristic of the collected datasets. After the questionnaires have been completed, coded paper questionnaires are entered into Excel?s CSV spreadsheet. The respondents? ID, Age and opinion data are entered into first, second and third column of the sheet. We used Stanford Topic Modeling Toolbox (TMT) to perform analysis of the collected datasets that have substantial textual component [27].

The Stanford TMT provided some features that give ability to do Topic Models Analysis, and the study utilized the following features:  1. Importing text datasets from cells in Excel?s CSV spreadsheets.

2. Using LDA model to create summaries of the text datasets.

3. Selecting parameters for training LDA model, such as the number of topics, number of top words in the each topic, filtering most common words and selecting the column containing the text datasets.

4. Slicing the LDA topic models output and converting it into rich Excel-compatible outputs for tracking word usage across topics and respondent categories.

Figure 2 shows script source used to train the LDA topic model. The data was imported from a CSV file with name ?survey-data.csv?. The program is set to read terms with more than 4 characters, because some terms and conjunctions commonly used in Indonesian language wrote in 3 or 4 alphabet characters. For example; saya(me), kamu(you), yang(be-,that), dan (and), etc. The number of topics was set to categorize the datasets into three topics. Table 2 shows a summary of the topic model after finishing the data training. The table represents the top-ten terms in the each topic.

Table 3 shows how many times the terms of topic have occurred in the each group of respondents.

Figure 2: A part of scripts code and its parameters for the LDA topic model analysis  Table 2: A summary of the top-ten terms in the topics  Topic 0 Topic 1 Topic 2  online terkini memuat layanan forum terkini administrasi diskusi pasar database memuat indikator-indikator dokumen berita-berita investasi regulasi pengaduan berita-berita kegiatan pendapat regulasi pengumpulan pengumpulan lelang pendapat online transaksi akses ruang Pengumpulan  Online services and database  up to date information and public opinion gathering  Economy business and online transaction  Table 3: Frequency the each topic occurred in the text datasets  Group ID  Documents Topic 0 Topic 1 Topic 2  under 20 8.6326 11.3897 31.9777 21-30 36.9365 12.8886 90.1749 31-40 37.9289 7.0932 42.9779 41-50 12.7829 0.0019 3.2152 50- 8.0401 0.0690 3.8909  Total 104.3210 31.4424 172.2366 Ratio 33.9% 10.2% 55.9%  Figure 3: Ratio of each topic from collected data sets  Table 4: Ratio of the topics in the groups of the respondents? age category  Group ID  Number of Respondent  Ratio of Document Topic 0 Topic 1 Topic 2  under 20 52 16.60% 21.90% 61.50% 21-30 144 25.70% 9.00% 62.60% 31-40 88 43.10% 8.10% 48.80% 41-50 16 79.90% 0.00% 20.10% 50- 12 67.00% 0.60% 32.40%         Figure 4: Characteristic of the proportion of each topic in the group of the respondents? age category  6. Findings The result on the table 2 shows that the respondents  feel that the e-Government services should make benefit for citizen. In this analysis, the datasets were categorized into three topics. Base on the summary of the top-ten of most frequency occurred terms in each topic, terms of the topic 0 represent the importance of providing online services and database. The topic 1 shows the identification of need to provide up to date information from the government institutions and the importance of public opinion gathering. Topic 2 indicate that the e-government services should provide information of economy and business circumstances, such as economic indicators, the government?s regulations on such businesses, opportunities for investor, bidding information and online transaction.

Base on the ratio of the topics, 55.9% of the documents is close to the content of the topic 2. Its indicate most of the respondents feel that the e-government services should provide online transaction services and up to date information related to the economy and providing information of business chance with the government institutions. The topic 0 was described in the 33.9 % of the documents. The importance of providing online services and database was represented in the one-third of the respondents? opinions. Only 10.2% of the respondents? opinion said the importance of providing the most up to date information of government institution activities and the necessity of the concrete actions to provide public opinion gathering services through online public forum and a consultation service corner for citizen.

Table 4 and Figure 4 illustrate the characteristics of the each group of respondent category to choose a topic for their opinion on e-Government services. The respondents with a group of younger than 20 years old and between 21 to 31 years old make their opinion choice to the topic 2. The result indicates that most of young respondents want to take economically benefit on e-Government services like utilization of online transaction for effectiveness of the government services.

The middle age respondents made a trend to choose their opinion to the topic 0. Around 80% of the middle  age and 67% of the old age groups argued about the providing an online services and database on the e-Government services is very important. Only 20% of the middle age and 32% of old age respondents feel the importance of providing online transaction on e-Government services. It can be said that the middle and old age groups of citizens suggest providing online services and database in the administration processes of government institutions.

7. Conclusions The LDA topic models can be used to assist an  analyzing of a big text datasets of the citizens? opinion and recommendation to identify and find out quickly the point of what citizens recommended in. The citizen recommendation can be indentified from the categorized topics and most frequency occurred terms in the each topic. The data analyses of this case study was used a number of parameter to categorize the topics into three different topics. More than three topics categorizing is also needed to be analyzed and compared with each others.

By slicing the topics and the groups ID, The LDA topics models also can identify the characteristics of the each group of the respondents. The study experimented to show the characteristics of each group of respondents? age category with their proportion in the each topic. The experiment shows that the different of the trend in each group of respondents can be shown clearly. In this study, the category of age was divided into only five groups. To analyze and show much more precisely the characteristics, it is needed more specific age categories. Identification of the characteristics of the citizens? opinions and recommendation is also needed on various type of groups of citizens such as area that the citizens live in, education, income, type of internet connection, and so on.

The government should do frequently evaluation of what are the services needed. To improve the usability, accessibility, and effectiveness of e-Government services for citizens, it is necessary to conduct the services? impacts evaluation, periodically. The resulting gathered information represents important feedback and opinions from the users. The e-Government website developers will then need to reflect such feedback in the redesign and reengineering of e-Government services. To make much clearer the current status of e-government services and its impacts for the citizen, author consider that it is necessary to conduct other studies with different frameworks and parameters, such as level of infrastructure, users terminal system, internet providers, access speed, scale of database, category and type of contents released, web user interface and so on. It is also required to conduct analyzing some factors with broader socio-economic framework such as social status and demographics parameters.

