The Sweet Burden:  Young Consumers? Extroversion, Number of Friendship on Online Social Network and

Abstract?The purpose of this paper is to build a model consisting of young consumers? personality, the use of online social network, and the luxury consumption tendency. We collected data from users of a popular online social network site in China, renren.com, which is Facebook copy. Over 150 respondents from two leading Chinese universities, respectively located at Beijing and Shanghai, volunteered to participate in the survey. The results indicated that one?s extroversion strongly predicted the number of fans on renren. Number of friendship was also strongly associated with his/her luxury consumption tendency, after controlled the gender, grade, disposable income, and frequency of internet use. Moreover, the participants? place of origin (big city vs. small town) served to moderate the relationship, i.e., for young consumers from small towns, their increased extroversion is associated with larger online social network, but at the cost of higher consumption of luxury goods, while the effect on undergraduates from big cities was lessened.

These findings offer insight into the influence of consumers? personality on luxury consumption and provide managerial implications for marketers to build luxury businesses in China.

Keywords-component; luxury consumption; extroversion; social network; place of origin

I.  INTRODUCTION Despite the worldwide economic downturn in 2008, the  luxury market has been thriving in recent years. According to a report by the leading consulting company Bain & Company, global luxury goods accounted for $ 212 billion in retail sales in 2012 and it is estimated that the market will grow by four to six percent per year between 2013 and 2015, pushing the market to between $240 and $250 billion by the middle of the decade. It is worthy that China has bypassed Japan as the sector?s second market, behind the United States. Chinese consumers now make half of the luxury purchases in all of Asia, and nearly one third of those in Europe. Globally, one in four purchases of personal luxury goods comes from Chinese consumers.

Despite the dramatic growth of the luxury market over the past two decades, the literature remains scant (Truong, simmons, McColl, and Kithen, 2008). Besides, prior research mainly focused on demographic characteristics (gender, disposable income, social class); however, with the phenomenon known as the ?democratization of luxury?  (Truong et al., 2008), which means luxury goods have become more affordable and accessible to new customers, more consumers from various classes are willing and able to pay a price premium for higher quality, higher status products, thus becoming occasional luxury customers. Considering the trend, it is necessary for researchers to develop a good understanding of consumers? underlying psychological factors. To address this knowledge gap, this study investigates the influence of Chinese young consumers' personality on the aspiration towards luxury goods.



II. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK AND HYPOTHESES Our review of the literature begins with a discussion of  luxury consumption. Next, we discuss the personality extroversion as well as its influence. Finally, we focus on the impact of place of origin.

A. Luxury consumption From the perspective of consumers, there are several kinds  of predictors of luxury consumption. Earlier research examined the demographics as antecedents. Researchers found that consumers? income is predictive of luxury goods consumption (Dubois, & Duquesne, 1993). Eng and Bogaert (2010) also stated that, at the country level, there is a direct relationship between economic growths and increased spending on luxuries.

Chao, & Schor (1998) found that race is positively associated with status consumption; specifically, compared to Black and Hispanic women, white women tend to engage in status- purchasing.

Later studies attempted to examine the influence of psychological characteristics as antecedents. Based on an online sample of adults in the Southeast USA, Eastman, & Eastman (2011) found that, there was a significant negative relationship between the level of status consumption and levels of price consciousness, value consciousness and brand consciousness, indicating that those more motivated to consume for status are both more brand-name conscious and more likely to see a higher price as indicative of higher quality.

Similarly, Zhan, & He (2012) demonstrated that value consciousness is positively related to luxury consumption among Chinese middle-class consumers.

The authors thank the support from National Nature Science Fund of China (No. 71102175)     Some researchers focus on the influence of values. Lee & Hwang (2011) showed that consumers who desire materialism and hedonism had favorable attitudes toward luxury restaurants, whereas consumers who desire uniqueness had unfavorable attitudes toward luxury restaurants. Gil, Kwon, Good, & Johnson (2012) also demonstrated that materialistic orientation is a powerful force in developing positive attitudes toward luxury brands.

Additionally, social influence and conformity account for why people engage in luxury shopping. For example, Kastanakis & Balabanis (2012) found that consumers? interdependent self-concept was positively related with bandwagon luxury consumption, which indicates people consume luxury goods to pursue perceived social value. Shukla (2011) found that normative interpersonal influences were significant antecedents of luxury consumption across nations.

Zhan, & He (2012) also demonstrated that susceptibility to normative influence is a key predictor for Chinese consumers.

Although much has been learned about the luxury consumption, little research had addressed the issue of consumers? personality, which has been proven significant influencing factors of consumer behavior.

B. The influence of extroversion on luxury consumption This study attempts to construct the relationship between  personality and luxury consumption tendency. In this research we introduced extroversion as a determinant of luxury consumption tendency. Extroversion is one of the traits of Big Five Factor model, consisting neuroticism, extraversion, agreeableness, openness, and consciousness (Goldberg, 1992), which have been identified in numerous studies as the most salient dimensions of personality.

Extraversion is distinguished by sociability, positive affectivity, assertiveness and confidence. Although previous research has not examined the relationship between extraversion and luxury consumption, we argue that several reasons make extroversion a good predictor of luxury shopping. First, extrovert individuals tend to be talkative and socially ascendant, they prefer interpersonal interaction and more importantly, they like to be the center of conversation (Costa & McCrae, 1992). As a consequence, luxury goods would make extroverts attract more attention from friends as well as strangers. Second, Extraverts are cheerful and optimistic individuals hence have a tendency to experience more positive emotions (Costa and McCrae 1980). Researchers indicated that extraversion is positively related to hedonic shopping values (Guido, 2006) and brand passion (Matzler et al., 2007). With the superior quality and aesthetic, luxury goods provide consumers positive experience, which is what extroverts are seeking. Finally, Individuals with high scores on extraversion have been characterized as assertive, forceful and ambition. Since luxury goods usually signal status or wealth, extroverted consumers may do luxury shopping to enhance their image.

Relying on the analysis above, we suggested the hypothesis:  H1: Individuals? extroversion is positively related to luxury consumption tendency.

C. Use of social network as mediator Besides the main effect, we attempt to explore the possible  influencing mechanism of extroversion on luxury shopping. As mentioned above, extroverts prefer making friends; for the young generation, extraverted individuals are more likely to be active in social networks and have more friends. Meantime, past research found that consumers? extraversion is positively related to their brand evangelism, which means advocating for a product to people around (Matzler et al., 2007). To some extent, online social network provides paths for extroverts to sharing (or even showing off) what they shopped. In this light, we hypothesize the mediation effect:  H2: Individual?s use of social network will mediate the relationship between extroversion and luxury consumption tendency.

D. Place of origin as moderator Aside from the main effect of personality, this paper aims  to explore whether such effect will differ for people coming from cities and town. For young people born and raised in small towns, when they come to large cities for colleges or work, they usually feel the shock brought by unfamiliar city life, which is totally different from the past quiet town life. For example, women who live in urban and suburban areas are more status-conscious than those in rural areas (Chao, & Schor, 1998). When the new comers would try to adapt to the city and build the new identity, luxury or status goods may be a good choice with their meanings of success or status. Image a girl from a small town in Minnesota the first time in her life and go to New York University, a Gucci bag may give her some confidence in a subtle manner.

Researchers demonstrated there are upwards purchases concerning the luxury. Lee & Hwang (2011) found that low income populations exhibited more unfavorable attitudes toward luxury restaurants than did middle and high income populations. More research demonstrated the compensation mechanism when examining the motivation for luxury and they found that individuals consume status-infused products for their reparative effects on the ego (Braun, & Wicklund, 1989; Sivanathan, & Pettit, 2010).

In this light, for young people who were not born at large cities, the city life would drive their willingness to spend on high-status goods, especially for extroverted people who desire to grasp the attention and build social network in a short time.

Following this logic, we suggested below:  H3: Individuals? place of origin will moderate the influence of extroversion on luxury shopping; specifically, for consumers from small towns (versus big cities), the relationship between extroversion and luxury consumption tendency would be stronger.



III. METHODOLOGY  A. Participants and procedures Over 150 respondents volunteered to participate in the  survey. They come from two leading Chinese universities, respectively located at Beijing and Shanghai, two leading cities in China. With the various place of origin, college students make a good sampling population. A self-report, paper and pencil survey instrument was used to collect data. The sample has 119 female students and 33 female students between 18 and 22 years of age.

B. Measures 1) Extroversion. The construct was measured by the 10-  items Extroversion Subscale from Goldberg?s Big Five 50 personality markers (1992). The adjective-anchored bipolar rating scales ranges from 1 (very Trait A), to 7 (very Trait B).

Samples of the adjectives include unenergetic-energetic, and silent-talkative. Higher score represents higher extroversion.

Alpha coefficient for this scale was 0.90, indicating high internal consistency.

2) Use of social network. Participants were asked to report their friends on the most popular online social network site among Chinese college students, renren.com, which is Facebook copy.

3) Luxury consumption tendency. Considering college students could not afford luxury goods, we measure the tendency by asking participants to list the luxury brands they could remember. Some participants just reported Louis Vuitton, Gucci, but some can list Bottega Veneta, prada and mont blanc. The average number of brands is 5.97(SD=4.19).

4) Place of origin. We asked students to answer the question, ?Generally, where do you think you come from, big city or small town?? It is a dummy variable.

5) Control variables. Control variables include participants? gender, grade, disposable income, and the frequency of internet use.



IV. RESULTS We used SPSS to analyze the data. To examine H1, luxury  consumption brands were regressed after controlling gender, grade, disposable income and internet use, F(5, 135)=3.76, p<0.01, and the standardized coefficient of extroversion was 0.16, t=1.96, p<0.05. H1 was supported.

To examine the mediation effect of individual?s use of social network between extroversion and luxury consumption (H2), we followed the procedures recommended by Baron and Kenny (1986). First, a regression of number of friends at social network was conducted on extroversion, F (1, 133) =4.69? p<0.05?R2=0.03?and the standardized coefficient was 0.18, t=2.16?p<0.05. Second, luxury consumption was regressed on extroversion after controlling demographics, F (5, 135) =3.76, p<0.01, while F change=3.84, p<0.05, R2change=0.03, and the standardized coefficient of extroversion was 0.16? t=1.96, p<0.05. Third, luxury consumption was regressed on friends at social network after controlling demographics, F(5 ?  123)=4.87?p<0.01, R2=0.17?while F change=11.64, p<0.01, R2 change=0.08, and the standardized coefficient of friends at social network was 0.29, t=3.41 ? p<0.01; Finally, luxury consumption tendency were regressed on control variables, extroversion and number of friends at social network, F(6, 122)=4.53, p<0.01?R2=0.18?and the standardized coefficient of extroversion?s effect on luxury shopping was reduced from 0.16 to 0.14?t=1.60?n.s, while the coefficients of friends at social network was 0.27, t=3.12, p<0.01. From the above analysis, we found that number of friends at social network was a full mediator between extroversion and individual outcomes, supporting H2. Figure 1 demonstrates the mediation effect.

Figure 1.  Mediation effect  Using correlation analysis, we checked the moderating effect of undergraduates? place of origin on the relationship between extroversion and luxury consumption. For undergraduates from large cities, there is no significant relationship between their extroversion and number of friends on social network (r= 0.02, n.s) as well as extroversion and luxury consumption (r=0.01, n.s), while for undergraduates from small town, the correlation is 0.22 (p<0.05) and 0.29 (p<0.01) respectively. The analysis supported H3.



V. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS  A. Conclusions In this study we investigate the role of one personality trait  (extraversion) as antecedents of luxury consumption tendency, which has been neglected so far. The results indicated that one?s extroversion strongly predicted the number of fans on renren. Number of friendship was also strongly associated with his/her luxury consumption tendency, after controlled the gender, grade, disposable income, and frequency of internet use. Moreover, the participants? place of origin (big city vs.

small town) served to moderate the relationship, i.e., for young consumers from small towns, their increased extroversion is associated with larger online social network, but at the cost of higher consumption of luxury goods, while the effect on undergraduates from big cities was lessened.

B. Theoretical implications This research makes two important contributions to the  luxury marketing literature. First, our findings provide evidence of a relationship between consumers? personality and luxury consumption buying behavior, and the intensity of  Individuals? extroversion  Number of friends on Social network  Luxury consumption tendency  ?=0.18*  ?=0.16*/0.14, n.s.

?=0.29**/0.27**    social network use mediated the relationship, which is consistent with the arguments of personality psychology that extroverts tend to make friends and have a greater desire for goods which grasps others? attention. Furthermore, the relationship is stronger for young students from small town rather than large cities, since they have greater motive to bridge social capital via social network and enhance their self-esteem via luxury consumption, which demonstrates the compensation mechanism of luxury or status consumption.

C. Practical implications The current research demonstrates that, when the luxury  brands intend to target potential luxury consumers, number of friendship on online social network would be a strong predictor, in that such consumers may score high on extroversion, which increases the likelihood of sharing or showing off goods on internet and luxury consumption tendency. We suggest that luxury brand develop specific marketing strategy towards the young consumers, for example, online marketing education and online games towards the intense social network users.

D. Limitation and future research One limitation of the study is that the sample was  predominately college students. Future research is needed to determine if the same relationship hold for a more diverse population. Additionally, researchers should further explore the influencing mechanism of extroversion aside from use of social network.

