Revealing Key Non-financial Factors for Online  Credit-Scoring in e-Financing

Abstract?E-commerce has rapid growth in the last two decades due to the development of information technologies, mobile network services and application of big data.  Nowadays, e- commerce has reached a stage in which e-businesses are far beyond the online trading of buy-pay-deliver, but covers a much broader spectrum of line business activities, such as financing, which indicates that e-commerce has been transited from monetary transfer to credit transfer. The financial services for e- businesses have now incurred fundamental changes in credit risk management, with significant impacts on the traditional credit system, such as timeliness, service quality, cash flow and liquidity, and scalability of services, etc.  In this paper, based on an online- credit scoring model, we identified important factors that improve the prediction accuracy of a credit scoring model and reduces the probability of default, which also demonstrated the important role of non-financial data in credit risk control in the e-businesses environment.

Keywords- e-commerce; credit risk management; non-financial data; financing service

I.  INTRODUCTION The fast advancement of information technologies, the  penetration of mobile network services, and the application of big data have been constantly empowering the growth of e- commerce since it was born in 1993. In early 21st century, e- commerce only accounted for less than 1% of retail sales in US due to lack of sufficient trust on the Internet [1]. Since then, with information technology development, consumers can easily get more and more information in e-commerce, which lowered their perceived risk and improved their perceived trust.

The enhanced trust was positively related to consumers? e- commerce participation, so it largely helped e-commerce development [2]. The e-commerce volume accounted for 4% of retail sales in US in 2010 [3]. In addition, the emergence of mobile technology facilitates e-commerce conducted from a wired network to a wireless network [4]. In the last two decades, we have witnessed how financial services, specifically e-payment services, contributed to the development of e- commerce. For example, advanced service like e-payment directly benefits e-commerce growth since it provides advanced competitive advantage for online consumers via lowering the cost of modernizing operations [5].

In the meantime, e-commerce has in turn rewarded the finance industry with innovative ideas and cutting-edge e- finance services, which are making the e-commerce ecology  more prosperous. E-finance is defined as ?the provision of financial services and markets using electronic communication and computation? and it mainly covers the use of electronic payments, the operations of financial services and the operation of financial markets [6]. Nowadays, e-finance has reached a stage in which e-business are far beyond the online trading of buy-pay-deliver, but covers a much broader spectrum of online business activities, including loan, mortgages, guaranty, insurance, pledge, vouch, etc. All these are credit-based, indicating that the financial mechanism in e-commerce has been transited from monetary transfer to credit transfer. In this way, financial services for e-businesses have now heavily relied on credit risk management, the same as they are in brick- and-mortar businesses.

The financial services in e-commerce are not just simply applications of financial services in the cyber world, but also incurring fundamental changes in credit risk management. E- finance has significant impacts on the traditional credit system, such as timeliness, service quality, cash flow and liquidity, and scalability of services, etc. Although banking industry has provided online loan application service, most financial institutions still evaluate applicants? creditability and predict the probability of default by using official financial data and non-dynamic transaction information provided by applicants [7]. However, in the e-commerce market, the transactions are conducted online and could have huge changes within minutes, even seconds. The information used in traditional credit risk management cannot be updated in real time. Its hysteresis makes traditional method unsuitable for credit analysis in e- commerce [8]. For example, borrowers? accurate real-time credit status and business information in e-commerce cannot be reflected by financial data, which is usually updated monthly or quarterly. The disability of being dynamic may significantly influence the accuracy of credit-scoring. So the traditional method is not suitable for online-credit scoring. In addition, unless provided by borrowers, the objective and comprehensive information about their business transactions is almost inaccessible for financing institutions, especially when the borrowers try to hide something having negative impacts on their credit. Therefore, a new method of analyzing creditability in e-commerce is urgently desired.

The credit risk of e-commerce mainly comes from two sources: virtual feature of the Internet and information asymmetry [9]. The virtual feature of the Internet makes the traditional method of credit risk analysis ineffective in risk     prediction in e-commerce market. In a traditional business practice, where credit risk analysis is mainly based on financial data and conducted off-line, the process of analysis usually takes weeks or even months. However, in e-commerce transactions, rapid updating the business information makes financial institutions have great difficulties to get accurate financial information in time to analyze credit correctly.

Moreover, organizations in the e-commerce market, especially small and medium enterprises, have comparatively higher capital turnover than normal entity companies. The traditional financing process takes too long time to satisfy their capital demands. Therefore, financial institutions need to apply a more efficient and effective credit scoring method to satisfy borrowers? financing needs, as well as to control the credit risk.

Additionally, for commerce market, lots of prior researches investigate the factors that could help to mitigate the information asymmetry, and are mainly focused on two aspects: hard credit information and soft credit information. Hard credit information is financial information, while soft credit information is defined as the non-financial data about business.

In this paper, we argue that not only financial data but also non-financial data should be used to evaluate credit in e- commerce market since the mature aspect of soft information for mitigating information asymmetry. Although measurable financial factors are important, it cannot represent a comprehensive picture about credit. For example, the traditional method of credit risk analysis cannot measure the social network in e-commerce market. The non-financial factors (quality of management, market position, transaction details, etc.) can provide a deep insight into credit measurement.

Therefore, to control credit risk in e-commerce market, an online credit analysis system taking account of non-financial data is needed urgently, which uses dynamic data and takes both hard and soft credit information into account.

In this paper, we identify important non-financial factors by using a comprehensive dataset about e-commerce transactions.

It is provided by a Chinese network technology company who owns the most prominent B2B market in China. This research contributes to credit risk management in e-commerce by revealing the fundamental difference between online credit scoring and traditional credit scoring. It also contributes to e- finance business by revealing key factors in the online credit risk analysis. And it adds to the big data application area by considering non-financial data in credit risk analysis. Finally, this paper demonstrates that the e-commerce market has promising future and it?s ready for other e-finance derivatives? development.



II. ONLINE CREDIT SCORING FOR E-COMMERCE Credit scoring is a technique that uses information collected  by banks and/or other financial institutions to reduce the probability of customer default, which indicates credit risk [10].

The traditional credit scoring model used to control credit risk is mainly built upon the information about an applicant?s ability to repay, project risk, and willingness-to-pay. Firstly, an applicant?s ability to repay is usually measured by financial data that can demonstrate his existing capital and financial status, such as the balance of checking account and cash flow.

Secondly, accurate prediction on project risk is essential to  control credit risk. Most applicants apply for loan service because of lacking capital to run projects. Therefore, the characteristics of projects and characteristics of applicants determine the projects? risk. The project risk is high in both situations: people with high risk sense apply for financing a low risky project and people with low risk sense apply for financing a high risky project. Lastly, willingness-to-pay should also be included in the credit scoring model. According to the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB), ?people are rational individuals and behavior motive is an important basis for detection of behavior? [11].  Therefore, it is possible that a borrower does not fulfill debt service obligations if the perceived costs associated with repayment exceed the benefits, even though he has the ability to repay [12]. For a specific debt or loan, the borrower?s willingness-to-pay largely depends on his perceived value of trust and the priority of debt. It can be perceived from the historical behavior, such as payment record, default record, etc.

To some extent, an online credit scoring model is different from the traditional one due to its unique characteristics. For example, compared with traditional credit scoring, it is hard to obtain formal record of financial activities of a business via financial statement. However, the e-commerce platform records every single transaction which can be used as alternatives for online credit scoring. In e-commerce, credit risk management is still based on measuring the applicant?s ability to repay, project risk, and willingness-to-pay. But the information used here is non-financial data. The e-commerce market is commonly viewed as an open community offering both opportunities and threats. Community-based reputations can help financial institutions evaluate trustworthiness in the e- commerce environment and predict community members? future debt behavior [13]. Thus, the applicant?s reputation can be considered as his social capital and used to demonstrate his ability to repay. In terms of project risk control, the online credit scoring model uses real-time transaction information, which should be more accurate than traditional methods. Is the project common for the borrower? How is the total business situation? How big is the involved market risk if compared with other members in e-commerce market? All the transaction information is available and updated online, so the online credit scoring model is more dynamic than traditional methods. The willingness-to-pay can be seen from the historical behavior, although the used information is not the same. Instead of evaluating financial data, historical records on the fulfillment of a contract, such as records of fulfillment, quality of fulfillment, and dependency on the project, are used to demonstrate borrowers? willingness-to-pay.

In 1999, Gebauer and Scharl [14] described four phases in e-commerce transactions process: information (seeking and collecting information), negotiation (establishing a contract), settlement (defining transactions), and after-sale [15]. From the perspective of procurement, the process is divided into two phases: contracting (sourcing and available to promise) and settlement (transaction and delivery) [16]. The specific activities among different phases can have some overlaps due to the different sequence of pay and delivery in online transactions. As mentioned before, the data used in traditional credit scoring model is financial data, which is mainly about    payments. It seems that traditional method can only control risk and analyze credit in the settlement phase. However, in e- commerce, all the other phases before settlement involve credit.

For example, the inquiry record shows how many potential customers are interested in the product. Comparing the inquiry record with the number of successful transaction, a convert rate may indicate the probability of business success in the future and the reliability of the business owner. In the negotiation phase, if the borrower is willing to disclose his business information and commit to reinforcing the relationship with the financial institution, he shows willingness to trade and could be more trustful than others who do not have willingness to disclose [17].

According to our date set, the guarantee transaction service that the financial institution provides to its B2B customers does not only deal with the lending issue, but also covers problems in other aspects, such as the buyer?s payment issue, the quality of product/service, the timeliness of delivery, the follow-up after sales, etc. Any inaccuracy in above fields leads to lost and commercial disputes between buyers and customers in e- commerce, which will involve compensation and guarantee payment. The traditional financing method does not cover such kind of issues, so we would like to investigate some unsolved problems. For example, since credit issue exists in negotiation and contract phases, will a credit scoring model starting credit measurement from contract phase be better? To measure the credit in contract phase, what kind of indicators should be used?

How to do credit scoring if no financial information available?

To try to answer these questions, we propose some hypotheses and test them by using non-financial transaction data in the real world. We investigate the relationship between non-financial data in e-commerce transactions and default probability. We find that transparent information, willingness to disclose information and dependency on e-commerce are influential factors in e-commerce market.



III. NON-FINANCIAL FACTORS IN CREDIT SCORING E-commerce platform records all the details about each  online transaction except for payment information and enables the financial institution to have lots of information to evaluate customers? credit. Being able to use dynamic data is the unique characteristic of the online credit scoring model. Therefore, any online change can be traced and monitored. The transparent information lessens information asymmetry [18]. For the financial institution, the reduction on information asymmetry provides it with more correct data that can be used in credit scoring model to get more accurate default prediction. For the TP members, the transparency acts as an invisible power that monitors their activities and has them fulfilled debt obligations, which reduce the default probability. Thus,  H1a. Transparent information reduces the probability of default by enable lenders to monitor borrowers? online activity.

H1b. Transparent information improves the prediction accuracy of online credit scoring model by reducing information asymmetry.

In B2B market, companies do businesses online. They have the right to change settings and post some information on the website to make their products attractive. To facilitate doing businesses online, they can also disclose firm?s information, such as address, phone number, decorate website, bind telephone with website, etc. Their willingness to disclose information in e-commerce exchanges shows their trust on the website [19]. Trust between borrowers and lenders increases the longer they work together [20]. The cooperation always increases with a higher frequency of contact in the relationship, which indicates their business dependency on the market.

Attempts to reduce dependency can be seen as evidence of a lack of trust [21]. The perception of dependency makes companies value the relationship with the e-commerce platform, which is the financial institution. Therefore, if borrowers? business is mainly accomplished online, they probably will not do harm to the relationship. From another perspective, the lending relationship can be considered as a specific asset. The more efforts borrowers commit to the relationship, such as pay for an annual fee and protection fun, the cost is high. Therefore, if the costs associated with the breaking lending relationship are higher than the benefits, the borrowers will try to make payments on time and avoid default.

Thus,  H2a. The willingness to disclose in e-commerce exchanges increases the dependency on the e-commerce market.

H2b. The dependency on the e-commerce market reduces the probability of default.



IV. METHOD In this paper, we use a data set provided by a Chinese  network technology company who owns the most prominent B2B market in China (called as ?financial institution? later).

To promote the development of e-commerce and facilitate transactions among small and medium enterprises, the financial institution launched a program named ?TP?, providing credit guarantee service to companies who registered in its B2B market (called as ?customer? later). The credit guarantee service includes loan and guarantee payment.

The customers who joined the TP program are TP members and can obtain some credit grant provided by the financial institution. Meanwhile, to join the program and maintain the membership, TP members need to pay the yearly fee. It means, for the financial institution, the more TP members, the more collected fee. However, it faces credit risk in this e-finance environment, such as losses if TP members do not have the ability to repay. Therefore, how to measure customers? credit and control the risk are big challenges.

The data set contains the information about 10,116 customers in the B2B market. For each customer, there are supposed to have 104 variables to describe its business characteristics, transactions, and the credit grant in the financial institution. To find out the key factors having influence on the probability of default, we use Neural Network in a data mining software SAS for regression analysis, analyzing the    relationship between independent variables (non-financial data) and dependent variable (the number of default). The variables used as predictors provide a comprehensive picture about customers? business behavior, which can be grouped into three aspects. The first group refers to the behaviors acted by customers. Does the customer bind his cell phone to e-platform?

Does he log in the trade link frequently? The second group refers to the behaviors incurred within transactions, such as the transaction amount within last 30 days, the credit grant, the total number of successful transactions, etc. The last group refers to objective and stable characteristics, such as TP type, TP period, and other data that may not be changed frequently.

In the analysis of each variable, we classified the customers according to different levels of the variable and tried to find the relationship between the single variable and the default record.

Then, we did group analysis by including variables with similar characteristics in credit model simultaneously and tried to find the relationship between cluster variables and default record.



V. RESULT According to the results of regression for number of default,  some key factors are statistically significant (p<0.1). It shows that the distribution of default for TP members is much lower than that for non-TP members. And the variables related to TP program are significant in the model. TP period refers to the length of membership, which is classified as short term membership, mid-term membership and long term membership.

The results indicate that the length of relationship should be included in the credit scoring model, since the distribution of default for customers with the long term relationship is much lower than that for customers with the mid-term relationship and short term relationship. In addition, TP product type is also a key factors having impact on the distribution of default.

Customers who pay for long lending period have a strong willingness of building or maintaining the relationship, which indicate that they value their reputation and will protect it by making payment on time.

TABLE I.  REGRESSION ANALYSIS FOR NUMBER OF DEFAULT  Independent variable No. of Default (p-value)  TP Type 0.146* (0.034)  TP Year 0.056* (0.047)  TP Product 0.029* (0.10)  No. of Complaint 0.095* (0.054)  Bind cell phone to e-platform 0.114* (0.038)  Decorate website 0.088* (0.043)  Change Company Disctionary 0.495* (0.089)  Issue Valid Offer 0.002* (0.04)  *p < 0.10  TABLE II.  THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TP TYPE AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF DEFAULT  TP Type  The Distribution of Default  TP Type  The Distribution of Default  TP member 0.133  Non-TP member 0.408  TABLE III.  THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TP YEAR AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF DEFAULT  TP Year  The Distribution of Default  Short Term (1 year and less) 0.99  Mid-Term (2-4 years) 0.24  Long-Term (above 5 years) 0.07  TABLE IV.  THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TP PRODUCT AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF DEFAULT  TP Product  The Distribution of Default  One Year 0.25  TwoYear 0.12  TABLE V.  THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN NO. OF COMPLAINT AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF DEFAULT  No. of Complaint  The Distribution of Default  0 0.15  1 0.75  2 0.86  TABLE VI.  THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN NO. OF COMPLAINT AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF DEFAULT, WHEN TP YEAR IS CONTROLLED  TP Year No. of Complaint The Distribution  of Default  Short Term (1 year and less)  0 0.15  1 0.74  2 0.85  Mid-Term (2-4 years)  0 0.04  1 0.18  2 0.21  Long-Term (above 5 years)  0 0.01  1 0.05  2 0.06   It can be seen that the e-commerce platform contains  various information about B2B customers and TP program covers more information about TP members than general customers. In other words, the data about TP members is more transparent than that about non-TP members. Therefore, the credit risk of lending money to TP members is more controllable and measurable than the risk of lending money to general customers, which supports the hypothesis H1a.

Additionally, one variable can be classified into different levels, which enables us to do more accurate analysis. After divided into three categories according to the length of relationship, customers can be further classified as groups having record of    complaint or not.  In this way, we can find out how the number of complaint impacts the probability of default if customers have the same length of relationship. Seen from the results, the distribution of default for the customers who have length of over 5 years is much lower than that for the customers who have length of less than one year, even if their have the same number of complaint. It is obvious that the credit risk is very different between these two groups. We did the similar analysis by clustering different variables. The results of multi-level analysis show differences when compared with previous single level analysis. Therefore, the credit scoring model with transparent information can provide a more accurate prediction for customers with different characteristics by analyzing information from multiple angles. This conclusion supports the hypothesis H1b.

The TP members have different level of activity. Basically, a B2B company will have relatively active online actions if most of its businesses are conducted online. It can be seen from the frequency of logging in, the number of feedback, the theme style, the authentication on website (email validation and mobile phone verification), etc. All these variables can also demonstrate the company?s willingness to disclose. The more activity it has, the more information it would be disclose.

According to our results, there are some key factors that can have impact on the prediction of default. The customers who revised or decorated its website have a lower distribution of default than those do not. If the customer binds his cell phone to e-platform, the distribution of default will decrease from 0.23 to 0.16. In addition, the distribution of default can decrease from 0.46 to 0.14, if the customer changed its company dictionary. These trends support the hypothesis H2a.

The degree of dependency on e-platform varies among B2B companies. The willingness to disclose is also a signal of willingness to trade. The authentic information that customers input into the e-platform shows customers? willingness to trade and their dependency on the e-commerce market. This conclusion supports the hypothesis H2b.

TABLE VII.  THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WILLINGNESS TO DISCLOS AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF DEFAULT  Bind Cell Phone to e-platform  The Distribution of Default  Yes 0.16  No 0.23  Decorate website  The Distribution of Default  Yes 0.089  No 0.192  Change Company Dictionary  The Distribution of Default  Yes 0.14  No 0.46  Issue Valid Offer   The Distribution of Default  Yes 0.22  No 1

VI. DISCUSSIONS & CONCLUSION This research makes academic contributions to online  credit-scoring in e-commerce by pointing out its fundamental differences with traditional credit-scoring method and the importance of non-financial data in credit scoring. In e- commerce, the credit evaluation could start from the very beginning of the transaction process, since the characteristics in each phase can demonstrate borrowers? credit to some extent. Therefore, the credit risk in e-commerce is measured not by using the data about payment in the settlement phase, but by using the transaction information in previous steps (collecting information, negotiation, and contract). In addition, some key non-financial factors have influence on the prediction of the credit scoring model, which has been ignored in traditional methods. This paper also has practical contributions by revealing key factors in online credit scoring and providing some guidance to financial institutions in e- finance industry. According to the results, the online credit scoring model can be improved to produce more accurate prediction. There are a lot of unanswered questions about credit evaluation in e-commerce and e-finance, which leaves a wide area for researchers to discuss. In the future, the studies on credit in e-commerce could discuss deeper issues. Based on our results, it is believable that the result of prediction on default probability could be different if combining more variables as cluster variables. From other perspectives, to investigate the role of online credit scoring in e-financing area, it is necessary to find more theories to support practical phenomenon. What are the fundamental differences on credit measurements between contract phase and settlement phase?

What kind of theories is needed to support the credit scoring model used in contract phase? With the rapid development of e-commerce, the problems with credit evaluation will become more complex. The e-commerce market has promising future and it?s ready for other e-finance derivatives? development.

