The Future of Enterprise Computing

Abstract  With emerging computing trends of social, mobile, cloud and big data, and also with the new trend of BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) in companies, enterprise computing is recently going through transformational changes. This talk will start by looking at the recent computing trends, one by one, and their implication on the enterprise computing, individually and collectively. While the trends started mostly for consumer computing, they ultimately have a significant impact on enterprise computing. It is expected that they will transform how information and communication technologies are used in enterprises, and so that they will fundamentally and permanently change the nature of the business of enterprise computing. We will look at a number of recent example products and services for enterprising computing built on the emerging computing trends and catering their needs, in an effort to take a peek at where enterprise computing is going in the future.

Based on this observation, we will discuss the challenges and opportunities in the future of enterprise computing.

Biography  Juhnyoung Lee is the Manager of the Business Service Solutions department at the IBM T. J.

Watson Research Center in New York. He finished his PhD in Computer Science at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville. He received his BS and MS in Computer Science from Seoul National University. Before joining IBM, he was a researcher at Los Alamos National Lab in New Mexico and at Lexis-Nexis in Ohio. Since joining IBM Research in 1997, he developed business solutions in commerce intelligence, electronic marketplaces, enterprise packaged applications services, smarter cities by using information management and analysis technologies, semantic Web, ontology management, decision support, model-driven business transformation and cloud computing. He currently leads strategic research initiatives in service operations and delivery for workforce management, global service delivery models, productivity optimization, delivery excellence, service quality, and performance benchmarking. He applies this research both internally to improve IBM?s service business and to improve the productivity, profitability and quality of IBM?s clients at a global level. He has received several technical achievement awards for his work. He actively contributes to global team development in both research and service organizations at IBM. He has been prolific in publishing research work in books, book chapters, papers in top academic journals and conferences, more than 100 technical papers all together. He has led filing more than 100 patents issued/pending in US and other countries. In the course, he was recognized twice as an IBM Master Inventor.

