Big-data Integration Methodologies for Effective

Abstract: Petroleum industries? big data characterize  heterogeneity and they are often multidimensional in nature. In the  recent past, explorers narrate petroleum system, as an ecosystem, in  which elements and processes are constantly interacted and  communicated each other. Exploration is one of the key super-type  data dimensions of petroleum ecosystem, (including seismic  dimension), exhibiting high degree of heterogeneity, sequence  identity and structural similarity; this is especially the case for,  elements and processes that are unique to petroleum systems of South  East Asia. Existing approaches of petroleum data organizations have  limitations in capturing and integrating petroleum systems data. An  alternative method uses ontologies and does not rely on keywords or  similarity metrics. The conceptual framework of petroleum ontology  (PO) is to promote reuse of concepts and a set of algebraic operators  for querying petroleum ontology instances. This ontology-based fine-  grained multidimensional data structuring adapts to warehouse  metadata modeling. The data integration process facilitates to  metadata models, which are deduced for Indonesian sedimentary  basins, and is useful for data mining and subsequent data  interpretation including geological knowledge mapping.

Key Words - Data warehousing, data mining, data fusion,  ontologies, petroleum bearing sedimentary basin, data integration    I INTRODUCTION    Petroleum-bearing sedimentary basin is an emerging  digital ecosystem [5]. Petroleum system and its elements are  narrated for each and every oil and gas field in each and every  petroleum-bearing sedimentary basin. A new concept of  ecosystem and its digitization are emerging within the generic  petroleum system. The significance of this concept comes with  an ability to establish connectivity among petroleum  subsystems. Big data that evolve, from petroleum ecosystems  scenarios consist of multidimensional and heterogeneous data  instances; modeling and mapping of data instances is a tedious  process.    In the past decade, there has been an explosive  growth in the volumes of published petroleum data, as a result  of the rapid development and progress of exploration and  development projects worldwide. The contribution to and  organization of such data by the industry?s professional  organizations, national and private oil and gas companies and  some major service companies, have resulted in a wealth of  available big-data.

Petroleum ontology (PO) describes the semantics of all  data sources and conceptually analyzed data in the multiple  contexts and domains of multiple petroleum systems of  sedimentary basins (Fig. 1). The sheer volume of big-data  from Southeast Asian basins makes it hard to find sequences  (events of petroleum system) of interest in each release of  heterogeneous databases. The data are often distributed as a  collection of flat files, each containing some textual  information (the annotation), such as, basin name (both  onshore and offshore) oil/gas-field-name and keywords, such  as names of producing-horizon and pay-zones and their  identifiers. The main method of searching for zones of interest  in such databases has been using a string-matching program.

Although this has motivated the development of relational  database management systems in the main database centers,  the databases have continued to be delivered as flat files.

Ontology based multi-dimensional databases are designed,  developed and delivered as accurate data views for data  mining and interpretation purposes [1]. During organization of  the data, completeness, uniqueness, validity, integrity and  consistency are ensured as per company standards and  protocols. Much of the value of petroleum resources is a part  of an interconnected network of related databases. Many  databases [4] are cross-referenced to other databases, often  through manual entries. These cross-references provide the  basic platform for more advanced data integration strategies to  address the problems, including: (a) establishing identity of  common concepts, (b) integration of data described in  different formats, (c) the resolution of conflicts among  different resources, (d) data synchronization, data mining,  fusion and visualization and (e) interpretation of unified data  views for knowledge mapping.

Furthermore, traditional data warehouses may not be able  to handle the processing demands posed by big data. As a  result, a new class of big data technology [7] has emerged and  is being used in many big data analytics environments. Great  attention is needed in designing the metadata structures,  especially keeping in view the multidimensionality and  heterogeneity of data relevant to petroleum ecosystems.

Authors in recent years, emphasize on ontology based  multidimensional data warehousing and mining technologies  in spite of several products associated with big data analytics,  NoSQL databases, Hadoop and MapReduce, are in the market.

Though these technologies form the core of an open source  software framework that supports the processing of large data  sets, across clustered systems, but handling real time spatio-     temporal big-data across multiple geographic locations  (operations taking place in multiple countries) is tedious for  integration and time-consuming even for business analysis.

II PETROLEUM BIG-DATA INTEGRATION ISSUES    Big data is a general term used to describe the voluminous  amount of petroleum unstructured and semi-structured data,  often operating companies create - data that would take too  much time and cost too much money to load into relational  databases. Even structured data are not effective to bring out  data trends and patterns, because of poorly organized data  structures and ineffective data integration procedures. In  addition, it is an enormous task acquiring and integrating the  datasets in real-time. Semantics, schematics and syntactic  heterogeneities must be addressed during ontology  descriptions. Unfortunately, the semantics of petroleum  resource data are often difficult to explain, in particular for  conceptually analyzed data in which several categories and  classifications are interpreted. Because of varied degree of  change in semantic and contextual contents, the interpreted  data are not explicitly stated, but are implicitly included in the  database design. PO (much less all geology or petroleum  geology science), is not a single consistent scientific domain,  but subsumes dozens of interrelated knowledge domains. For  characterizing and organizing multidimensional metadata  structures in warehouse environments, ontologies are  characteristically used.

Fig. 1: Petroleum Basins of South East Asia, evenly  distributed onshore and offshore areas (source: [6])    This would not be a significant issue, if explorers only  access data from within a single domain, but that is not usually  the case. Typically, explorers require integrated access to data  from multiple domains, which requires resolving terms that  have slightly different meanings across different domains.

Schematic or structural heterogeneities observed among  petroleum system elements and processes from global scale to  local scale are handled by schematic ontologies. Similarly,  semantic heterogeneities may have occurred during  interpretation of meaning of data-views from multiple sources,  implying multiple petroleum systems consisting of oil and gas  fields or drilled wells or surveys. Syntactic heterogeneities   or  differences in formatting styles of data from multiple sources,  as is the case, which occurs with multiple petroleum systems  and their data representation, are other anomalies addressed  during ontology descriptions. This issue is further complicated  by the observations that the specific domain whose  terminology is being used by the data source is usually not  explicitly identified and the terminology evolves over time.

Geology also demonstrates three challenges for data  integration that are common in evolving scientific domains,  but are not typically found elsewhere. The first is the sheer  number of available data sources and the inherent  heterogeneity of their contents. Some of these sources contain  data from a single laboratory or project, whereas others are the  definitive repositories [2] for very specific types of  information (e.g., for a specific reservoir class). Not only do  these sources complicate the concept identification issue  previously mentioned (because they use highly specialized  data semantics), but they also make it feasible to incorporate  all of them into a consistent repository. Second, the data  formats and data access methods change regularly. These  changes are an attempt to keep up with the scientific evolution  occurring in the domain at large. However, a change in a data  source representation can have dramatic impact on systems  that integrate multiple sources, at times causing the integration  to fail in the new format. Third, the data and related analyses  are becoming increasingly complex, especially spatio-  temporal data, such as geological and geophysical (G & G)  data. The transformation of voluminous geological data into  useful information and valuable knowledge is the challenge of  knowledge discovery. Identification and interpretation of  interesting patterns hidden among trillions of seismic and  other exploration big data-points is a critical goal of geo-  informatics. As demonstrated in Figure 1, in the context of  South East Asia, hundreds of oil & gas fields possess huge  amount of G & G (Geology & Geophysics) and E & P  (Exploration & Production) data. This complicates the goal of  identification of useful reservoir structures from variety and  multiple petro-geological sequences.

III  PETROLEUM DATA MANAGEMNET AND  KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY    The field of geo-informatics plays an increasing role in the  study of fundamental geological problems owing to the  exponential explosion of sequence and structural information  with time. There are two major challenging areas in geo-  informatics: data management and knowledge discovery. In  order to address these challenges, multiple heterogeneous data  are integrated into logical database structures and thus derived,  metadata range into several scales?presenting huge analysis,  for data mining and visualization opportunities. A challenge to  data management involves managing and integrating the  existing G & G databases. However, in some situations, a  single database cannot provide answers to the complex     problems of geologists and geophysicists. Integrating or  assembling information from several databases to solve  problems and discovering new knowledge are other major  challenges in geo-informatics. The transformation of  voluminous exploration data into valuable geological  knowledge is the challenge of knowledge discovery process.

Data mining and interpretation of interesting patterns hidden  in trillions of seismic and other exploration data are critical  goals of geo-informatics. The goals cover identification of  useful reservoir bearing structures from petroleum ecosystems  [5].

IV PO FRAMEWORK   A comprehensive framework is discussed in [1] and [5] in  different petroleum ecosystems scenarios. A conceptual  framework of PO, as discussed in Fig. 2, keeps criteria (1) a  hierarchical classification of concepts represented as classes,  from general to specific; (2) a list of attributes related to each  concept, for each class; (3) a set of relations between classes  to link concepts in ontology in more information-rich ways  than implied by the hierarchy, thus promoting reuse of  concepts in the ontology; and (4) a set of algebraic operators  for querying petroleum ontology instances. The contexts of  PO domains, (Fig. 2), depict the overall layered approach for  generic PO structure. Three layers are distinguished here:   1. Real-world data and information sources are considered?  various proprietary G- & G- and petroleum engineering  data sources, including scientific reports, company and  project documents, and published literature.

2. Data elements and models (both of inherent data descriptors resulting from patterns in data, and formal  data models defined by scientists for specialized  applications) possess different formats and the anomalies  are addressed by PO syntactic structure. These data  models represent post analysis information exchange.

Both human and machine agents that access and analyze  the ontology are considered. Human agents, such as  geoscientists interpret and analyze ontology directly using  their expertise. For machine agents to interpret and  analyze ontology, at the same level as human agents, the  expertise represents using semantic relationships and  articulation rules in an ontology framework, as shown in  Fig. 2.

V  GENERIC AND DERIVED CONCEPTS OF PO    Our common conceptual model for the internal  representation of PO is based on the work done in [4]. The  authors describe ontologies in the health field domain, citing  implementation of ontology models in gene technology. A  similar ontology framework provides a common vocabulary  for structured and unstructured information, including G- &  G- and E- & P- practitioners; it is a medium to share and  access knowledge in petroleum/reservoir-geology domain.

Fig. 2: PO general framework modeling  heterogeneous data sources  Specifically, a PO describes a series of events (Fig. 2),  especially in the context of the petroleum exploration domain  that can be used to depict reservoirs in any field or to depict  drillable wells. PO describes:   1. Reservoir or/ seismic sequence and structure information 2. Structure or /reservoir integration process 3. G & G and geochemical processes of structures, reservoirs  and sources  4. Reservoir/ or structural internal and external data associations to petroleum accumulations;  5. Constraints affecting the final petroleum trap/s or seal conformation.

PO removes the constraints of potential conflicts arising  during conceptualization and interpretations of terms in  various data sources and provides a structured vocabulary that  integrates all data and knowledge sources in a unified domain.

There are eight concepts of PO, called generic concepts, which  are used (and reused in different domains and in a broad scale,  basins) to define complex concepts: {{structure, reservoir,  source, seal}, {chain}, {generation, migration, timing,  accumulations}}, linked by ?chains? an evolved concept.

These conceptualized dimensions are typically narrated in  hierarchical structure, as demonstrated in Fig. 3. PO specifies  different topological relationships among structure, reservoir  and source, in order to illustrate how mandatory semantic  constraints are represented. Source and structure have a  mandatory constraint with reservoir because every structure  (trap) and every source must topologically touch (analogues to  chain as derived in Fig. 3) one or more instances of a  reservoir. Producing oil or gas field must contain at least one  reservoir, while reservoirs have a mandatory relationship with  trap in a producing field.

Elements of petroleum system, their constraints and limits  may be explored and gathered on the internet through public  Web knowledge domains. Notice in the Web Ontology  Language (OWL) representation that minimum cardinality ?1?  is explicitly represented and is retrieved. Instances of chains  Human Agent (Geologist)   Human Agent (Geophysicist)   Workstation (machine based) Agent   Workstation (machine based) Agent   Semantic based relational petroleum ontology with description of articulation rules/constraints  Formal Model 1 Formal Model 2  Inherent Multidimensional  Data Model 1 (informal)  Inherent Multidimensional  Data Model 2 (informal)  Petroleum Ontology Definitions  Geological, Geophysical and Petroleum Engineering Data Sources  Scientific Texts, Information and data  , , ,  Ontology Structures  Hierarchical  Relational  Network  Object Oriented  Multidimensional  MD Cube  Vertical  Horizontal  Lateral     of former elements of PO are defined in the chains concept  (Fig. 4). The multidimensional data structure of PO elements  is represented as instances of the elements, chains and  processes concepts. Defining elements, chains and processes  as individual concepts, has the benefit that any special  properties or changes affecting a particular element, chain and  process, can be easily added to PO.

Fig. 3: A multidimensional hierarchical structure  view - describing dimensions of each system element    If PO concept is tagged to a Total Petroleum System all the  details of petroleum system elements, processes and chains are  described within that contextualization, conceptualization and  specification. Data about binding elements and processes, each  in chains, are again entered into ontology as their instances.

Data among elements are chained by the elements-chains  concept. Similarly, data among processes are chained by the  process-chains concept. Similarly, data among elements and  processes are chained by elements-processes-chains concepts.

Chains are conceptually described by their instances.

The structure of PO provides concepts necessary to  describe individual elements, processes and chains. Instances  of these dimensions are stored either in excel files, ASCII, or  in databases in Web ontology language (OWL) format. The  complete multidimensional hierarchy of PO is shown in Figs.

3 and 4. Another significant feature of representation of the  structures is refining the boundaries or limits of system  elements or processes.

As narrated in Fig. 4, the relationships are drawn among  elements and processes. Several logical rules and constraints  applicable for scalability of PO models and multiple levels of  information stored in PO models for query, information  retrieval and presentation, are illustrated in Fig. 5. Data views  retrieved from metadata cubes are analyzed for data  correlations and patterns. For this purpose, data visualization,  data fusion and interpretation are used for knowledge  discovery.

Fig. 4: Defining limits and constraints of structure, reservoir  and source dimensions in a schema, showing design of OWL  code (multiple dimensions with elements, chains and  processes presented in a hierarchy in the above figures)    VI  BIG DATA ANALYSIS    One of the primary goals for examining big data [7] is to  discover repeatable technical and business-data patterns. It?s  generally accepted that unstructured data, most of it located in  text files, accounts for at least 80% of an organization?s data.

If left unmanaged, the sheer volume of unstructured data that?s  generated each year within an enterprise or company can be  costly in terms of storage. Big data analytics [7] is often  associated with cloud computing because the analysis of large  data sets in real-time requires a framework like MapReduce to  distribute the work among tens, hundreds or even thousands of  computers. Big data analytics is the process of examining  large amounts of data of a variety of types (big data) to  uncover hidden patterns, unknown correlations and other  useful information. Such information provides competitive  advantages over rival organizations and result in business  ,  +  MultidimensionalHierarchicalPetroleumOntology  TotalPetroleumSystem(TPS)  PetroleumSystemDomain  ChainsEcosystemDomain  SedimentaryBasinDomain  PetroleumField  FieldRulesConstraints  StructureTrapDomains (Rule)  ReservoirDomains (Rule)  SourceDomains (Rule)  SealDomains (Rule)  MigrationDomains (Rule)  TimingDomain (Rule)  Constraints  ProcessDomainRulesConstraints  +  +  +  +  +  )  )  )  )  4-WayStructuralClosure  FaultGeneratedClosure  ,  ,  SurfaceExposed  ,  ,  Constraints  PoorQuality  ShalingDomain  ,  ,  ,  Carbonates  Clastics  FracturedShales  ,  ,  ,  )  Shales,  )  Shales,  SiltStones  ClayStones  ,  ,  NonSealing  ,  )  Constraints  Constraints)  ,  PoorSeal  StratigraphicTrapDomain (Rule)  PoorTrap  NoTrap  (Elements, processes and chains of Petroleum System: Multiple Dimensions with hierarchies)  ,  ,  )  ThermalMaturity  MudStones  LocalSeal  PoorlyUnderstood  PoorlyUnderstood  Quality,  )  )  )  )  ,  ,  ,  ,  , NoTiming  FarDistance  CloseToKitchen  BeyondTime,  PoorlyUnderstood,  ,  PetroleumSystemsElements  +  Quantity  ,  , Limestones  Coals,  Constraints)  Channel  OnLap, TopLap, DownLap  GenerationDomain  , OilWindow  FavorableTemperature,  ,  ,  OIL/GASField Structure Source  Reservoir  contains seals seals  extension  hasName  hasGeometry  Integer  string  string  Reservoirseals seals Instance Instance  hasName String hasGeometry String  hasName String  hasLimit String  Volumes Integer  hasName String  contains instance Reservoir hasGeometry String  Reservoir  <owl:Class rdf:ID="OIL/GASFIELD"> <rdf:subClassOf> <owl:Restriction> <owl:valueFrom rdf:resource="#Reservoir"/> <owl:minCardinality rdf:datatype="#int">1</owl:minCardinality> <owl:onProperty> <owl:ObjectProperty rdf:ID:="contains"/> </owl:onProperty> </owl:Restriction> </rdfs:subClassOf> <rdfs:subClassOf rdf:resource="http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#"Thing"/> </owl:Class> <owl:Class rdf:ID="Source"> <rdfs:subClassOf> <owl:Restriction> <owl:minCardinality rdf:datatype="#int">1</owl:minCardinality> <owl:onProperty> <owl:ObjectProperty rdf:about="#seals"> </owl:onProperty> </owl:valuesFrom rdf:resource="#Reservoir"/> </owl:Restriction> </rdfs:subClassOf> <rdfs:subClassOf rdf:resource="http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#"Thing"/> </owl:Class>     benefits, such as more effective marketing and increased  revenue.

Fig. 5 Multidimensional data views from a seismic cube from  ontologically described metadata for interpretation and  knowledge discovery (mining algebra for extracting data  views)   The crucial goal of big data analytics is to help operating  companies make better technical and business decisions by  enabling data scientists and other users to analyze huge  volumes of technical and commercial data as well as other  data sources that may be left untapped by conventional  business intelligence (BI) programs. The other data sources  may include Web server logs and Internet clickstream data,  social media activity reports, mobile-phone call detail records  and information captured by sensors. Some people exclusively  associate big data and big data analytics [7] with unstructured  data of that sort, but consulting firms like Gartner Inc. and  Forrester Research Inc. also consider transactions and other  structured data to be valid forms of big data.

Big data analytics [7] is done with the software tools  commonly used, as part of advanced analytics disciplines such  as predictive analytics and data mining. But the unstructured  data sources used for big data analytics may not fit in  traditional data warehouses. Potential pitfalls that can rise with  organizations on big data analytics initiatives include a lack of  internal analytics skills and the high cost of hiring experienced  analytics professionals, plus challenges in integrating Hadoop  systems and data warehouses, although vendors are starting to  offer software connectors between those technologies and  integrated platforms. Authors proposed various integrated  frameworks and as designed and developed in [1] and [5] for  petroleum industries, use visualization and mining G & G data  views for interpretation.

A G- & G- DATA MINING AND FUSION  As narrated in an integrated framework [5], ontology based  multidimensional modeling is done to generate a metadata and  accommodate metadata in a warehouse environment. As  described in Fig.2, integrated frameworks [5] are collaborated  to facilitate the data visualization, mining and interpretation  processes. Data mining in essence, explores data correlations,  trends and patterns among petroleum heterogeneous metadata.

Several algorithms are available in the literature [3]; one of the  popular ones is representation of multidimensional data cube  and its slicing and dicing [3].  Data fusion is the process of  integration of multiple data and knowledge representing the  same real-world object into a consistent, accurate, and  interpretable representation. Fusion of the data sources  (multiple dimensions) yields a classifier superior to any other  classifiers based on dimensions and their fusion  representations. Data fusion processes are often categorized as  low, intermediate or high, depending on the processing stage  at which fusion takes place. Low-level data fusion combines  several sources of raw data to produce a new arrangement of  raw data. The expectation is that fused data is more  informative and synthetic than the original inputs. In a much  more complicated application, petroleum exploration  researchers use ?data fusion? to review and display integrated  products of exploration and production data with other  associated systems [6]. Other ecosystems include data  acquired from a marine system such as bathymetric; in an  environment system, such as meteorological, sea surface  temperature (SST) and bore-hole temperature are examined to  understand petroleum system integration and its ecosystem  behavior in reaction to other associated ecosystems. Through  the use of data fusion, all data and attributes are brought  together into a single view in which, a more complete picture  of the system is created and interpreted for the case of  Southeast Asian larger sedimentary basin setting (examples of  data fusion as narrated in Figs. 6 and 7). This enables  geoscientists to gain new insights on interactions between  different petroleum ecosystems. Data fusion is significant, and  reservoir-trap presentation, have increased understanding of  petroleum ecosystem visualization process.

Fig. 6: Multidimensional data views for extracting knowledge  of a clastic reservoir from integrated metadata  In the petroleum systems analysis and knowledge domains,  data fusion is often synonymous with representation of  integrated interpreted data or map-views of multidimensional  data views. In these applications, there is often a need to  combine system elements and their datasets into a unified  (fused) dataset, in which all the data instances from domains,  (such as seismic, drilled-well, reservoir, drilling and  production) are interlinked and integrated into a single  conceptual domain, which could be chains. The fused dataset  Reservoir  Source  Structure  Seal  Migration  Timing  O il  P la  y F  a c  to rs  Petroleum System  Tarakan Kutei Barito Baram Sabah Sarawak  Shallow Marine  Deltaic  Fluvial  Deep Marine  Eolian  Hierarchical Structuring  L e  a d  s a  n d  P ro  s p  e c  ts D  im e  n s  io n  PS1RS1 PS2RS2 PS3RS3  Petroleum System  PS4RS4 PS5RS5 PS6RS6  PS1S1 PS2S2 PS3S3 PS4S4 PS5S5 PS6S6  PS1ST1 PS2ST2 PS3ST3 PS4ST4 PS5ST5 PS6ST6  PS1SL1 PS2SL2 PS3SL3 PS4SL4 PS5SL5 PS6SL6  PS1M1 PS2M2 PS3M3 PS4M4 PS5M5 PS6M6  PS1T1 PS2T2 PS3T3 PS4T4 PS5T5 PS6T6  PS1SM1  PS1D1  PS1F1  P S1  D M  PS1E1  PS2SM2  PS2D2  PS2F2  P S2  D M  PS2E2  PS3SM3  PS3D3  PS3F3  P S3  D M  PS3E3  PS4SM4  PS4D4  PS4F4  P S4  D M   PS5SM5 PS6SM6  PS4E4 PS5E5 PS6E6  P S 5D  M  P S6  D M   PS5F5 PS6F6  PS5D5 PS6D6  R S  L  P  S  L P  S  T  L P  S  L  L P  M  L  P  T  L P  D  R  S  L P  D  S  L  P  D  S T  L  P  D  S L  L  P  D  M  L P  D  T  L  P 6 F  T  L P  6F  M  L P  F  S  L  L P  F  S  T  L P  6F  S  L P  6F  R S  L  P 6 D M  R  S  L P   D M  S  L  P  D M  S  T  L P  D  M  S L  L  P  D M  M  L  P  D M  T  6L P  E  R  S  L P  E  S  L  P  E  S T  L  P  E  S L  L  P  E  M  L P  E  T  L  P  Ontology based Multidimensional Data Cube  S e  d im  e n  ta ry  B a  s in  D a  ta S  tr u  c tu  ri n  g  Sedimentary Basins  Fields  B as  in s  A tt  a k  a  B a  d a  k  B a  li k  p a  p a  n  B u  n y  u  B e  k a  p a  i  H a  n d  il  P a  m u  s ia  n  M a  m b  u rg  a n  Tarakan  Y e  a rl  y  K utui  B arito  B aram  Sabah  Saraw ak  Sandakan1980             Year = 1990  Basin = Kutui  Total Prod = 200 MMBO  Basin = 5 Fields  Count = 56  Year = 1989  Basin = Tarakan  Field= Bunyu  Prod = 83 MMBO  Count = 99  M u  lt id  im e  n s  io n  a l  d a  ta v  ie w  M u  lt id  im e  n s  io n  a l  d a  ta v  ie w  Crossline Dimension Inline Dimension  T im  e /D  e p  th D  im e  n s  io n  Crossline Dimension Inline Dimension  T im  e /D  e p  th D  im e  n s  io n  Crossline Dimension Inline Dimension  T im  e /D  e p  th D  im e  n s  io n  Crossline Dimension Inline Dimension  T im  e /D  e p  th D  im e  n s  io n  1. SELECT operator is defined as: OS = ? (NS, ES, RS) where NS = Nodes (condition = true) and ES = Edges (N ? NS).

2. INTERSECTION: OI (1, 2) = O1 ?SR O2 = (NI, EI, RI), where: NI = Nodes (SR (O1, O2)), EI = Edges (E1, NI ? N1) + Edges (E2, NI ? N2) + Edges (SR (O1, O2)), and RI =  Relationships (O1, NI ? N1) + Relationships (O2, NI ? N2) + SR (O1, O2) ? Edges (SR (O1, O2)).

3. UNION: OI (1, 2) = O1 USR O2 = (NU, EU, RU), where, NU = N1 U N2 U NI (1, 2), EU = E1 U E2 U EI (1, 2), and RU = R1 U R2 U RI (1, 2), where, OI (1, 2) = O1 ?SR O2 = (NI  (1, 2), EI (1, 2), RI (1, 2))  DIFFERENCE: O1 ? (O1 ?SR O2); O1, O2 are two different domain ontologies; SR: Semantic Relationships; N: set of Nodes; E: set of edges;     is different from a combined superset. The data points in the  fused data set can contain attribute strengths and magnitudes  (computed or derived from hypotheses). In fact, fused  metadata may not represent the contextual or conceptual views  as that described in the original data. Data instances built with  conceptual chains are preserved in the original fact tables.

More commonly, data warehousing supports the data fusion  concept. Data warehousing consists of collecting functions  providing access to, and management of, data fusion  databases, including data retrieval, storage, archiving,  compression, relational queries, and protection. Data  warehousing, for data fusion systems may pose problems,  because of the large and varied data (i.e., images, signal data,  vectors, and textural data) and the data rates both for ingestion  of incoming exploration data, and for rapid retrieval.

Knowledge based data fusion: Interpretation of fused data  for G & G interpretations, with valid calibrations and  assumptions, is used to obtain data trends and patterns  ensuring good agreement with original data. These  calibrations are in the form of two-dimensional graphic or map  views drawn for Southeast Asian basins (Figs. 6-8). As  modeled using integrated framework described in [5], data  views (through OLAP [3] and [5]) are extracted from  integrated metadata structures. In particular, these are  extended-form of knowledge-based or expert systems  developed, to interpret the results of processing, analyzing  issues such as contexts in which the data, the relationships  among multiple dimensions, hierarchical groupings of targets  or objects, and predictions of future actions of targets are  perceived. Such reasoning is normally performed by analytical  solutions, but it is approximated by hypotheses, wherever  necessary.

Fig. 7: G & G fusion data mining and visualization     Fig. 8: Knowledge discovery from one of the attributed  metadata models  VII CONCLUSIONS  Big data systems that impact petroleum ecosystems  management scenario, too need an integrated approach for  building semantic, syntactic and schematic relationships  among multidimensional and heterogeneous data sources. A  common conceptual representation of PO is needed to resolve  the heterogeneity among petroleum data sources to enable  meaningful data exchange among them. Semantic  relationships in petroleum ecosystems? data are discussed that  interpret semantics that are normally not interpreted by  annotating systems. PO algebra that allows composition of  multiple levels of information stored in the ontology for  information query and retrieval is discussed. PO rules and  logic are applicable for worldwide basins. PO algebra based  on semantic relationships, allows systematic composition that  unlike integration is more scalable. Further advantages include  reduced time of data search - correct information in one  database only, and reduced risk of key business decisions and  interpretations being made on incorrect, incomplete, or non-  validated data. Fine-grained ontologies are effective for  mining South East Petroleum Ecosystems; data views  represented for visualization and fusion, are useful for  interpretation and knowledge discovery.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT    We are grateful to Schlumberger staff for their critical  evaluation and acknowledge for permitting us to present the  paper in the IEEE-DEST 2013.

