Exploring Associated Rules of Danggui in Traditional  Chinese Medicine through Text Mining

Abstract-Single Chinese herbal medicine is the basic element in  traditional Chinese medicine's clinical treatment against disease.

Then, it is an interesting and meaningful task to acquire  knowledge of a single Chinese herbal medicine within the  framework of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). In this paper, based on the knowledge of TCM, we explored the association  rules of Danggui (Angelica sinensis in Latin). These associated rules include Danggui-TCM syndrome/pattern,  Danggui-disease, Danggui-symptom, Danggui-TCM herbal  formula, and Danggui-Chinese herbal medicines. Through text  mining, these rules can be demonstrated in different networks.

These associated networks represent a variety of knowledge  points and most of them can be validated in textbooks of  traditional Chinese medicines. Thus, these results might be useful  for both clinical practice and medical research, and the approach  provides a novel way in exploring associated rules of single  Chinese herbal medicine within the framework of traditional  Chinese medicine.

Keywords-text mining; Danggui; traditional Chinese medicine;  associated rule; validation

I. INTRODUCTION  Danggui (Angelica sinensis in Latin), was first documented in Shennong-Bencao-Jing (Shennong's Materia Medica; 200-300AD) and has been marketed in various fOnTIS worldwide [1-3]. It is a commonly used Chinese medicinal herb to enrich blood, promote blood circulation and treat blood deficiency pattern and menstrual disorders, such as dysmenorrhea and irregular menstrual cycle[4]. Or formulated with other herbs as an aid to wound healing [5]. And, there have been a lot of experimental research work to explore its pharmacological mechanism and function [6-14].

Chinese herbal medicines are used under composition rules called Chinese herbology [15]. It is the theory of traditional Chinese herbal therapy, which accounts for the majority of treatments in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM).

Although described in textbooks of Chinese herbology, it is still not enough to grasp all the points associated with it.

What's more, although described and researched elaborately in literature, it is not possible for researcher to read all the 12,961 literatures on Danggui in SinoMed which is the Chinese Bio-Medical literature database.

With the newly developed techniques of text nurung, together with powerful computers and high speed internet, it is now possible to read them by machines and then report these text mining results [16, 17].

In this study, based on the principle algorithm of data slicing [16, 17], we explored the associated rules of Danggui within the framework of TCM. These associated rules include Danggui-syndrome/pattern, Danggui-disease, Danggui-symptom, Danggui-fonTIula, and Danggui-Chinese herbal medicines which are tightly associated with Danggui in clinical practices.

In this study, not only the associated rules of Danggui was explored and reported, but also the novel way of searching these rules for any single Chinese herbal medicine. As these results come from the mass literature data on medical database, so, they might be a good reference for both clinical doctors and medical researchers.



II. DATA TREATMENT  A. Data Collection and Pretreatment  Most papers of TCM are collected in the database of SinoMed (http://sinomed.imicams.ac.cn/index.jsp), which is the Chinese Bio-Medical Database also known as CBM.

By querying on terms of "Danggui" in Chinese (angelica sinensis in Latin) on June 19, 2012, we got a dataset of 12,961 records. We downloaded this dataset, and transform these semi-structured paper data into structured database.

B. Construction of Co-occurrent Keyword-pairs  According to the knowledge of TCM, we built the keyword lists of TCM pattern/syndrome, symptom, disease name, formula, and Chinese herbal medicine. Based on these keyword lists, we filtered the title, keyword, and abstract of papers downloaded from literature database of SinoMed.

Then, based on the principle of co-occurrence, we build the keyword-pairs [16-18]. For example, in one particular paper, if two keywords of pattern/syndrome concurrent, then, there is a concurrent pair of pattern/syndrome.

In the construction of keyword-pairs, not only keyword-pairs of the same category were built, keyword of    different categories yet with connection based on TCM knowledge were also built. For example, pattern/syndrome and formulae are closely related, in order to get their relationships, we constructed the concurrent pairs according to the same paper ID.

e. Construction on Fixed Rules In the formulae of traditional Chinese medicine  (Fang-Ji-Xue in Chinese Pinyin)[15], some widely used formulae associated with Danggui are listed with TCM syndromes and symptoms.

Within these formulae, herbal medicines are compo sited strictly under the compositing theory known as sovereign, minister, assistant, and courier (Jun, Chen, Zuo, and Shi in Chinese Pinyin). Different roles of ingredients in a prescription or formula have different weights and functions in TCM formula/prescription theory [15].

Based on the fixed rules of prescriptions of TCM, we constructed the mapping lists from prescription to Chinese herbal medicines. In this study, the associated network of formula and Chinese herbal medicine is demonstrated in Fig. 4.

D. Network Construction  Based on the concurrent keyword-pairs constructed, we built the networks of TCM syndrome, symptom, Chinese herbal medicine, and formula/prescription of Chinese herbal medicine.

a?ia aplasJi?  _ -antmia'----;rL-----,L-;'----? a?mla i ron?ency  anemia  b??t cancer  liYllJ cancer  diabeti.c nephlu?  With these networks constructed, they are demonstrated in figures of Fig. 1, 2, 3, and 4. In Fig.l, network of Danggui-formula-disease is demonstrated. In Fig. 2, network of Danggui syndrome/pattern-disease is demonstrated.

In Fig. 3, network of Danggui-symptom-disease is demonstrated. At last, the network of Danggui-herbs-formula is demonstrated in Fig. 4.



III. RESULT  For simplicity and clarity, only limited nodes with significant weights are presented in network figures. Within these networks, under the consideration of professional knowledge of traditional Chinese medicine, not only common knowledge networks were found, there were also some know knowledge discovered.

In these figures, the sizes of the nodes represent the importance of items. What's more, nodes with the same shape and color indicating the same group of items.

Now, these sub-networks contain the following information on the theory of TCM:  -____ -I[;)aAijgtJi? u ue-Tang Uu .. WeI-D{fi9ang-Wan  Danggui- haoyao-San '---./  Si.Jun-?Tang  \ [l:fgQa?i-Tang  .NWng Fu-li@Wan Wuzht@-Tang Huangqi-Guizt!bWu-Wu-Tang  Figure 1 Networks ofTCM formulae and disease associated with Danggui  A. Danggui-F ormula-Disease Network  Danggui-formula-disease is demonstrated in Fig.I. This network demonstrates the connections of associated diseases and formulae with Danggui.

For formulae of yellow nodes shaped in hexagon on the right section, nodes tagged as Danggui-BuXue-Tang, Danggui-Shaoyao-San, Danggui-Si-Ni-Tang, Shaoyao-Tang, are directly associated with Danggui because they all contain it as their ingredients.

Around these formulae are some other formulae i.e., "Wuzhuyu-Tang", "Si-Jun-Zi-Tang", "Fu-Ling-Wan", and so on, Their ingredients do not contain Danggui. However, in the clinical practice, these formulae might be modified by adding Danggui according to the patient's health conditions.

These basic functions of Danggui are enriching blood, promoting blood circulation, and treating blood deficiency pattern, especially given in combination with other herbs. For example, formulae warm the interior or supplement qi.

For nodes in blue diamond, they represent diseases associated with Danggui mentioned in literatures. Nodes with gray lines connecting to red Danggui are the top 5 diseases.

In Fig. 1, there are also grey lines connecting fonnulae with diseases. These lines represent facts that in the clinical practices of TCM, these diseases can be regulated with these formulae.

In Fig. 1, it is clear that formulae group and diseases group which are tightly associated with Danggui are clearly demonstrated. What's more, these are also lines connecting these two groups. This may indicate that to some extent, Danggui might be affected the biological basis of these diseases.

Checked these knowledge points in textbooks[15, 19], most of these connected nodes can be validated.

B. Danggui-PatterniSyndrome-Formulae Network  Danggui-patternlsyndrome-disease network is demonstrated in Fig. 2. In this figure, red big node represents Danggui which is at the upper center position of the figure.

In Fig. 2, nodes of gray parallelogram on the right are the top 10 TCM pattern/syndrome associated with Danggui listed in table I.

TABLET. Top 10 TCM P A TTERN/S YNDROME ASSOCIATED WITH DANGGUI  ID Term q:t)( Meaning 1 Qi-Xue-Liang-Xu ?JfrJ.W3m Dual deficiency of qi and blood 2 Qi-Zhi-Xue-Yu ?1rffJfrJ.JM' Qi stagnation with blood stasis 3 Qi-Xu-Xue-Yu ?mJfrJ.JM' Qi deficiency with blood stasis 4 Gan-Qi-Yu-Jie H?lm?a Stagnation of liver qi 5 Shen-Yin-Xu 'IHJ]m Kidney yin deficiency 6 Qi-Xue-Xu-Ruo ?JfrJ.m?? Dual deficiency of qi and blood 7 Gan-Yu-Pi-Xu H;g?M!m Stagnation of liver qi and spleen deficiency 8 Gan-Shen-Yin-Yu H'If?}]m Yin deficiency of liver and kidney 9 Gan-Yu-Qi-Zhi H;g??1rff Stagnation of liver qi  10 Xue-Yu-Zheng JfrJ.JM'iiE Syndrome of blood stasis  Fu  Figure 2 Networks ofTCM formulae and syndrome associated with Danggui Danggui-BuXue-Tang and Danggui-Si-Ni-Tang. In textbook,  In Fig. 2, among these patterns, Qi-Xue-Liang-Xu is the most significant one. It is tightly associated with  they focused on treatment of "Qi-Xue-Liang-Xu" caused by Yang-qi deficiency and Yin-blood insufficient, respectively.

Beyond this, Danggui-Shaoyao-San and Shaoyao-Tang  can affect the syndrome of Gan-Qi-Yu-Jie (liver qi depress  ion), or Gan-Yu-Pi-Xu (liver depression and spleen deficie  ncy) / Gan-Yu-Qi-Zhi (liver depression and qi stagnation).

Both of them have the function of harmonizing qi and bl  ood so as to sooth liver and strengthen spleen.

Checked in textbook, most of these syndromes are associated with formulae reasonably where there are gray edges connecting them.

e. Danggui-Symptom-Disease Network The network of Danggu i-symptom-d is ease is  demonstrated in Fig. 3.

Figure 3 Networks ofTCM symptom and disease associated with Danggui In this figure, the left part includes nodes in gray round  represent the symptom network associated with Danggui.

Among these symptoms, the top group includes 8 items. These  8 top symptoms are headache, bellyache, ulcer, insomnia,  astriction, pruritus, menoxenia, angina, fever, spiritiessness. For these symptoms, they are also tightly connected with other symptoms mentioned in literatures i.e., dizziness, lack of appetite, vomit, and so on. In the theory of TCM, these symptoms are the clinical manifestations of "Qi-Xue-Liang-Xu" (dual deficiency of qi and blood) or blood stasis.

The right part demonstrates the top five diseases, which the symptom network tightly connected in gray lines, For example, tumor connected with symptoms of bellyache, angina, menoxenia and so on.

Checked in textbook of internal medicine of traditional Chinese medicine [20, 21], most of these connected nodes can be validated by professional knowledge.

D. Danggui-Chinese herbal medicine-Formula Network  Table II lists the Chinese herbal medicine demonstrated in Fig. 4   TABLE II. Top 8 CHINESE HERBAL MEDICINES ASSOCIATED WITH DANGGUI  Term 9=')( English Huangqi jit? Radix Astragali seu Hedysari Chuanxion )[113 Rhizoma Ligustici g Chuanxiong Baishao 8? radix paeoniae alba Gancao i:tl'j![ Radix Liquiritiae Shengdihu 1::I:-&jit Radix Rehmanniae ang Recens Danshen ft? Radix Salviae  Miltiorrhizae  Baizhu 8# Rhizoma Atractylodis Macrocephalae  Honghua ?I::tE Flos Carthami    Figure 4 Networks of Chinese herbal medicine and Formula associated with Danggui  In the theory of Chinese herbal medicine and herbal formulae (Fang-Ji-Xue in Chinese Pinyin), herbal formulae are composed under strict composition rules of Chinese herbal medicines on roles of sovereign, minister, assistant, and courier.

In Fig. 4, there are two parts in it. The red nodes shaped round on the left are the Chinese herbal medicines associated with Danggui. On the right side is the network of associated Chinese herbal formulae.

Following the formulae listed in Fig. 4, the top 4 formulae are demonstrated. They are "Danggui-BuXue-Tang", "Danggui-Shaoyao-San", "Shaoyao-Tang", and "Danggui-Si-Ni-Tang".

The gray lines connect the network of formula and network of Chinese herbal medicine. Following these lines from right side to left side, the main ingredients of those formulae can be demonstrated. For example, following the gray lines from formula "Danggui-BuXue-Tang", Chinese herbal medicines of Danggui, Huangqi can be found. In addition, based on the knowledge of Chinese traditional medicine partner, Danggui and Huangqi, or, Danggui and Baishao, has a affIrmance theory foundation and compounding prescript. It is a pair of available partner of Chinese traditional medicine through clinical application.

Checked in the textbook of prescriptions of Chinese herbal medicine (Fang-Ji-Xue in Pinyin) [15], again, most of these knowledge points represented by connections between nodes can be validated.



IV. CONCLUSION  In this study, by executing data slicing algorithm which is based on the principle of co-occurrence, we constructed networks associated with precious Chinese herbal medicine Danggui.

These networks focus on five aspects in TCM i.e., pattern/syndrome, symptom, disease, formula, and Chinese herbal medicine. Following the interconnections among these networks, basic knowledge networks associated with Danggui are revealed intuitively.

A. Most knowledge points mined out can be validated in textbooks  Validated knowledge points demonstrated in Fig. 1, 2, 3, and 4. Most of them can be checked validated in textbooks.

These knowledge points cover the range of Chinese herbal medicine[19], herbal formula [15], disease symptom[21], and disease pattern/syndrome [20] within the framework of TCM.

B. TeM networks were found  In this study, through mass calculations on dataset of Danggui, the main aspects of TCM networks were found.

These networks include TCM Zheng/syndrome, symptom, herbal formula, and Chinese herbal medicines.

C. Triangle networks is a clear way for network demonstration  In order to balance the expressiveness and simplicity, we choose the triangle model for the demonstration of associated networks on Danggui. Also, limited by the model of triangle, only three groups of information can be demonstrated in separated figures.

Centered by red node Danggui, Fig. 1, 2, 3, and 4 demonstrate the associated information on Danggui. For example, Fig. 1 demonstrates the formulae and diseases associated with Danggui. Fig. 2 demonstrates the TCM pattern/syndrome and diseases associated with Danggui. Fig. 3 demonstrates the symptom network and disease network associated with Danggui.

Even for Fig. 4, it is a simplified figure of triangle networks.

In this figure, as Danggui itself is also a Chinese herbal medicine, so, it is surrounded by other nodes of herbal    medicines. If Danggui in this figure is lifted to the upper center position, Fig. 4 is also a triangle network.

D. rCM Network might be useful in both rCM clinical practices and scientific researches  The networks in Fig. 1, 2, 3 and 4, demonstrate the associated networks of TCM pattern/syndrome, symptom, formula, and disease on Danggui. What's more, although these networks were constructed according to the clinical literature, most of these networks can be validated in textbooks.

From the view point of clinical practice, it can be taken as a kind of reference. From the view point of research, this result might be useful to illuminate some further clinical researches.

