CHARACTERIZING SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL DYNAMICS  OF MOBILE INTERNET SERVICES IN CELLULAR DATA

Abstract Understanding spatial and temporal dynamics of mobile internet services in cellular data network can be of great help to network management and service provisioning. To this end, we conduct the detailed measurement analysis of spatial and temporal dynamics from point of view of traffic generated by subscribers. The analyzation is based on a large-scale data set collected from a commercial ISP covering an entire city in Southern China. We analyze individual subscriber behaviors and observe a significant variation in network usage among subscribers. We characterize mobile internet services spatial and temporal dynamics and identity their relation to traffic volume. The data set tracks more than 3 million mobile subscribers. To handle the problem of big data processing, the data are parallel processed using MapReduce programming model, a novel framework for distributed computing with proved high efficiency and low cost features. Generally, our observations deliver important insights into mobile internet service and mobile subscriber behavior.

1 Introduction Fueled by the emerging of subscriber-friendly smart phones, netbooks and tablet devices with abundant innovative mobile applications, the mobile networks become an important part of people?s life. What can be foreseen is that the traffic volume running through mobile network will increase explosively in the near future. In order to deal with such increases, it is necessary to understand the mobile subscriber behavior and its impact on the networks. This will help better resource planning and network designs that finally improve the user experience.

Some characteristics of traffic in cellular data network have been posted in previous researches. Authors in [9] provide the fine-grained characterization of the geospatial dynamics of application usage in a 3G cellular data network. [3]  conducts a comprehensive study of smartphone use and characterizes the impact of those activities on network and energy usage. In [8], the authors conduct the first detailed  measurement analysis of network resource usage and subscriber behavior using a large-scale data set collected inside a nationwide 3G cellular data network. [5] studies important factors that impact user-perceived performance of network applications on smartphones. There are also several works that study the characteristics of subscriber behavior in wired networks. Research work of [7] explores the residential broadband Internet access and establishes mental models in terms of user experience metrics. In [4], the authors investigate the preference patterns of ADSL users. Authors of [6] analyze subscriber behaviors based on the data extracted from web and draw a conclusion about subscriber behavior online changing with time.

Comparing to all the existing researches, our main contribution is that we provide an analysis on spatial and temporal characteristics related with traffic volume. In addition,  we make use of Hadoop [10] framework and MapReduce [2]  programming model to analyze huge traffic data which could be a reference to similar research work.

Furthermore, our insight based on data collected from China?s mobile internet service is important for mobile network operators, ISPs and application developers in China.

The rest of our paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes how we capture the data which are used in this paper. Section 3 analyzes distribution of traffic volume generated by subscribers in the mobile network. Section 4 and Section 5 illustrate relations between traffic generated by subscribers to their spatial as well as temporal characteristic.

Finally the conclusion is drawn in Section 6.

2 Data capture  2.1 Data capture  The experimental data set processed in this paper are collected by deployed commercial Traffic Monitoring System (TMS) devices. It is placed at the central node of a leading mobile network operator in Southern China. There are around 3 million subscribers in the city from which we collect data.

Figure 1: TMS in network.

Date Log Volume Flow Numbers Day 1 682.66GB 1,530,545,227 Day 2 655.17GB 1,472,557,724 Day 3 602.16GB 1,366,522,080  Table 1: Daily log volume and flow numbers.

102 104 106 108 1010 1012       Traffic volume (bytes)  C D  F  Day 1  Day 2  Day 3  (a)  0.01 0.1 1 10 100       Percentage of subscribers  C D  F  Day 1  Day 2  Day 3  (b) Figure 2: (a) CDF of total traffic volume (in bytes) per  subscriber per day. (b) CDF of normalized traffic over the percentage of subscriber per day.

Key components of the monitoring system for our mobile subscriber behavior analysis are illustrated in Fig. 1.

A cell tower receives the data traffic which come from mobile devices and then transmits it to a RNC (Radio Network Controller). Then the RNC delivers the data traffic to a SGSN (Serving GPRS Support Node). Before finally arriving at Internet, the data traffic go through a GGSN (Gateway GPRS  Support Node) which provides IP connection between the mobile telecommunications network and external packet data networks (e.g. the Internet). Deployed at the Gn interface between SGSN and GGSN, TMS captures the data traffic running through the Gn interface and classifies network traffic employing DPI [1] and DFI [11] methods. The traffic data are stored in a log database in the form of flow logs. For the sake of privacy, the Uploader component removes the privacy related information before it transmits the logs to the HDFS  (Hadoop distributed file system) [10]. Here we define the flow using the {source IP, source port, destination IP, destination port, protocol}, which is referred to as 5-tuple principle. The flow logs contain information about many traffic features, such as traffic bytes, Server IP address, the location and the time when subscribers log into the net etc.

2.2 Data description  TMS keeps running day and night throughout a year. In this paper, we take the data collected from 3 days which are from different month for an example. And we pick a day from different month randomly to insure that the result we get reflects the real situation of subscribers. The volume of the flow logs and number of flow each day are shown in TABLE

I. Note that the flow logs contain a lot of information, but we merely use part of them in this paper.

3 Subscriber traffic distribution After capturing the traffic data, more detailed analyses are carried out on the mobile subscriber behaviour. In this section, we mainly show the amount of traffic generated by subscribers in the network on the 3 different days.

Fig. 2 (a) shows the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of traffic generated per subscriber. This figure shows a wide range of traffic generated by different subscribers in the network. The median of the traffic is close to 600KB per day.

However, there are heavy subscribers who generate as high as 10GB per day as well as light subscribers generating less than 1 KB per day. We see the CDF slightly shifts towards the left for Day 3 and Day 2 indicating less traffic compared to Day1.

It reveals that traffic generated by subscribes changing slightly on different days.

We also present a normalized view of traffic over a percentage of subscribers in Fig. 2 (b). It is interesting to see that only 1% of the subscribers (out of approximately about 3 million unique subscribers who appear in each day) create 40% of the daily network traffic and 10% of the subscribers create 70% of the daily network traffic. This presents a significant imbalance of network usage among subscribers with few subscribers hogging the much of the network resource. In the following section, the spatial and temporal characteristics of these subscribers will be discussed.

0.1 1 10 100 1,000      Number of distinct LAC-CI  C D  F  Day 1  Day 2  Day 3  Figure 3: CDF of the number of distinct LAC-CI visited by a subscriber each day.

Traffic volume (bytes)  C D  F  1 loc.

2 loc. to 5 loc.

6 loc. to 10 loc.

11 loc. to 30 loc.

> 30 loc.

(a)  0.1 1 10 100 1000       Number of distinct LAC-CI  C D  F  < 1MB  1 MB to 10 MB  > 10MB  (b) Figure 4: (a) CDF of traffic generated per day by subscribers  of different category based on number of locations (LAC- CI) visited in a day. (b)  CDF of the number of distinct LAC-CI visited by a subscriber per day of different category based on traffic volume generated by subscribers in a day.

4 Subscriber spatial characteristics In our data set, we do not have access to the precise location of subscribers. However, our captured data set provide information about the LAC-CI the subscribers are associated to when they are using mobile data services. A location area code (LAC) identifies an area in the network to which the cell belongs and a cell identity (CI) identifies the cell within the area in the network to which it belongs. It can be said that a unique LAC-CI specifies a unique area. In our flow logs, we not only have the LAC-CI at which subscribers are when they get on-line but also have the off-line one. To some extent, the number of LAC-CI visited by a subscriber reflects the movement range of the subscriber. In this section, we study the behavior of mobile subscribers in terms of their spatial characteristics and explore the relations between traffic generated by subscribers and their movement range.

4.1 LAC-CI visited  Firstly, we look into the number of distinct LAC-CI an individual subscriber visits per day. Fig. 3 shows the CDF of the number of distinct LAC-CI visited by each subscriber in a day. Note that the distribution of three days is very similar.

Overall, the movement range is not wide in terms of the number of distinct LAC-CI visited. Roughly, more than 30% of the subscribers are stationary, meaning they constrain within a cell. And about 95% of the subscribers travel across less than 10 distinct LAC-CIs in a day. We find that there are also few subscribers who visit more than 50 distinct LAC-CIs, however, the number of them only accounts for 0.05% of daily subscribers.

4.2 Relating subscriber movement range and traffic  It is natural to relate the subscriber spatial activity and the volume of traffic they generate. We categorize subscribers based on two metrics: (i) number of distinct LAC-CI visited and (ii) traffic volume generated. For the first classification standard, we classify subscribers into 5 groups according to the number of distinct LAC-CI they visit in one day. For each category of subscribers, we plot the CDF of traffic volume generated per day in Fig. 4 (a). Note that while the plot lines appear similar, due to the log-scale of the horizontal axis, there is actually significant difference in traffic volume for different categories. As shown in the graph, the median of the traffic generated by subscribes in the widest movement range category is roughly 30 times that of the subscribers in the narrowest movement range category. In Fig. 4 (b), the subscribers are split into 3 groups based on the traffic volume they generate in one day and the CDF of the number of distinct LAC-CI visited by each group in a day is drawn. We can see that almost half of the ?light subscribers? (subscribers who generate traffic less than 1MB per day) only visit one LAC-CI in one day. However, when considering all subscribers as shown in Figure 3, the percentage of subscribers who stay in one LAC-CI declines to about 30%.

In other words, Fig. 4 (b) is similar to Fig. 4 (a) in the trend that ?light subscribers? tend to be more stationary. This    0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24       Number of hours appeared  C D  F  Day 1  Day 2  Day 3  Figure 5: CDF of number of hours subscribers generate traffic each day.

102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 1010       Traffic volume (bytes)  C D  F  1hour 2 to 3hours 4 to 6hours 7 to 10hours 11 to 15hours >15hours  (a)  0 5 10 15 20       Number of hours appeared  C D  F  < 1MB  1MB to 10MB  > 10MB  (b) Figure 6: (a) CDF of traffic generated per day by subscribers  of different category based on number of hours active in a day. (b) CDF of occurrence per day for subscribers of different category based on traffic volume generated by subscribers in a day.

correlation of spatial activity and traffic has implications in resource planning and spectrum management.

5 Subscriber temporal activity In this part, we study the behavior of mobile subscribers in terms of their activity on the temporal scale. We describe the temporal activity of subscribers by the number of hours in a day that they generate traffic. This addresses basic questions such as whether the subscribers generate traffic frequently or only occasionally.

5.1 Subscribers active hours  To understand the hourly activity of subscribers, we plot the distribution of hours in a day that the subscribers generate traffic. Fig. 5 shows the CDF of the number of hours that subscribers generate traffic. We see that about 20% of subscribers generate traffic only in a single hour in a day. A typical subscriber (median) is active in 5 different hours per day. Here, we come to the conclusion that a large fraction of subscribers generate traffic only in a few hours within the day.

5.2 Relating subscriber active hours and traffic  In this section, we draw relation between the traffic generated by subscribers and how frequently they appear in the trace.

To begin with, we group the subscribers according to the number of hours that they generate traffic per day. Then for the sake of contrast, we draw the CDF of traffic volume generated in a day for each group. From the Fig. 6 (a), we can see clearly that the more hours subscribers appear in a day, the more traffic they generate. To further investigate this phenomenon, we classify subscribers into 3 groups based on traffic volume they generate. For each group, Fig. 6 (b) shows the distribution of hourly activity. In this plot, we notice that there is a big difference between ?heavy subscribers? (subscribers who generate traffic more than 10 MB per day) and ?light subscribers?. A typical light subscriber appears in 1 to 2 different hours in a day while a typical heavy subscriber appears in 16 to 18 different hours. Fig. 6 (a) and Fig. 6 (b) indicate jointly that heavy subscribers tend to spend more hours on the mobile Internet.

6 Conclusion In this paper, we analyze spatial and temporal dynamics of mobile internet services in cellular data network based on a large set of data using MapReduce which is a distributed parallel programming model with proved low-cost and high- efficiency features. We have made several observations related to traffic load, spatial dynamics and temporal dynamics which will lead to better resource planning and network designs that finally benefit the subscribers.

Acknowledgements This work is supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61072061) Important National Science & Technology Specific Projects (2012ZX03002008), 111 Project of China (B08004) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2012RC0121).

