Transforming massive data to pragmatic target marketing practice

Abstract?Marketing is all about the process of communicating the value of a product or service to customers in order to stimulate sales, while target marketing maximizes the return on investment into the marketing activities. We present a piece of practice to transform massive data into actionable insights and guidance using statistical analysis and data mining methods, which helps a leading home appliance manufacturer optimize its marketing strategy for increasing customer intimacy, solidifying customer loyalty, and most importantly, boosting the sales volume and profit.

Keywords?marketing policy optimization; statistical analysis; massive data.



I. INTRODUCTION  According to the American Marketing Association [1], mar- keting is defined to be ?the activity, set of institutions, and pro- cesses for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchang- ing offerings that have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large. (Approved October 2007).? Marketing can be ineffective when an enterprise tout some product to an uninterested customer, because marketing resources are spent without gathering the financial fruits.

Therefore, target marketing comes into play to maximize the ROI (Return on Investment). According to [2], target mar- keting means that ?a group of customers has been identified for whom the offering should be ?right? and to whom the firm will direct the majority of its marketing time, resources, and attention.? By bringing the suitable products to those customers in need of them and trigger the purchase, the marketing investment justifies itself.

With fast evolving of information technology, mass data are generated, sensed and collected along the enterprise value chain, which can be used to characterize customers, products and sub-market for better marketing campaign design. This piece of work describes how we optimize the target marketing strategy by extracting  1) product insights: the features in common of best-sellers; and  2) customer insights: the purchasing pattern of customers; and  3) geographical insights: how the product and customer patterns differ across geographical areas.

The three dimensions form a complicated information cube which enables the marketing manager to plan marketing ac- tivities in a comprehensible and data-driven manner. In other words, we could easily answer questions such as what are the critical features (we call them the catchers) for best sellers to interest customers, what kind of features are favored in the Yangtzi River Delta, and which products are bought together in a basket, etc. We report in this paper the numeric results we have obtained by extracting the product, customer and geographical insights, and demonstrate how these results can be used to guide the marketing practice.

In the following, Section II reviews the literature around marketing, especially from the quantitative perspective. Sec- tion III describes the approach we applied to extract the tri- dimensional marketing insights. Section IV shares the market- ing insights we obtained from the massive data analysis for a leading home appliance manufacturer. We conclude our paper in Section V.



II. LITERATURE REVIEW  According to [3], target marketing is similar concept to the market segmentation, which is the identification of a set of buyers sharing common needs or characteristics that a company decides to serve [4]. More broadly, [5] viewed target marketing as the basis of a predominant marketing strategy, the user positioning approach, in which the products or services are closely associated with a particular user or customer. [5] points out that target marketing has been applied in many fields, such as education [6], advertising [5], voluntary sector marketing [7], e-commerce [8], etc. and has arguably been the driving force behind the success of many well-known brands (e.g., Pepsi, Mercedes-Benz, etc.).

Before executing target marketing activities, it is worth looking into customer purchasing history and demographic information combinatorially. Rossi et al. [6] built up a heterogeneity distribution model to evaluate the purchase history as well as customer demographics and then developed new econometric methods to implement a random coefficient choice model in     order to target of consumer segments for differential pro- motional activity. Rothman et al. [9] patented a system and method in which a hierarchical organizational structure was created to compare the purchased product categories in order to generate customer preference model for target marketing activity. From the perspective of database marketing, Zahavi and Levin [10] explored the feasibility of using neural network computing as a means of targeting audiences for promotion through the mail, from among a list of customers in a database. Furthermore, the issues and problems in applying neural network computing to target marketing were discussed in details [11].

Geographical segmentation or geographic marketing is also a common and valuable concept in consumer theory because different regions have different cultures, histories, climates, and resources [12]. These differences can heavily influence consumer behaviors, such as shopping area, use of media, products and services. With the key observation that marketing managers had already realized the potential importance of geography, Hess et al. [4] advocated the use of geographi- cal information systems (GIS) as a decision support system generator for constructing marketing information system. Due to frequent changes of customer residence, the tentative theory of ?geographical mobility? was introduced in [13], where the author attempted to demonstrate the value of geographical mobility as a dimension for segmenting consumer markets and provided evidence showing geographical mobiles to be high in purchasing power.

Besides utilizing the customer information (demographic and geographical data) to conduct target marketing, bridging the product features with customer preferences can be dated back to 1965 [14]. Miracle [14] studied the relationship between product characteristics and marketing strategy and it showed that the product feature was one of the most important factors for product marketing activity. Simonson et al. [15] studied the relationship between product features and sales promotion effect on brand choice where five experiments were conducted to prove the negative effect when consumers are uncertain about the values of products and their preferences. In order to conduct one-to-one marketing, a personalized recommendation system based on product features is built, which can overcome the cold start problem of the traditional recommendation system [16]. The authors attempted to analyze customers? pur- chasing behaviors based on product features from transaction records and product feature databases. Customers? preferences toward particular features of products are analyzed in order to recommend products that potentially attract customers.

Marketing basket is another thought which set the customer or product features aside, but purely rely on the purchase history.

It studies items from multiple categories that are frequently chosen interdependently from each other. Association rule mining [17] is commonly used for analyzing these transac- tional data, extract frequent item sets, and guide database  marketing. Lai and Yang [6] proposed a group-based inference approach by integrating clustering and association rule mining, in order to conduct customized marketing on the web. For direct marketing activity, Wang et al. [18] presented a solution based on a creative use of association rules, to resolve the problem of the extremely imbalanced data and the inverse correlation between the probability that a customer responds and the dollar amount generated by a response.

Working with limited whilst incomplete data, we have been trying the best to bridge statistical methods with industrial practice by applying the marketing concepts as introduced above. We report the approach design and results in Sections III and IV.



III. APPROACH DESIGN  We design a systematic approach to integrate the product anal- ysis, customer analysis and geography-based analysis to form a relatively comprehensive decision-making support system for target marketing. Figure 1 shows the approach.

The input to the target marketing system include three main sources, i.e., Point-of-Sales (PoS) data, customer information (demographical, geographicalal data, etc.), and store informa- tion (location, size, etc.). Via the customer ID and product ID captured in each transaction, the PoS data bridge the customer information with the product information.

After joining the three data sources together, we first divide the PoS data into subsets by geography (based on store location) .

Then we branch to satisfy two different kinds of target market- ing. The left branch (shadowed by the oblique lines) extracts the features in common for best sellers in geographicalally different sub-markets, which will guide retailers to customize their product assortment and advertising strategy for each sub- market instead of applying a unified policy. Moreover, it is straightforward to analyze the features of a new launch, and then select the ?right? sub-markets to promoting it.

The right branch concerns what to recommend to a particular customer (not a particular area). By analyzing the purchase pattern of customers, we extract what customers tend to buy together. Therefore the marketing manager could promote for product combos, and realize cross/up-selling.

A. Feature extraction for best sellers  To extract the best-selling features, we first make sure each product is associated with pre-defined features. Taking a refrig- erator as an example, Table I shows its typical specifications (exemplary).

Divide data by geography  Input: Sales data, volume, store location,  customer info. etc.

Feature extraction of best- sellers  Customer basket analysis  Map target sub-market with products having potential to sell  well  Map target customers with products having potential be to  cross/up-sold  Output ? targeted sub-market and feature  differentiator ? suitable sub-market given a  newly launched product  Output ? targeted customer and products  that they have high likelihood to buy  ? suitable customers to push campaign given the products  Fig. 1: Approach to Conduct Target Marketing  Capacity 17.6 cu ft Fresh Food Capacity 13.5 cu ft Freezer Capacity 4.1 cu ft Installation Type Free standing Form Factor Freezer Top Color White Voltage 220 Defrost Automatic Door Hinges Reversible Door Material Type Steel Lighting Incadescent Shelf Type Glass Shelves 3 Material Type Steel  TABLE I: Exemplary Refrigerator Specifications  To make the results comprehensible, some manual work is required. For example, we might want to classify the color into limited number of color systems instead of tracking hundreds of colors which bring tremendous noises in the statistical learning process. Therefore, a mapping between colors and color systems needs to be established before-hand.

We use the multi-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test if sales volume difference is caused by random fluctuation or customer/sub-market/product features. A sample two-way  ANOVA design is as in Table II. Each number separated by comma in the cell represents the sales volume of a particular product, which belongs to the corresponding color system and price range.

By partitioning the sum of squares and analyzing components statistically, we test against the null hypothesis  H0: the geography have no impact on the sales volume.

If the null hypothesis is rejected, we arrive at a conclusion that the geography affect the sales volume at a peculiar significance level. Similarly, we can test if the price affect the sales volume significantly by building the below null hypothesis  H0: the price has no impact on the sales volume.

A rejected null hypothesis represents that colors do affect the sales volumes. Moreover, we can test the interaction factor district*price as  H0: the price and district affect the sales volume indepen- dently.

The rejection of this null hypothesis indeed means the tastes for color systems differ across geography (alternatively, across districts).

Price District 1 District 2 District 3 0-999 10, 100, 200 89, 32, 202 55, 106, 20 1000-2999 375, 801, 1000 23, 10, 22 614, 459, 336 > 3000 90, 33, 24 8, 2, 3 40, 32, 60  TABLE II: Exemplary two-way ANOVA Table  The results output by two-way ANOVA in this toy example is shown in Table III. If we determine the significance level is 0.05 and looking at the interaction term District*Price, it implies that customers from different district has different target price range with statistical significance. By observing Table II, we get an intuition that District 2 prefers low- end products, while Districts 1 and 3 favor products priced in between. The two-way ANOVA statistically tests if the intuitive difference is caused by random fluctuation or the latent preference.

Item SS DF F p value  District 312260.1 2 9.986 0.001 Price 121366.5 2 3.881 0.040 District*Price 1072216.1 4 17.145 0.000 Error 281418.0 18  TABLE III: Results of two-way ANOVA     B. Customer purchase pattern extraction  Customer purchase pattern is also called the basket analysis, which mainly answers two questions. One is that which products are tended to be bought together and the ?beers and diapers? is a famous example; the other is which products are tended to be bought sequentially. In this practice, we only implement the ?buy together? analysis to answer the first question.

We conjecture that customers residing in different areas may tend to have different patterns because of diverse lifestyles, climate conditions, economical environments, etc. Hence, we extract the customer purchase pattern by geography. We apply FP-tree to extract the frequent item sets [19]. FP-tree is a common algorithm for association rule mining which outperforms classical Apriori in terms of memory requirement and computation time.

There are two critical parametric thresholds, support and con- fidence, for basket analysis. Take a frequent item set {Diaper, Beer} as an example, and let  T = Number of transactions, T d = Number of transactions containing diaper, T b = Number of transactions containing beer, T d,b = Number of transactions containing diaper and beer simul-  taneously.

The support of the item set {Diaper, Beer} is defined to be T  d,b  T . Only when the support of an item set exceeds a threshold, we will call it a frequent item set which becomes a valid basis for rule extraction.

The Confidence of the rule ?{Diaper} ? {Diaper, Beer}? is defined to be T  d,b  Td , and similarly, for ?{Beer} ? {Diaper,  Beer},? the confidence is T d,b  T b . The confidence tells that given  the items at the left of the arrow, how probable the customer will buy the items at the right. Assuming that the ?{Beer} ? {Diaper, Beer}? has a confidence of 0.15 and ?{Beer} ? {Diaper, Beer}? has a confidence of 0.05, it indicates that recommending diaper to those who buy beers will triple the conversion rate of recommending beers to those who buy diapers.



IV. MARKETING INSIGHTS  In this section, we report the numeric results based on real business data. Because of the confidential agreement, we have transformed the data but retain the essential insights to share with the audience.

D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 D7 D8 D9 D10 D11 D12 D13 D14 D15  V o  lu m  e  District  <1000 1000-2999 3000-7999 >8000Pric  Fig. 2: Price vs District  A. Best-selling features cross geography  We conduct the two-way (alternatively, two-factor) ANOVA analysis, where the dependent variable, again, is the sales volume and the two factors are price and district respectively.

For space interests, we only show the summary statistics of the raw data as in Table IV. In total there are 25373 refrigerators sold from stores scattered in 15 districts. We test against four price ranges (unit: Yuan) after discussion with the business partner, i.e., < 1000, 1000-2999, 3000-7999, and > 8000.

Number of Districts 15 Number of Price Ranges 4 Number of Refrigerators sold 25373  TABLE IV: Summary statistics of marketing data  Table V shows the results and it tells that the interaction factor District*Price has statistically significant impact on the sales volume variations. Without providing details here, we then do paired t test to find out which District*Price combination causes higher/lower than average sales volume. Figure 2 visualizes the sales volume against the price and district. The vertical axis is the sales volume, and the horizontal axis the district. Different price ranges are characterized by different fillings of bars in the Figure. We could get an impression that D6 is definitely a high-end district which sells very expensive refrigerators; as in the opposite, D8, D13 and D15 are areas where low-end products are relatively popular. The statistical test confirms the above observations.

Item SS DF F p value  District 1036.8 14 8.9 0.000 Price 1886.2 3 75.5 0.000 District*Price 1681.8 42 4.8 0.000 Error 84696.6 10173  TABLE V: Two-way ANOVA analysis of the marketing data  We also do multi-factor test including color, energy con- sumption level, capacity, etc. to mine the different ?taste? of different districts. It turns out the insights not only guide the     merchandizing of current product sets, but also shed a light on how to promote new product in a customized way for ROI maximization.

B. Customer purchase patterns cross geography  Table VI shares part of our findings (two selected rules for demonstration purpose) on the customer purchase patterns across geography. Since the client would like us to try a different set of data in this practice, the districts are not the same as those in Section IV-A. We have in total six districts of a second-tier city in China. These districts are com- posed of customers with different income level and lifestyles.

Rule District Support Confidence {TV} ? {Washing machine} D2 0.358 0.627  D5 0.227 0.596 D6 0.313 0.584  {Small appliance, Heater} ? {Washing machine}  D1 0.109 0.787  D3 0.106 0.817  TABLE VI: Customer purchase patterns  As expected, we find that the geography do affect the product combos. The above two rules establishes for different districts.

As a matter of fact, D2, D5 and D6 are relatively poorer, which is originally countryside and undergoing urbanization, while D1 and D3 are downtown areas that are more fashionable.

A preliminary analysis with our business partner reveals that the TV and washing machine are indispensable articles when young couples get married due to customs in the rural area.

That explains why the two items are bought together. In downtown, people seeks for comfortability and convenience from small appliance, heater and washing machines; in the opposite, the country people will not considered the appliances beyond basic necessity. Therefore, the second rule is not valid for D2, D5 and D6.



V. CONCLUSION  In this paper, we share a piece of pragmatic marketing practice driven by statistical analysis on real data. On one hand, we help the client characterize its sub-markets through best- selling product features such that they could direct the correct products to the correct sub-markets. on the other hand, we the customer purchase patterns are extracted based on which the client could do personalized marketing/recommendation according to the historic behavior of customers, of which the chance to succeed, again, depends on the districts as we discussed on Section IV-B.

Our client is very satisfied with the results because we setup the mechanism for them to pull out marketing insights regu- larly. The multi-dimensional insights (product, customer and  sub-market) together offers them comprehensive guidance to conduct marketing activities. However, we still have rooms to improve. Next, we plan also to add colors, prices, etc. into the customer purchase pattern analysis. The results will become more accurate since we could tell, for example, a ?high-end? TV buyer will be a ?high-end? washing machine buyer. Or, a ?black? refrigerator leads to a ?black? washing machine. We will definitely report the effect once we got the results in near future.

