Fuzzy Logic Based Admission Control Method in  Wireless Networks

Abstract?This paper deals with admission control in wireless networks such as WiMAX or LTE. Because of the limited sources, available bandwidth has to be used effectively. In case, where multimedia traffic is considered, each type of service has different requirements for transmission rate and delay. The frequency band has to be divided between several service streams. In this paper, five basic types of service will be considered: voice, videophone, data, videoconference and IPTV.

These services have big deviations in transmission rates and delay requirements. Fuzzy logic was chosen as an admission control method, because of its flexibility and simplicity. It will be shown, that only few input parameters are needed to get good result. Designed model describes situation, where new connection wants to enter to the cell. The base station considers whether or not to accept connections according to service requirements and actual cell load. Main goal is using bandwidth effectively and avoiding cell overload.

Keywords: Fuzzy Logic, Admission Control, dropping probability, wireless networks

I. INTRODUCTION Bandwidth of each cell is limited. One base station can  process finite number of access requests. Nowadays, each network has to handle several types of services. Base station should permit access for each incoming connection, meet required connection conditions and prevent congestion. To achieve all of these, bandwidth management has to be designed well. Admission control serves for this purpose.

There is lot of admission control methods, for example measurement based or diffusion method. Most of them have lots of constraints in their applications. From some methods we can get good results for specific network type but unsatisfactory for another. Fuzzy logic is universal admission control method for various networks types and it is able to meet all requirements of quality for several multimedia services. It has low computation complexity, because the decision is made at the point of entrance to the network, which in wireless technologies is entrance to the cell. Fuzzy logic does not monitor stream variations. Admission decision is made once at the beginning. Then agreed transmission conditions are guaranteed.

Every admission control method has to meet effective bandwidth utilization, because of limited frequency band, and congestion prevention. With rising number of multimedia  applications and users, these two features are going to be more and more important. Furthermore, admission control method has to deal with some uncertainty as we cannot certainly predict a way how a transmission quality will change and how many users will be willing to enjoy a bandwidth. That is why we chose fuzzy logic as the admission control method.

First part of the article describes transmission model, technical specifications and services requirements. Then the fuzzy logic based admission control model will be designed.

Next the performance parameters will be presented to evaluate efficiency of designed model. The transmission model as well as fuzzy logic model is programmed in Matlab. Work outputs are presented through several simulations and obtained results are evaluated in final part of the article.



II. TRANSMISSION MODEL Transmission model is designed for WiMAX technology as  several ongoing streams of one cell with bandwidth 4MHz.

New connections with their service specifications ask for admission. Base station has to make decision whether it is possible to handle new connection according to actual situation in cell. Channel is divided to 50 sub-channels with OFDM (orthogonal frequency divided multiplex) access and TDD (time divided duplex) or FDD (frequency divided duplex) multiplex. Each sub-channel uses ACM (adaptive coding modulation) coding scheme chosen according to SNR (signal to noise ration). One coding scheme is used in one frame duration because of this assumption the transmission conditions are stable during this period [1].

Queue is described by number of PDUs x in queue size of

X. Unit arrival process has batch behavior described by v and maximum value A.

The model can process various types of services and it can be deployed  to the modern wireless networks such as WiMAX and LTE. Transmission requirements of used multimedia services are described in ITU-T recommendation in Table I. [1].



III. FUZZY LOGIC ADMISSION CONTROL MODEL Admission control model (shown in Fig. 1) is composed of  3 similar parts. Each part contains block with input values and  EuroCon 2013 ? 1-4 July 2013 ? Zagreb, Croatia     block, where fuzzy rules [4] are applied. First, input values are fuzzyfied, from now it is possible to work with them in fuzzy logic environment. Next, fuzzy rules are used to make partial decision. An output of one decision block serves as an input for next one. In first two parts, the transmission conditions of new connection, such as required rate, delay and channel quality are processed. In final part, the arriving connection admission decision is made according to actual situation in the cell. At the end, an output of third decision block is deffuzyfed and final decision is applied.

TABLE I TYPE OF SERVICE BASED TRANSMISSION REQUIREMENTS.

Type Rate Delay PDU dropping  Voice 4-25 Kbit/s  <150 ms - preferred <400 ms - acceptable  3%  Videocall 16-32 Kbit/s  <150 ms - preferred <400 ms - acceptable  1%  Data <10- 30.5 Kbit/s  <400 Ms 0  Videoconference 128-384 Kbit/s  <150 ms - preferred <300 ms - acceptable  1%  IPTV 2.5-3.5 Mbit/s  <300 ms 1%  Rate requirements fuzzyfication  ?p  ?  Ppeak  Traffic decision block  SNR fuzzyfication  Delay requirement fuzzyfication  Subchannel allocation  decision block  Allocated subchannels fuzzyfication  Deffuzification Admission  control decision block  Delay requirement  Allocated subchannels  in cell  Mean SNR  Amission probability  Connection requirements Actual cellsituation  Fig. 1. Fuzzy logic admission control model  Incoming connection can inform base station about their transmission requirements such as:  ? ? transmission rate ?p ? peak transmission rate Pp ? peak transmission rate probability dreq ? delay requirement These input requirements are fuzzyfied and the affiliation  degree is assigned to fuzzy function. For this purpose the Gaussian curve and generalized bell membership functions are used. Then the fuzzy rules described in Table II ? Table IV  are applied onto fuzzy values. Rules decision logic used the Boolean AND operator. The centroid method is chosen as a decision method. Generalized bell and sigmoidal membership functions are used in Fig. 2 ? Fig. 10. to describe input affiliation degree of input values and output decisions, inspired by publication [3].

There is multimedia traffic in the cell so an incoming connection can require various type of service. According to this assumption, rates and peak rates are random values generated with Poisson probability from 5 intervals. Each interval is related to type of service listed in the Table I.

Fig. 2. Membership function for normal transmission rate of new connection  Fig. 3. Membership function for peak transmission rate of new connection  Fig. 4. Membership function for peak rate probability of new connection  When the rate, peak rate and probability of peak rate are randomly chosen and fuzzy rules are applied, traffic intensity decision for new connection is made.

Delay requirements as well as mean SNR values are also generated randomly. This randomness preserves stochastic  EuroCon 2013 ? 1-4 July 2013 ? Zagreb, Croatia     attribute of connections. According to traffic intensity, delay requirement and mean SNR, estimation of necessary number of subchannels is made. According to these values, a required number of subchanels are estimated. Then, an output of the second block and used as an input of the following, where the final decision is made.

The last decision block compares required number of sub- channels with actual cell situation and decides whether it has enough sources to handle this new connection.

TABLE II NORMAL RATE, PEAK RATE AND PROBABILITY FUZZY RULES FOR TRAFFIC  DECISION BLOCK.

Normal rate Peak rate Peak rate probability  Traffic  Low Low Not high Low Low Low High Medium Low High Low Medium Low High Not low High High Low Not high Medium High Low High High High High - High  Fig. 5. Membership function for traffic requirements of new connection  Fig. 6. Membership function for required delay of new connection  Fig. 7. Membership function for mean SNR of new connection transmission channel  TABLE III TRAFFIC, MEAN SNR AND DELAY FUZZY RULES FOR SUBCHANNEL  ALLOCATION DECISION BLOCK.

Traffic Mean SNR Delay Required sub-channels  Low Poor Small High Low Poor Medium Medium Low Poor Large Low Low Average Not large Medium Low Average Large Low Low Good - Low  Medium Poor Not large High Medium Poor Large Medium Medium Average Small High Medium Average Medium Medium Medium Average Large Low Medium Good Small Medium Medium Good Not small Low  High Poor - High High Average Not large High High Average Large Medium High Good Small High High Good Medium Medium High Good Large Low  Fig. 8  Membership function for required sub-channels of new connection according to previous input parameters  EuroCon 2013 ? 1-4 July 2013 ? Zagreb, Croatia     Fig. 9  Membership function for actual allocated number of sub-channels in cell  TABLE IV REQUIRED SUBCHANNELS AND NUMBER OF SUBCHANNELS IN CELL FUZZY  RULES FOR FINAL ADMISSION CONTROL DECISION BLOCK.

Required sub- channels  Number of sub- channels in cell  Decision  - Low Accept Not high Medium Accept  High Medium Accept with constrains  Low Congestion Accept Medium Congestion Accept with  constrains High Congestion Reject  Fig. 10  Membership function for final decision

IV. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE Three basic parameters serve as system performance  evaluation:  1) PDU dropping probability: It is the most important parameter, because it has been proved that connection avoidance is better choice than set-up connection with poor quality and high number of dropped PDUs from user point of view.

2) Throughput: This parameter depends on transmission rate and PDU dropping probability. It expresses the number of PDUs transmitted in one frame  ,  (1) 3) Average delay: It means average number of PDUs in  queue with respect to throughput. Little?s law [5] is used as follows:  (2) where is average number of PDUs in queue.

A. PDU dropping probability PDU dropping probability is going to be closer described in  this part. It is the ratio of average number of dropped PDUs and PDUs arrival in one frame, respectively.

,   (3) where  , (4)  and  (5)  Symbol j represents the number of arriving PDUs, but in this case takes only two values as total number of PDUs in the queue increases by v at every arrival phase.

Information source can be described as MMPP in steady- state with probability ?(x,s) [6], with only two phases s (the traffic source transmitting with normal and peak rate). Each sub-channel as Nakagami-m channel model [7].

Behaviour of PDUs in queue describes transmission matrix, published in [8], [9] and [10].

(6)  Matrix is divided to three parts. First part is related to situation, when buffer has enough capacity for incoming PDUs. PDUs arrival rate is lower than queue serving rate and no PDU has to be dropped.

Second part describes situation, when PDUs arrival rate is close to queue serving rate. Buffer is on the edge of their capacity, but as in the previous case, no PDU has to be dropped.

Third part it the most interesting part, because it describes queue situation, when buffer is full and PDUs have to be dropped. Queue is more and more congested.



V. SIMULATION Simulation results describe two typical situations. First, no  connection has to be rejected and second some connections  EuroCon 2013 ? 1-4 July 2013 ? Zagreb, Croatia     have to be rejected or accepted with constrains. The connection is called to be accepted with constrains when  this connection has to reduce its transmission requirements if it wants to be admitted.

It is obvious, that there is strong relation between figures describing PDU dropping probability and admission control probability (Fig. 11 and 12). It is clear to see, that no connection has to be rejected, just some of them are accepted with constrains on Figure 12. The PDU dropping probability is lower than 1.5% in this case. In comparison with Table I., which describes various service types, most of them have 1% tolerance of dropped PDU. It can be said, that transmission meets the requirements. This simulation has shown, that most of the connections have throughput about 200Kbit/s and lower, SNR was between 14-22 and delay about 200ms. These values allow all connections to be accepted. There are no big deviations, which could cause rejection.

Fig. 11 PDU dropping probability with increasing number of connection in case, when no connection has to be rejected.

Fig. 12 Admission control probability with increasing number of connections in case, when no connection has to be rejected.

The second case presents rejection of 14th connection, because of its poor channel quality. Additional input values of this connection have average distribution without bigger deviation, so it?s obvious, that the poor channel quality causes rejection of 14th connection.

Fig. 13 PDU dropping probability with increasing number of connection in case, when one connection has to be rejected  Fig. 14 Admission control probability with increasing number of connections in case, when one connection has to be rejected  Fig. 15 Mean SNR dependence on increasing number of connections  Connection rejection can be also caused by low delay requirement, when additional input values are without high deviations as it is shown on figures below.

Note that, extreme values can cause connection rejection only in case, when the cell needs to avoid congestion. It is important to know, that the cell serves several connections, which have been accepted before and they have to be treated on the basis of agreed quality of service. New connection cannot affect ongoing connections.

The third typical case of connection rejection is high transmission rate. This case is clear and so it is not presented in this article.

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20  0.005  0.01  0.015 PDU dropping probability with increasing number of connections  Number of connections  P D  U d  ro pp  in g  pr ob  ab ili  ty  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 0.5  0.55  0.6  0.65  0.7  0.75  0.8  0.85  0.9  0.95  Admission control probability with increasing number of connections  Number of connections  A dm  is si  on c  on tro  l p ro  ba bi  lit y  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  PDU dropping probability with increasing number of connections  Number of connections  P D  U d  ro pp  in g  pr ob  ab ili  ty  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  Admission control probability with increasing number of connections  Number of connections  A dm  is si  on c  on tro  l p ro  ba bi  lit y  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20         Mean SNR dependence on number of connections  Number of connections  M ea  n SN  R  EuroCon 2013 ? 1-4 July 2013 ? Zagreb, Croatia     Fig. 16 PDU dropping probability with increasing number of connections in case, when one connection has to be rejected  Fig. 17 Required delay dependence on increasing number of connections

VI. CONCLUSION Each admission control model should meet connection  requirements, prevent congestion and provide bandwidth efficiency with low computation complexity. It can be concluded, that all of these requirements were met. Incoming connections were evaluated individually according to their type of service. Final decision was made based on the number of necessary subchannels and real-time cell load. The system performance evaluation is based on PDU dropping probability, throughput and average delay. Simulations of PDU dropping probability reached really low values, which means, that simulation proved that connection requirements were met.

In case, where the cell was close to congestion and some of the incoming connections required extreme parameter values, such as high transmission rate, low SNR or delay requirement, these connection requests had to be rejected.

Fuzzy logic as admission control method brings big advantages. Model like this can be implemented in to various network service types. In comparison to method based on measurements, fuzzy logic is much more flexible and has lower computation complexity. In most cases, the channel is described by inaccuracy parameters. Another admission control methods cannot calculate and make decision with this inaccuracy. It gives good results with high efficiency and application flexibility, which is the main feature of fuzzy logic.

Sem mozno este nejaka veta - co by sa dalo zlepsit do buducna.

