Is Privacy Still an Issue in the Era of Big Data?  ?Location disclosure in spatial footprints

Abstract?Geospatial data that were once difficult to obtain are  now readily available to the public with the development of  geospatial technologies. The ubiquitous use of social networking  and location-based services enables easy sharing of personal  stories among many people. With or without awareness of  location disclosure, some users reveal a considerable amount of  geopersonal information to the general public. Privacy issues  have been raised again in the GIScience community. This study  shows that home and work places may be inferred from  georeferenced tweets of heavy Twitter users. Is privacy still an  issue in the era of big data when people freely share blogs, photos,  videos, and spatial footprints over the Internet? Or do people  willingly decide to give out location information in order to gain  benefits from the disclosure? After a discussion on possible  reasons for people to share spatial footprints, this paper invites  more research on perception of geoprivacy.

Keywords-privacy; geoprivacy;  location;  georeference; Twitter;  location-based services

I. INTRODUCTION  Geographic information is essential for many aspects of social life. Daily activities, such as navigation in space, require the locations of places and relationships among them. For example, people rely on knowledge of transportation networks in local areas to find the direction from home to work place.

Geographic information has also been used to study spatial patterns of social phenomena. As early as the mid-1800s, John Snow plotted on a map the locations of deaths by cholera in London, and found a water pump on Broad Street as the source of disease. Nowadays, geographic information systems (GISs) have been adopted to study a wide range of subjects, including public health [1] and crime patterns [2]. While geographic information was traditionally produced only by authorities in mapping agencies, now it is easy to obtain locational information of geographic features with the aid of geospatial technologies. Global Positioning System (GPS) devices, for instance, enable anyone to easily identify the location of any object with good spatial accuracy. High-resolution remote sensing imagery technologies provide regular update of large areas on the Earth?s surface. Map-making is no longer an activity performed only by the government. It has become a global effort conducted by millions of people all over the world, demonstrated in projects such as OpenStreetMap (http://www.openstreetmap.org/) and Google Map Maker (http://www.google.com/mapmaker).

Although geographic information has undoubtedly played a critical role in human activities, the release of geospatial data to the public arouses debate on associated ethical issues, such as privacy. A map of cancer or an infectious disease at point locations may put involved people at unexpected risk.

Therefore, individual geospatial data collected by the government are usually aggregated to protect individual privacy, as required by law. For example, all individual health data must be aggregated to the level of zip code containing more than 20,000 people according to the privacy rule of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/summary /privacysummary.pdf).

It is possible to impose certain regulations on government agencies in terms of the use and disclosure of individual geographic data. However, when data collection is no longer a process monopolized by the government, it is difficult to trace every piece of geographic information by its origin and transformation, as well as to identify data providers. People, whom the law tries to protect may willingly share their private locations and daily activities with the public through social media and social networking services, such as Twitter, Facebook, and Foursquare. For these individuals, important geopersonal information may be inferred by analyzing their online activities. Do their behaviors imply changed perception of geoprivacy? Or are they just not aware of how much they have chosen to share with the public?

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses privacy issues in geospatial data and methods for geoprivacy protection. Section 3 describes a new source of geospatial data: volunteered geographic information (VGI) [3].

Section 4 presents evidence of location disclosure in georeferenced tweets. Section 5 discusses people?s motivation for sharing spatial footprints and perception of privacy, followed by conclusions and future research directions in Section 6.



II. PRIVACY IN GEOSPATIAL DATA  Individual geographic data is important for understanding spatial patterns and addressing many social problems, including modeling of health events in spatial epidemiology [4].

However, the use of sensitive geographic information causes privacy concerns among GIS critics [5]. For instance, georeferenced individual health data are very useful for  Supported by the US National Science Foundation (No. 0849910) and the US Army Research Office (No. W911NF-09-1-0302).

studying the distribution and spread of diseases, but disclosure of such information may put patients into a disadvantageous position. One solution adopted by government agencies is aggregation of individual data into a geographic unit that contains a large number of people, so as to prevent individual identification based on location. Although this method is effective for protecting individual geographic privacy, it limits the types of analysis that can be performed on aggregated data and introduces uncertainty into the dataset in the aggregation process, by creating Modifiable Areal Unit Problem (MAUP) [6,7]. Consequently, some important social questions, such as possible sources of disease, cannot be answered. To preserve individual spatial distributions, researchers have proposed geographical masking as a method to retain original spatial patterns and meanwhile protect confidentiality of individuals, by modifying locations of point data appropriately [8,9]. In these methods, perturbation radius is a key parameter in the masking procedure: there is a trade-off between privacy protection and analysis accuracy. When the perturbation is above a certain threshold, the analysis result is substantially different from the original data. In contrast to an analytical comparison between original and masked geographic data, Leitner and Curtis [10] investigated the perceived visual pattern difference after a map is geographically masked. In addition to concerns over health data provided by official sources, such as the Department of Health, maps included in mass media may also cause the risk of privacy violation. For example, a map of the mortality locations during Hurricane Katrina published in the Baton Rouge Advocate newspaper was used to identify house locations within approximately one and half city blocks [11].



III. VGI IN THE ERA OF BIG DATA  We have entered the era of big data. Emails, blogs, photos, videos, and geographic datasets have been generated every day by possibly anyone with access to necessary technologies.

These data are also widely disseminated over the Internet through websites such as Twitter, Flickr, Youtube, and OpenStreetMap. For the first time in history, people are able to collect vast volumes of data on various aspects of human life, from conversations about mundane chores of daily life and fluctuation of emotions, to discussions on major scientific breakthroughs and debate on critical political decisions. Many large online datasets do not only record stories of celebrities as in the old times, but also lives of ordinary people. According to a recent survey conducted by an Internet security company AVG, 92% of babies in the U.S. have an online presence before they reach the age of two, in the form of an email, a social network profile, spatial footprints, and so on. The large volumes of data are referred to as big data, which provide a great potential to study the complex systems of human life on a large number of people.

VGI, one specific type of user generated content with a spatial element, is a new source of geographic data that are produced by citizens using geospatial technologies including GPS units and Web 2.0 for data collection and distribution.

One famous VGI project is OpenStreetMap (OSM) with the goal of creating a free editable map of the whole world. The data contributed to the OSM database have been proved very useful in many applications, especially for some areas of the  world that lack adequate geographic data. For example, when the Haiti Earthquake happened in 2010, there was almost no appropriate geographic information for Port-au-Prince. Within only 48 hours after the earthquake, contributors from all over the world used the OSM platform to produce a possibly most accurate and complete map of Port-au-Prince, which was later used for rescue efforts on the ground. Geographic information produced and disseminated through social media and social networking services has also been used for emergency response and management [12,13].

In addition to geographic information that is deliberately created by volunteers with some geographic purpose in mind, there is another type of geographic information that is recorded as digital spatial footprints [14]. Digital spatial footprints are traces of locations left by people when they move around the Earth?s surface, particularly those recorded by social media or location-based services in a digital form. These footprints could be locations associated with tweets in Twitter, or places attached to photos uploaded to Flickr. The digital locations reveal places a person has visited and even the time spent in each place. Some location-based services, such as Google Latitude, even allow people to be located by others in real time.

One major motivation to disclose location information is to share stories with family and friends and to find local people with common interests. While some people may be reluctant to share locations with the general public, a substantial number of people do so.



IV. LOCATION DISCLOSURE IN GEOREFERNCED TWEETS  Most social networking services give users the choices to turn on or off the location. For people who leave the location option on, some are willing to share their whereabouts with the world, while others may not be aware of their locations being visible to others. In this study, we used georeferenced tweets collected from Twitter to infer people?s home and work places.

A. Data  The data were collected using Twitter?s public API and stored in a MySQL database. We collected all georeferenced tweets within the bounding box of Los Angeles (LA) County in California, USA between January 21 and March 7, 2011. In total, there were 506,016 georeferenced tweets generated by 24,369 users. Information associated with each tweet includes tweet ID, tweet text, tweet time, tweet location, and user ID as shown in Fig. 1 (tweet ID and user ID are not displayed to avoid identification of individuals).

Figure1. Sample georeferenced tweets within LA County.

To study patterns of spatial footprints contributed by individual users, we grouped georeferenced tweets by user ID.

As displayed in Fig. 2, the number of georeferenced tweets created by different users produces the long tail effect: most    georeferenced tweets were generated by a small number of people. Among all users, the number of georeferenced tweets ranges from 1 to 5039. Table 1 demonstrates the top 5 users who generated most georeferenced tweets in our database.

Figure2. Number of georeferenced tweets generated by the top 1000 users.

TABLE I.  TOP 5 USERS WHO GENERATED MOST GEOREFERENCED TWEETS  User rank Number of georeferenced tweets  1 5039  2 3475  3 3268  4 3099  5 2601    B. Disclosed home and work locations  In order to infer home and work locations of individual users, we linked the georeferenced tweets with land use data provided by Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG). Land use data in LA contain use code at the parcel level. There are several major categories of land use: vacant land, single family residence, multiple dwelling, commercial, industrial, agricultural, exempt property, natural resources, and miscellaneous property. Under each major category, there are several sub-categories of land use. The georeferenced tweets generated by the top 5 users were extracted from the dataset and joined with the land use data. For each user, the number of georeferenced tweets located in each parcel was counted. The parcel with the largest number of tweets was regarded as a main location of user activities. Then the land use code was used to differentiate between home and workplace. For the 5 users, a large number of tweets were generated from a single parcel and nearby parcels due to positional uncertainty. The percentage of tweets and land use in the parcel with most georeferenced tweets for each user is shown in Table 2.

Although the percentage varies from 32.83% to 73.07%, four users created most tweets in a residential parcel and one user created most tweets in a commercial parcel. Furthermore, the time period associated with the georeferenced tweets contained in the parcel spanned across several days. For example, the georeferenced tweets created in one residential parcel by the  first user were generated from 4:54am on January 21, 2011 to 1:18pm on March 5, 2011. This result indicates that these parcels are probably the home locations for four of the five users, and work location for one. Fig. 3 demonstrates the tweet locations on top of a base map for the first user. This user had a wide coverage of tweet locations (Fig. 3a), but most tweets were clustered around a single family house (Fig. 3b).

TABLE II.  PERCENTAGE OF GEOREFERENCED TWEETS AND LAND USE IN THE PARCEL WITH MOST TWEETS FOR THE TOP 5 USERS      (a)    (b)  Figure3. Georeferenced tweets for the first user:  (a)  all tweet locations on top of the bing imagery;  (b) tweets clustered in a residential parcel (street names are blurred to avoid exact identification of  location).

V. CHANGED PERCEPTION OF PRIVACY?

As shown in the examples above, we can infer home and work locations of individuals using georeferenced tweets and auxiliary land use data. Although georeferenced tweets represent approximately only 1% of all tweets, some users share substantial amounts of activity locations and daily  User rank  Percentage of  georeferenced tweets  in the parcel  Land use of the parcel  1 73.07% Single family residence  2 35.39% Apartment complex  3 50.70% Combination Stores and Offices  4 32.83% Apartment complex  5 54.52% Apartment complex    trajectories. There may be two possible reasons. First, they are not aware of the type of geopersonal information they give out by tweeting with locations. For some location-based services, users must opt out of location visibility. By default, current location is automatically recorded in the database and shared with the public. If these users are aware of the disclosure of their home locations and possible uses of their georeferenced tweets, they may turn off the location option to protect privacy.

Second, users who share spatial footprints understand the possibility of revealing their locations. However, their level of concern about geographic privacy is low. As on some personal websites and blogs, people explicitly list their home addresses and cell phone numbers.

Although disclosure of sensitive personal information, such as bank accounts and credit cards, is always a concern for online security, people may be less worried about their geopersonal information: location of their presence, their home, and workplace. On the other hand, users sometimes have to give out some personal information to take advantage of the convenience and efficiency of information and communication technologies. Maybe not everyone has access to users? locations, but cell phone companies constantly collect location information from phone users. Whenever a credit card is swiped, the credit card company immediately knows the location of card user. When using Google Maps to search for Points of Interest (POIs) or to find direction between two places, people give out their locations to Google. Home location may no longer be a secret. Location information contributed by millions of people has been collected and used to predict real-time traffic for route suggestions. In an increasingly interconnected society, it is difficult or even disadvantageous not to share some type of geopersonal information. Since the 1990s, GIS critics have expressed their concern over privacy issues associated with the use of geospatial technologies. In the era of big data when many people are willing to share geographic information when using location-based services, the content of geoprivacy may be redefined, and location sharing is a choice.



VI. CONCLUSIONS  Geographic information has been proved essential for performing many spatial tasks, but privacy issues in the use geospatial technologies have been a concern. Laws and regulations are enforced by government agencies to ensure privacy protection before geographic data are released to the public. To protect geoprivacy and to preserve spatial patterns of original data, geographic masking techniques were developed. It may be relatively easy to control release of geographic data by the government, but it is almost impossible to regulate every piece of geographic information that is distributed over the Internet. In this paper, we inferred home and work locations from georeferenced tweets generated by  users in Los Angeles County of California, USA. When substantial amounts of georeferenced tweets are generated by a user across an extended period of time, it is possible to identify his or her home or work location with the aid of land use data.

When tweet locations are overlayed with a satellite image, it is even clearer that most tweets by the same user were created around a house, an apartment, or a workplace. It would be useful to further study why people share their locational information of daily trajectories. If they are not aware of the disclosure of locations and possible uses of such data, new design of social media and location-based services may be required to protect geopersonal privacy. On the other hand, when fully informed of possible location revelation, people may still decide to share locations for the sake of gained benefits from such disclosure, in which case, sharing of geopersonal information is a choice, not privacy violation.

