Thermal Infrared Face Recognition Based on   Lattice Computing (LC) Techniques

Abstract? This work introduces a novel methodology for human face recognition based on lattice computing kNN classification techniques applied on thermal infrared images.

Novel feature extraction and knowledge-representation engage populations of orthogonal moments represented by intervals? numbers, or INs for short. Preliminary experimental results compare well with the results by alternative classifiers as well as with alternative feature extraction techniques from the literature.

We point out the far-reaching potential of the proposed techniques to big data applications.

Keywords ? face recognition; infrared images; intervals? number; lattice computing; orthogonal moments

I. INTRODUCTION The problem of human face recognition has attracted a lot  of attention in various applications including video surveillance [1], human-machine interaction [2], computer vision [3], etc.

Even though successful results have been reported extensively, the proposed systems are, in general, characterized by a remarkably poor performance under different illumination conditions. Note that ?illumination? as well as ?occlusion? constitute significant difficulties for face recognition, especially in non-structured environments.

A promising approach for face recognition, especially under varying illumination conditions, is based on thermal infrared images. The latter images represent a face temperature distribution, that is an advantage for both illumination-invariant and robust-to-occlusion face recognition, even in the dark [4].

Despite the potential advantages of temperature patterns in face recognition problems, the high cost of infrared cameras has discouraged the widespread use of thermal images in the past.

Nevertheless, the ongoing growth of the semiconductor industry has resulted in an affordable drop of infrared cameras? cost as well as an increase of microprocessor speed towards enabling the proliferation of thermal infrared images in human face recognition applications of scale.

This work proposes a human face recognition system that carries out the following four information-processing tasks: #1. Image acquisition, #2. Face localization, #3. Feature extraction, and #4. Classification, as described next.

The ?image acquisition? task #1 is carried out by the camera hardware without any user intervention. The remaining  three tasks are carried out by user-designed software. More specifically, the ?face localization? task #2 carries out stable or, equivalently, robust face localization in the sense that it clearly separates the face from the background on an image.

The ?feature extraction? task #3 is carried out here using orthogonal moments [5], [6]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that orthogonal moments are employed with thermal infrared images, in particular for human face recognition. Finally, the ?classification? task #4 is carried out using techniques from the lattice computing framework outlined next.

Lattice Computing (LC) was initially defined as ?the collection of Computational Intelligence tools and techniques that either make use of lattice operators inf and sup for the construction of the computational algorithms or exploit Lattice Theory for language representation and reasoning? [7]. Recent work has extended the meaning of LC to denote ?an evolving collection of tools and methodologies that process lattice ordered data including logic values, numbers, sets, symbols, graphs, etc? [8]. LC techniques have been used successfully in a number of applications including robot localization [9], industrial dispensing [10], structure identification [11], shape recognition [12], human facial expression recognition [8], fingerprint classification [13], image classification [14] storage and recall of color images [15], etc. The LC techniques proposed here for face classification engage a distance function in the metric lattice of Intevals? Numbers (INs) [11], [13], [16], [17] by a kNN (with k=1) minimum distance classifier.

The novelties of this work include, first, the employment of (orthogonal) moment features as pattern descriptors of thermal infrared face images and, second, the engagement of granular kNN LC techniques for human face recognition where an IN is used as a ?meta-representation? of a population of moment features. The reported experimental results are promising.

More specifically, the proposed methodology achieves clearly higher classification rates compared to alternative classifiers from the literature.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II details the proposed face recognition methodology. Section III presents experimental results comparatively with alternative methods as well as alternative feature extraction techniques from the literature. Finally, section IV concludes by summarizing our contribution and discussing potential future work.



II. THE PROPOSED METHODOLOGY The proposed methodology carries out three information-  processing tasks, namely face localization, feature extraction and classification, as described in this section.

A. Face Localization As soon as a thermal infrared image is acquired, the human  face is localized in order to remove irrelevant image content.

This step is crucial because it specifies the part of an image where features are to be computed during subsequent steps.

Would the aforementioned image part include either irrelevant or trivial content then face recognition might deteriorate significantly, even fail.

Face localization on conventional images is typically carried out either by the Viola-Jones face detector [18] or by alternative face detectors from the literature. However, the aforementioned solutions typically fail with infrared images due to the high textured nature of the thermal infrared images.

More specifically, the aforementioned detectors work well with face images where the eyes, mouth and nose regions are clearly discernible. Nevertheless, the situation with a typical thermal infrared face image (Fig. 1) is quite different.

Taking into account the aforementioned difficulties, a new face localization method is proposed here, especially for thermal infrared face images, in five steps:  1. Image Conversion to Gray-scale: The acquired image, coded in the RGB color space, is converted to gray-scale format. Such a conversion removes useless color information by transforming temperature distribution to texture. In particular, the following formula is employed:  Gray-scale = 0.2989*R + 0.5870*G + 0.1140*B  2. Image Binarization: The gray-scale face image, produced in the previous step, is converted to a binary image towards separating the foreground (useful face information) from the background (useless information). In particular, the Otsu binarization [19] method is applied to calculate a suitable threshold value which is then used to produce the binary image by hard thresholding.

Fig. 1. A typical thermal infrared image of a human face.

3. Morphological Opening and Center of Mass Computation: The binary image of the previous step is morphologically opened by applying erosion, followed by dilation morphological operators [20] towards removing isolated image parts. The structure element is selected big enough so as to retain only the human face part of the image. Upon successful completion of the opening operation step, only a single segment of the initial binary image remains. Then, the center of mass of the aforementioned binary segment is computed by geometrical moments techniques [21] using the following formulas:  10 01  00 00 and  = =  GM GM x y  GM GM , (1)  where  ( ) 1 1  0 0 ,  M N n m  nm x y  GM x y f x y ? ?  = =  = ??  (2)  is the (n+m)th order geometric moment of the M?N pixels face image f(x,y); n and m are nonnegative integers, i.e. n, m?{0,1,2,?}.

4. Ellipse Masking: The center of mass computed in the previous step is used as the center of an ellipse masked on the face region. We remark that the major and minor axes of an ellipse are selected by trial-and-error. Note that since all human faces share a similar ?oval? shape, masking the face with an ellipse discards irrelevant face parts such as hair, ears, etc.

5. Face Cropping: The image region, already masked by an ellipse in the previous step, is used to select the corresponding part from the original face image. The latter part is finally cropped towards using it for feature extraction. The size of a cropped image is 128?128 pixels.

Fig. 2 displays the output image after each one of the above five steps, respectively, for the infrared face image in Fig.1. In conclusion, the output of the ?face localization? task #2 is a face region where redundant information (e.g., background, hair, body torso, etc.) has been removed.

B. Feature Extraction We have engaged a feature extraction method on a thermal  infrared image localized face so as to achieve dimensionality reduction while, at the same time, preserving discriminatory face characteristics. Therefore, we carried out feature extraction by computing orthogonal moments on a cropped face image (Fig.2(e)). We remark that orthogonal moments are known image descriptors, especially effective in pattern recognition applications, with a capacity to encode image content with minimum redundancy [22].

We experimented with two families of moments, namely Zernike moments (ZMs) and Tchebichef moments (TMs) defined in the continuous and discrete coordinate space, respectively [21], [22].

Fig. 2. Image preprocessing for face localization. (a) Gray-scale image.

(b) Binary image. (c) Opened image. (d) Ellipse masked image.

(e) Cropped face image.

C. Classification A classifier here was designed in the context of LC. The  corresponding mathematical background [23] is outlined next.

1) INs Meta-Representation: Our interest focuses on a complete lattice of Intervals' Numbers (INs) defined as follows.

Definition 1. Let I denote the set of intervals on the real  line including the empty set. An Intervals? Number (IN) is a function F: [0,1]?I which satisfies  1 21 2 1) .

2) [0,1] : .? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? =? h h  h P h P  h h F F  P F F (3)  The set F of INs, is a (metric) lattice with cardinality ?1, where ?1 is the cardinality of the set ?  of real numbers. The lattice order relation ?  in F is defined as  [ ]( )0,1 :? ? ? ?? h hF G h F G  (4) An algorithm for inducing an IN from a population of data  samples [10], [12] is described next. Consider a vector x  of  real data samples, e.g. 1 n= ( , , )?x xx . Two vector x  entries xi, xj are called successive iff there is no other entry xk, k?{1,?,n} such that < <? ?i j k i jx x x x x , where ? and ? are the min and max operators, respectively.

A strictly-increasing, cumulative real function 0: +? ? ?c  is computed from the entries of vector x  by, first, defining  ( ) { }{ } { }1 : 1,...,   and , 1,...,= ? ? ?i j j ic x x j n x x i nn  (5)  where S  denotes the cardinality of the set S ; finally, function  0: +? ? ?c  is defined by straight-line connecting two points  (xi,c(xi)) and (xj,c(xj)), where xi, xj are successive entries of vector x . Obviously, there is a unique real number x0.5 such that c(x0.5)=0.5. In conclusion, an IN is calculated from function c(.) such that for values less-than or equal-to x0.5 the corresponding IN envelope function equals 2c(x), whereas for values larger than x0.5 the corresponding IN envelope function equals 2(1-c(x)).

In practice, we represent an IN envelope by 32 equally spaced intervals from h=0 to h=1 included. It turns out that any population of data samples in vector x  can be represented by 32 intervals stored in a 32?2 size matrix. This is, potentially, a very useful property for the IN representation because it provides a fixed size ?meta-representation? for any data vector x  length. In other words, a single IN can represent any data population. Therefore, INs emerge as an instrument for dealing with big (numeric) data including satellite data [24] as well as multi-dimensional data [25]. Note that an IN represents all order data statistics [8], [10], [11].

The representation of a distribution of data samples (e.g., image moments) by an IN enables the employment of established, useful mathematical instruments for measuring a distance as well as for calculating a (fuzzy) degree of partial order of different data distributions [8], [13], [23].

2) LC-Minimum Distance Classifier (LC-MDC): A traditional minimum distance classifier (MDC) assigns a testing data sample (S) to the class (k*) represented by a prototype pattern *kP  such that *kP  corresponds to the  minimum distance; symbolically, ( ){ }arg min ,kkk Dist P S  ? =  (6)  where Pk is the prototype pattern of class k and Dist(.,.) is a distance function that quantifies the ?apartness? of Pk and S.

In our computational experiments below, both a class prototype pattern Pk and a testing data sample S are in the Cartesian product FN, where F is the lattice of INs. Recall that a metric distance function 0:  +? ? ?dF F F  is defined [13] as  ( ) ( )   , ,= ? h hd F G d F G dhF I  (7)  where function 0: +? ? ?dI I I is a metric distance given by   (a)                                (b)   (c)                                (d)   (e)    [ ] [ ]( ) ( )( ) ( )( ) ( ) ( )  , , ,  ;  ? ?? ?= ? ? ?? ? ? ?+ ? ? ?? ?  d a b c d v a c v a c  v b d v b d  I (8)  moreover, functions 0: +? ? ?v  and :? ? ? ?  are strictly  increasing and strictly decreasing, respectively. In conclusion, a metric distance function 0:  +? ? ?N Nd F F  is given by  ( ) ( ) ( )( ) ( )1 1  , ,..., , ,..., , N  N N i i i  d d F F G G d F G =  = =? FF G  (9)  This work employs a minimum distance classifier, namely Lattice Computing Minimum Distance Classifier (LC-MDC), described by (6), where function Dist(.,.) is calculated by (9).

Note that the following functions 0:  +? ? ?v  and :? ? ? ? have been used in (8)  ( ) ( ) ( )  and  21 ? ? ? ?  ? ? = = ?  + x Av x x x  e (10)  where ,? +??A  and ? ?? are parameters to be tuned by stochastic (e.g., genetic algorithm) optimization techniques.



III. COMPUTATIONAL EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS The recognition capacity of the proposed LC-MDC  classifier was studied as described in this section. Our proposed algorithms were implemented in software on the MATLAB platform executed on an Intel Core i5-2410M with 2.3 GHz CPU as well as 8 GB memory.

A. Benchmark Dataset The Terravic Facial IR benchmark dataset [26] was used to  evaluate the performance of alternative pattern recognition schemes. Since this dataset includes images of 20 persons with a variable number of images per person, a subset of this dataset was employed. More specifically, 70 images were selected randomly for each one of the first 10 persons resulting in a total of 700 images. The images are in 8-bit format with 320?240 pixels size and variable angle of view (front /left /right) in an indoor environment. For instance, images of the first four persons in this dataset are shown in Fig.3.

B. Data Preprocessing The applied structure element for the opening operator was  selected, by trial-and-error, as a 40?40 pixels rectangle, that is the smallest detectable face region. The remaining experimental settings were defined per case, as detailed below.

C. Comparative Experimental Results In order to evaluate the capacity of our proposed LC-MDC  classifier we carried out a number of comparative computational experiments with alternative feature descriptors as well as with alternative classifiers.

Fig. 3. Sample images from the Terravic Facial IR benchmark dataset.

(a) Person #1.  (b) Person #2.  (c) Person #3.  (d) Person #4.

First, regarding alternative feature descriptors, we considered Local Binary Patterns (LBP), that is a popular texture descriptor used in facial recognition applications [27], [28], [29]. More specifically, here we used LBP descriptors for the temperature distribution on infrared faces. Note that LBP descriptors are typically employed in the literature in two different configurations including, first, the entire image and, second, nonoverlapping blocks covering the entire image; in the latter case LBP histograms of blocks are concatenated resulting in a single histogram, namely LBP-C. In addition, we considered ZMs as well as TMs feature descriptors. Overall, the feature vectors for comparison included moments ZMs (36 features - up to order 10), moments TMs (36 features - up to order 5), uniform LBP (59 features) and LBP-C texture descriptors computed in a neighborhood of radius 1 and 8 samples. Note that each image was partitioned in four 64?64 pixels size blocks resulting in 59?4 = 236 features.

Second, regarding alternative classifiers, we considered three versions of the MDC classifier using three different distances, namely Euclidean, Chi Square (?2) and Manhattan, respectively, defined as follows.

Euclidean Distance ( ) ( )    , n  i i i  d p s =  = ??p s  (11)  Chi Square (?2) Distance ( )  ( )2   , n  i i  i i i  p s d  p s=  ? =  +?p s  (12)  Manhattan Distance ( )3 1  , n  i i i  d p s =  = ??p s  (13)   We remark that (11) - (13) measure the distance between two vectors [ ]1 2 3, , ,..., np p p p=p , [ ]1 2 3, , ,..., ns s s s=s  in the space ( )0+? n . In our simulations vectors p and s correspond to feature vectors ZMs, TMs, LBP and LBP-C.

(a)                                (b)   (c)                                (d)    Third, regarding alternative classification methodologies, we considered additional face recognition schemes, as explained below, whose application on the Terravic Facial IR dataset has been reported in the literature [28], [30].

In our classification experiments, the first image of each person in the dataset was used as a training datum, whereas all the remaining images were used as testing data. Hence, 10 feature vectors (prototypes) were used as ?training exemplars?, whereas the remaining 690 feature vectors were used for testing. Regarding, in particular, the LC-MDC classifier each feature vector was represented by a single IN.

The recognition performance, that is the percentage of correctly classified sample images over the total number of sample images for testing are summarized in Table I, for all feature descriptors as well as for all MDC classifier types.

Table I demonstrates that moment features produce better classification rates (between 2% - 11%) compared to LBP features, for all MDC classifiers. Moreover, the combination of moment features with LC-based MDC using INs outperforms any other classifier. In particular, Tchebichef moments (TMs) produce the best classification result (94.74%) outperforming by over 7% alternative MDC schemes. Note that the optimal parameter values in (10), that produced the best classification rate (94.74%) in Table I, were (A, ?, ?) = (1.197, 0.025, 10.00).

D. Additional Experiments Given the superiority of the TMs features as demonstrated  above, we further studied how the number of (moments) features effects the classification performance of the LC-MDC.

To this end additional experiments were carried out for TMs features and the LC-MDC classifier. In particular, TMs moments of order up to 1 /2 /3 ... /10 were computed resulting in (order+1)2 number of features in each case. Then the TMs moments were used to recognize the same faces as in the above experiments. The corresponding recognition rates for each TMs feature vector length are summarized in Table II.

Table II demonstrates that the length of the feature descriptor vector may have a significant impact on the recognition capability. More specifically, Table II shows that an optimum vector length of 16 TMs feature descriptors produces 95.43% recognition rate; that is a performance slightly higher (around 1%) which also corresponds to less than half the length of the best performing descriptor length (36) in Table I. We point out that our interest is in both effective feature descriptors and small length towards achieving high classification rate with low complexity.

E. Discussion Table III displays results by alternative face recognition  schemes from the literature as well as the aforementioned best 95.43% performance of the proposed LC-MDC classifier. In particular, in [30] a recognition performance of 85% has been reported on the same dataset using Center of Gravity (CoG) points as features and a conventional MDC. Whereas, in [28] a maximum recognition accuracy of 94.11% has been reported using LBP or Haar wavelet features with PCA and either a Neural Network (NN) or a conventional MDC on a subset of the Terravic Facial IR benchmark data set.

Extensive computational experiments here have demonstrated that the recognition performance clearly depends on the selected features as well as on the selected metric of a MDC classifier. A study of the free parameters including the (variable) length of the feature vectors might result in an improvement in classification performance. Nevertheless, such a study is beyond the scope of this work. Therefore, fixed feature vector lengths have been considered here.

TABLE I.  COMPARATIVE RECOGNITION RESULTS (%)  Feature Descriptor  Vector Length Classifier Type  MDC LC-MDC  d1 d2 d3  LBP 59 77.28 84.29 82.71 75.71  LBP-C 236 82.71 85. 43 83.57 83.43  ZMs 36 88.00 87.72 88.14 90.71  TMs 36 87.43 86.86 87.43 94.74     TABLE II.  RECOGNITION RESULTS (%) FOR DIFFERENT LENGTHS OF THE TMS FEATURE DESCRIPTOR  Order Vector Length Recognition  Rate  1 4 78.71  2 9 88.43  3 16 95.43  4 25 93.14  5 36 94.74  6 49 93.14  7 56 85.00  8 81 82.71  9 100 80.29  10 121 87.00     TABLE III.  COMPARATION WITH OTHER SCHEMES  Method Features Type Classifier  Type Recognition  Rate (%) [30] CoG MDC 85%  [28] LBP & PCA Wavelets & PCA MDC NNs 94.11%  Proposed TMs LC-MDC 95.43%

IV. CONCLUSION This work has demonstrated promising experimental results  regarding the application of LC classification techniques for human face recognition based on orthogonal moments features induced from thermal infrared images. More specifically, we recorded a clearly higher classification performance of our proposed techniques (TMs combined with LC-MDC) compared to the performance of alternative schemes. We attribute the success of our proposed classification scheme to the synergy of INs, which can represent all order data statistics, with orthogonal moment descriptors.

Future work plans include, first, a study of the effect of various parameters of our proposed classification scheme, second, the effect of varying environmental conditions (such as illumination) and, third, an extensive comparison with alternative classifiers from the literature. Additional plans include ?big data? applications, where INs may represent large data populations [24], [25].

