Random Access Congestion Control in DVB-RCS2

Abstract?The next generation of interactive satellite terminals is going to play a crucial role in the future of DVB standards. As a matter of fact in the current standard, satellite terminals are expected to be interactive thus offering apart from the possibility of logon signalling and control signalling also data transmission in the return channel with satisfying quality. Considering the nature of the traffic from terminals that is by nature bursty and with big periods of inactivity, the use of a Random Access technique could be preferred. In this paper Random Access congestion control in DVB-RCS2 is considered with particular regard to the recently introduced Contention Resolution Diversity Slotted Aloha technique, able to boost the performance compared to Slotted Aloha. The paper analyzes the stability of such a channel with particular emphasis on the design and on limit control procedures that can be applied in order to ensure stability of the channel even in presence of possible instability due to statistical fluctuations.

Index Terms?Transmission, Simulation, Channel Modeling, Congestion Control

I. INTRODUCTION  In consumer type of interactive satellite terminals, users  generate a large amount of low duty cycle and bursty traffic  with frequent periods of inactivity in the return link. Under  these operating conditions, the traditionally used Demand As-  signment Multiple Access (DAMA) satellite protocol does not  perform optimally, since the response time for the transmission  of short bursts can be too long. For this reason, in the recently  released specification for the next generation of Interactive  Satellite Systems (DVB-RCS2) [1], the possibility of sending  logon, control and even user traffic using Random Access (RA)  in timeslots specified by the Network Control Center (NCC)  is provided to Return Channel Satellite Terminals (RCST). In  particular, two methods are considered for RA: the first one is  the well known Slotted Aloha (SA) [2] [3], the second is called  Contention Resolution Diversity Slotted Aloha (CRDSA) [4]  [5] [6].

SA represents a well established RA technique for satellite  networks in which users send their bursts within slots in  a distributed manner, i.e. without any central entity coordi-  nating transmission. While this allows to reach an average  throughput around 0.36 [packets/slot] despite the possibility of collision among bursts from different users, SA works  A. Meloni gratefully acknowledges Sardinia Regional Government for the financial support of his PhD scholarship (P.O.R. Sardegna F.S.E. 2007-2013 - Axis IV Human Resources, Objective l.3, Line of Activity l.3.1.).

with very moderate channel load to ensure acceptable delay  and loss probability. This gap has been recently filled with  the introduction of a new technique named CRDSA that is  able to boost the throughput even up to values close to 1.

This technique is based on the transmission of a chosen  number of replicas for each burst payload, similarly to what  is done in Diversity Slotted Aloha (DSA) [7]. Burst copies  are randomly placed within a certain number of slots grouped  in a so called frame. However, differently from DSA, in  CRDSA each burst copy has a pointer to the location of the  other replicas of the same burst payload. Therefore, when  the frame arrives at the receiver an interference cancellation  (IC) process is accomplished. The IC process consists in  removing the interfering content of already decoded bursts  from the remaining slots in which collision occurred, in order  to try restoring the content of bursts that had all their replicas  colliding (from which its name). In particular [1] specifies two  possible variants of CRDSA:  ? Constant Replication Ratio CRDSA (CR-CRDSA): using  a constant number of replicas for each burst;  ? Variable Replication Ratio CRDSA (VR-CRDSA): using  a number of replicas that can differ among packets, since  the number of replicas is determined according to a pre-  defined probability distribution.

Document [1] also claims that the applications using the  interactive network may rely on network internal contention  control mechanisms to avoid sustained excessive packet loss  resulting from simultaneous destructive transmissions but the  definition of such a mechanism is claimed to be out of scope  for the document. For this reason, in this paper guidelines  for the design of such a system having simple yet effective  retransmission policies aiming at avoiding congestion at the  gateway when using RA in the next generation of satellite  terminals are presented. To do so, we rely on the analysis  carried out in [8], in which a stability model for the case of  CRDSA with geometrically distributed retransmissions was  presented. The analysis carried out in [8] is based on the  definition of Equilibrium Contour and Channel Load Line,  similarly to what was done in [9] for SA. The Equilibrium  Contour represents a set of circumstances for which the  ongoing communication is in equilibrium, in the sense that  the number of newly transmitted packets is equal to the    number of packets successfully sent so that the total number  of packets ?queuing for retransmission? do not change. The  Channel Load Line completes the analysis telling which of  these equilibrium points are actually of equilibrium for a  given scenario, depending on the user population and on the  probability that a user has a new packet to transmit. Based  on this model it is possible to understand where this points of  equilibrium for the ongoing communication are with respect to  the throughput. For this reason, this paper discusses parameter  settings able to ensure that the communication is taking place  in a desirable and stable manner. Moreover, similarly to what  was done in [10] for SA, control limit procedures able to  ensure congestion control in DVB-RCS2 when using CRDSA  as transmission mode are discussed.



II. SYSTEM OVERVIEW  Consider a multi-access channel populated by a total num-  ber of users M. Users are synchronized so that the channel  is divided into slots and Ns consecutive slots are grouped to constitute a so called frame. The probability that at the  beginning of a frame an idle user has a packet to transmit  is p0. When a frame starts, users having a packet to transmit place l copies of the same packet over the Ns slots of that frame. The number of copies l can be either the same for each packet or not. Packet copies are nothing else than redundant  replicas except for the fact that each one contains a pointer to  the location of the others. These pointers are used in order to  attempt restoring collided packets at the receiver by means of  Successive IC. For the sake of simplicity, throughout the paper  perfect IC and channel estimation are assumed which means  that the only cause of disturbance for the correct reception  of packets is interference among them. Moreover, FEC and  possible power unbalance are not considered. Given these  conditions, consider the example in Figure 1 representing a  frame at the receiver for the case of 2 copies per packet. Each  slot can be in one of three states:  ? no packet?s copies have been placed in a given slot, thus  the slot is idle;  ? only 1 packet?s copy has been placed in a given slot, thus  the packet is correctly decoded;  ? more than 1 packet?s copy has been placed in a given slot,  thus resulting in interference of all involved packets.

In DSA, if all copies for a given packet collided the packet is  surely lost. In CRDSA, if at least one copy of a certain packet  has been correctly received (see User 4), the contribution of  the other copies of the same packet can be removed from the  other slots. This process might allow to restore the content  of packets that had all their copies colliding (see User 2) and  iteratively other packets may be correctly decoded up to a  point in which no more packets can be restored (or until the  maximum number of iterations Imax for the IC process is reached, if a limit has been fixed).

When a retransmission process is present, if a packet has  not been decoded at the end of the SIC process a feedback  is used in order to inform users about the eventual failure of  their transmission thus giving birth to a closed loop between  USER 2  USER 3  USER 4  USER 1  N s  Figure 1. Example of frame at the receiver for CRDSA with 2 copies per packet; plain slots indicate that a transmission occurred for that user in that slot.

the transmitter and the receiver. Since this could cause the  channel to get to a state of congestion, a certain policy able to  retransmit unsuccessful packets and transmit newly generated  packets while keeping the channel in a desirable point of  operation is of great interest.



III. CHANNEL STABILITY MODEL  In this section we quickly revise the channel stability  model introduced in [8]. Consider the communication system  introduced in Section II. Each user can be in one of two  states: Thinking (T) or Backlogged (B). Users in T state  are idle users that generate a packet for transmission within  a frame interval with probability p0; if they do, no other packets are generated until successful transmission for that  packet has been acknowledged. Users in B state are users that  failed in successfully transmitting their packet and thus are  attempting to retransmit it (the probability that they retransmit  is pr in each frame). In the followings, we assume that users are acknowledged about the success of their transmission at  the end of the frame (i.e. immediate feedback). From [8], we  define  ? NfB : backlogged packets at the end of frame f  ? GfB = N  (f?1)  B pr  Ns : expected channel load of frame f due  to users in B state  ? GfT : expected channel load of frame f due to users in T state  ? GfIN = G f T +G  f B : expected total channel load of frame  f  ? PLRf (GfIN , Ns, l, Imax) : expected packet loss ratio of frame f , with dependence on the expected total channel load GIN , the frame size Ns, the burst degree distribution l and the maximum number of iterations for the SIC process Imax  ? GfOUT = G f IN (1 ? PLR  f (GfIN , Ns, l, Imax)) : part of load successfully transmitted in frame f , i.e. throughput.

The equilibrium contour can then be described as  GT = GOUT = GIN (1? PLR(GIN , Ns, l, Imax)) (1)    NB = GINPLR(GIN , Ns, d, Imax)Ns  pr (2)  For the channel load line, in the case of finite population  GT = M ?NB  Ns p0 (3)  while for M ? ? the channel input can be described as a Poisson process with expected value ? [thinking users] so that  GT = ?  Ns (4)  for any NB (i.e. the expected channel input is constant and independent on the number of backlogged packets). Notice that  the frame number f is not present, since in equilibrium con- ditions always the same value of throughput and backlogged  users is expected.

A. Definition of Stability  Equilibrium contours represented in Figure 2 divide the  (NB ,GT ) plane in two parts and each channel load line can have one or more intersections with the equilibrium contour.

These intersections are referred to as equilibrium points since  GOUT = GT . The rest of the points of the channel load line belong to one of two sets: those on the left of the equilibrium  contour represent points for which GOUT > GT , thus situa- tions that yield to decrease of the backlogged population; those  on the right represent points for which GOUT < GT , thus situations that yield to growth of the backlogged population.

From the considerations above, we can gather that an  intersection point where the channel load line enters the left  part for increasing backlogged population corresponds to a  stable equilibrium point, since it acts as a sink. In particular,  if the intersection is the only one, the point is a globally stable  equilibrium point (indicated as GGT ,N G B ) while if more than  one intersection is present, it is a locally stable equilibrium  point (indicated as GST ,N S B). If an intersection point enters the  right part for increasing backlogged population, it is said to  be an unstable equilibrium point (indicated as GUT ,N U B ) in the  sense that as soon as a statistical variation from the equilibrium  point occurs, the communication will diverge in one of the two  directions of the channel load.

Figure 2(a) shows a stable channel. The globally stable  equilibrium point can be referred as channel operating point  in the sense that we expect the channel to operate around that  point. With the word around we mean that due to statistical  fluctuations, the actual GT and NB (and thus also GIN and GOUT ) may differ from the expected values. In fact, the model deals with the expected values of GT and GB , and the actual values have binomially distributed probability for GB and GT with finite M and Poisson distributed probability for GT with infinite M . Nevertheless, averaging over the entire history of the transmission, simulations in [8] have shown that values  close to the expected ones are obtained thus validating the  assumption of considering the expected value.

N B  G T  C hannel load line  Channel operating  point  (a) Stable channel  N B  G T  C hannel load line  Channel saturation  point Channel operating  point  (b) Unstable channel (finite M)  N B  G T  C h  an n  el l  o ad  l in  e  Channel operating  point  (c) Unstable channel (infinite M)  N B  G T  Channel load line  Channel saturation  point  (d) Overloaded channel  Figure 2. Examples of stable and unstable channels  0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  f  T h ro  u g h p  u t  [G O  U T ]  Figure 3. Simulation throughput for CRDSA with Ns = 100 slots, Imax = 20, p0 = 0.143, pr = 1, M = 350 and f indicating the frame sequential number (i.e. the time from the beginning of the communication in frame time units.)  Figures 2(b) and 2(c) show two unstable channels respec-  tively for finite and infinite number of users. Analyzing this  two figures for increasing number of backlogged packets, the  first equilibrium point is a stable equilibrium point. Therefore  the communication will tend to keep around it as for the  stable equilibrium point in Figure 2(a) and we can refer to  it once again as channel operating point. However, this is    not the only point of equilibrium since more intersections  are present. Therefore, due to the abovementioned statistical  fluctuations, the number of backlogged users could pass the  second intersection and return to the right part of the plane,  causing an unbounded increase of the expected number of  backlogged users in the case of infinite M (Figure 2(c)) or an increase till a new intersection point is reached in the case of  finite M (Figure 2(b)). In the latter case, this third intersection point is another stable equilibrium point known as channel  saturation point, so called because it is a condition in which  almost any user is in B state and GOUT approaches zero. In the former case of infinite M , NB will increase indefinitely and we can say that a channel saturation point is present for  NB ? ?. The effect of this saturation is that the related throughput falls off to a value close to zero as illustrated in  Figure 3 for the case of unstable channel with finite M . Finally Figure 2(d) shows the case of an overloaded channel. In this  case there is only one equilibrium point corresponding to the  channel saturation point. Therefore, even though the channel is  nominally stable, the point of stability occurs in a non-desired  region. For this reason this case is separated and distinguished  from what is intended in this work as stable channel.



IV. DESIGN CHOICES AND PARAMETER SETTINGS  Given l, NS , Imax, in this section we will extensively dis- cuss the role of M , p0, pr and explain how the communication state changes when changing them. First of all this is important  in order to understand the relations to be considered in the  design phase. Moreover, the same discussion is introductory  to understand how control policies can help to obtain better  performance and a stable channel even in case of statistical  fluctuations that could yield to instability.

Consider Figure 4. The first thing we can notice is that M and p0 only influence the channel load line while changing pr corresponds to a change of the equilibrium contour. In Figure 4(a) we can see that p0 influences the slope of the channel load line that becomes steeper when increasing p0.

This is intuitive to understand since for fixed M , if pA  < pB   then GAT < G B T . Figure 4(b) shows that M shifts the channel  load line up and down if the population size is respectively  increasing or decreasing. From Equation 3 we can notice that  the value M is nothing else that what is known in literature as  q, that is the intersection of the line with the y-axis. Finally pr determines a shift upward of the channel load line for smaller  values of pr. As we can see in Figure 4(c) if the value pr is sufficiently small, it is possible to stabilize a channel initially  unstable. This represents the ground base for one of the control  policies shown in the next section.



V. CONTROL LIMIT POLICIES  Previous sections highlighted that statistical variations can  yield to instability even in case of initially well-performing  channels (see Figure 3). To render a channel of that type stable  2 straightforward solutions are available: the first is to use a  smaller value for the retransmission probability giving then  rise to a larger backlogged population for the same throughput  value; the second is to allow a smaller user population size  M thus resulting in a waste of capacity. A third solution, that is the one analyzed in this paper, is the use of control  limit policies to control unstable channels by applying the  countermeasures above in a dynamic manner. In this section  we analyze control procedures of the limit type able to ensure  stability. This procedures recall those used in [10] for SA. In  particular two simple yet effective dynamic control procedures  are considered: the input control procedure (ICP) and the  retransmission control procedure (RCP). These two control  procedures are based upon a subclass of policies known as  control limit policies, in which the space of the policies is  N B  G T  p  +  p  ?  (a) Changing p0  N B  G T  M +  M ?  (b) Changing M  N B  G T  p r  ?  p r  +  (c) Changing pr  Figure 4. Graphical representation of the changes in the (GT ,NB) plane when increasing or decreasing one of the parameters? values.

generally composed of two actions and a critical state that  determines the switch between them, known as control limit.

In this case the control limit is a critical threshold for a certain  number of backlogged users N?B .

A. Input Control Procedure  This control procedure deals with new packets to transmit.

In particular, two possible actions are possible: accept (action  a) or deny (action d) and the switch between them is deter- mined by the threshold N?B as previously mentioned.

B. Retransmission Control Procedure  As the name says, the retransmission control procedure  deals with packets to retransmit and in particular with their  retransmission probability. In particular two different  retransmission probabilities pr and pc are defined that represent respectively the action taken in normal  retransmission state (action r) and in critical state (action c).

From the definition above it is straightforward that it must be  pr > pc. The switch between these two modes is determined by the threshold N?B .

N B  G T  (a) ICP  N B  G T  p n  p c  (b) RCP  Figure 5. Control limit policy examples.

Figure 5 shows two examples corresponding respectively to  channels using ICP and RCP. As we can see both policies ac-  complish the same task of ensuring channel stability. However,  while ICP controls the access of thinking users, RCP controls  the access of backlogged users.



VI. SIMULATION RESULTS  In this section we consider some cases of unstable channels  that call for a control policy able to prevent them from satura-  tion. In all the cases analyzed M and p0 are fixed (stationary) and we consider pr = 1 and pc small enough to ensure a stable channel. All the scenarios have been simulated for 106  frames. The three scenarios considered are the followings:  1) CRDSA with 3 replicas, M = 300, p0 = 0.2, pc = 0.39 resulting in NUB = 25 when pr = 1;  2) CRDSA with 3 replicas, M = 200, p0 = 0.34, pc = 0.5 resulting in NUB = 12 when pr = 1;  3) CRDSA with 2 replicas, M = 220, p0 = 0.25, pc = 0.8 resulting in NUB = 39 when pr = 1.

10 20 30 40 50 60 70  0.4  0.45  0.5  0.55  0.6  N?B  T h ro u g h p u t  case 1) with ICP  case 2) with ICP  case 3) with ICP  case 1) with RCP  case 2) with RCP  case 3) with RCP  Figure 6. Average throughput versus N?B  10 20 30 40 50 60 70         N?B  % ra te  o f N  B >  N? B  case 1) with ICP  case 2) with ICP  case 3) with ICP  case 1) with RCP  case 2) with RCP  case 3) with RCP  Figure 7. Percent rate of application of the limit control policy versus N?B  Figure 6 illustrates the results in terms of throughput both  for ICP and RCP for the study cases enumerated above versus  N?B . Figure 7 shows the related percentage of frames in which the channel has NB > N?B so that the critical action of the control limit policy is applied (d or c depending on the case).

First of all we can notice that both for ICP and for RCP,  the range of flatness is wider when operating far from the  throughput peak. This is really important for the following  reason. Imagine a real application scenario with large delay (as  it is the case in satellite communications). Differently from the  case analyzed in this paper, when the N?B threshold is crossed the control limit policy needs a certain propagation time before  it is applied. As a result the effective threshold is not N?B but some value N?B + ?, where ? depends on the drift of the    0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7            G T  N B  Equilibrium contour for case 1) with retx probability p r  Equilibrium contour for case 1) with retx probability p c  Channel load line for M=300 and p =0.2  Channel load line for M=170 and p =0.2  Figure 8. Equilibrium contours for CRDSA 3 and channel load lines  number of backlogged users for the particular case and on the  propagation delay. Therefore the wider is the flat region, the  less the performance optimality of the controlled channel will  be influenced by the propagation delay. The reason for this  difference of flatness can be detected from Figure 7 where it  can be noticed that in general terms the number of time spent  in critical state is greater when closer to the throughput peak.

This comes from the fact that the operating point of stability  and the point of instability NUB are generally closer when approaching the throughput peak while the PLR is greater thus  determining are more probable drift beyond NUB .

Let us now consider the difference between the case with  2 and 3 replicas. As we can see, in the case of 2 replicas a  degradation of the throughput and a high percentage of time  spent in the critical state is also found for a small N?B value. In general terms, when a control limit policy is applied it does  not make sense to choose N?B < N U B , therefore this result  does not seem to be of interest for our analysis. However let  us consider once again the case with large propagation delay.

If NB > N?B the control limit policy will switch to critical state until NB < N?B is verified. But as previously mentioned users do not immediately switch state due to the propagation  delay, so that in this case the critical policy is applied for  a certain period also when NB is smaller than N?B and this could result in suboptimal performance especially in the case  of ICP as shown in Figure 6.

Last but not least let us discuss the results when instead of  dynamic control limit policy, the channel is designed by stati-  cally limiting the number of allowed users or by decreasing the  retransmission probability so that the channel is always stable.

Figure 8 shows the case of CRDSA with 3 replicas, M = 300, p0 = 0.2, pc = 0.39. In the first case, the number of allowed users must be decreased to approximately M = 170 so that the resulting average throughput is around 0.32 . The second case consists in decreasing the retransmission probability (as done  in Figure 8 to 0.39). Also in this second case the resulting  throughput is diminished, although most of the times this  decrement is of small entity. However another effect is that  the average packet delay is increased. Therefore depending on  the application also this second solution could be problematic.



VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  In this paper a model for computation of the channel stabil-  ity when using Contention Resolution Diversity Slotted Aloha  as Random Access mode in DVB-RCS2 has been outlined.

After analyzing the influence of some crucial parameters such  as the transmission and retransmission probability and the  population size, the paper introduces the concept of control  limit policies for such a technique and outlines empirical  yet effective procedures for congestion control in case of  channels that present the possibility of drifting away to a zone  of saturation with low throughput. Finally, simulation results  demonstrate how dynamic control limit procedures can help  avoiding congestion while allowing the channel to behave in  a optimal manner despite the possibility of instability and also  in presence of large propagation delay. This work has mainly  concentrated on the throughput resulting from the application  of this channel procedures. However this represents only half  of the story since also the related packet delay associated  to successful packets is of utmost interest. For this reason  we are currently preparing an extended version of this work  where also this second aspect is analyzed together with other  important points that have been omitted here for the sake of  concision.

