Investigation of Students? Attitudes to Lectures with Text-Analysis of Questionnaires

Abstract?The eventual goal of our study is to help teachers who give lectures in universities and other educational orga- nizations with advising them as well as to help the attending students in order to maximize the learning performance of student. In order to achieve this goal we take the model- based approach. We construct student?s learning model at first, and then extract appropriate tips on teaching for teachers and on learning for students. In this paper, as an attempt in this approach, we analyze the text data which were obtained as answers to a term-end questionnaire in a course. Firstly we make a grouping of students based on a correspondence analysis of students and words from the answers to a question about the student?s achievement in taking the course. Then we compare these student groups in combination with other data such as examination scores as achievement, and attendance and homework scores as effort, as well as the features of words used in the answered texts. We have found that the students who have good achievement scores often give the comments from a wider view than what they actually learned in the class. On the other hand the students who give the comments using those terms which were taught in the class tends to have low achievement scores. The methods for in-depth analysis used in this paper are supposed to be appropriate tools for complementing the results from using the big data analysis methods and need to be developed more toward the future.

Keywords-Text Mining; Correspondence Analysis; Free De- scription Questionnaire; Educational Data Mining; Lecture Data Analysis;

I. INTRODUCTION It has been pointed out in Japan that the students?  academic skills and achievements have been decreasing.

There are various factors behind it. One factor comes from the declination of birth rate and the increase of university enrollment rate. As a result, universities compete so hard that even the students with low achievements are able to enter universities. Another factor is that the students have been educated under the misconception of ?yutori (or relaxed) education? and thus education were considered to be done without stress and thus let them learn as they want, so that quite a lot of students have not been encouraged to learn even the fundamental academic skills and knowledge. Due to the reason that such factors are complicatedly intertwined, quite a lot of universities are facing the problem of providing with higher education to the students with low academic skills together with low motivation to learning.

In order to cope with this problem, universities have introduced remedial courses for students who need to learn preparatory materials, and they also enhance the courses for the first year students to be got used to the style of teaching in university. Furthermore, universities have introduced the FD (Faculty Development) program as a promotion of changes of the consciousness of university professors and improve the quality of university education.

However, students? academic skills do not look to be  improved even with such a lot of efforts. Thus we assume the essential problem lies in students rather than professors with their educational ability. In combination with our observation in the lectures, we presume that the most important factor on this problem is not on the students? academic skills and the amount of knowledge, but on their attitudes such as eagerness to learn, curiosity to learn something new, motivation to learn, and other mental tendencies. Thus it is important to take the student side into consideration even more, which we would call SD (Student Development), in order to find a solution of the issue we have.

Based on such an awareness, our eventual goal of the  study presented in this paper and our other related papers is to find out the most appropriate teaching/advising/leading methods for the students learn the most out of the lectures.

In order to achieve this goal, we take the model-based  approach, where (1) make a student?s learner model which includes attitudes to learning, and (2) utilize the model and advise the student in order to maximize the student?s achievement. As a part of this approach, this paper presents a case study of analyzing a group of class data; answer to a questionnaire, and attendance/homework/examination scores. The model dealt with in this paper aims to represent the student?s learning style and attitudes, which are obtained in the analysis of lecture data.

Goda et al. [1][2][3] take a similar approach and present  a method of text analysis, where text data are given by students as reports about the everyday lectures. Our studies are different as we use such data as attendance, homework, exercise, and term-end examination, which are obtainable in ordinary lectures. Another difference of our approach is that we do not intend to estimate the student?s achievement. We focus on to make a learner model of students.

DOI 10.1109/IIAI-AAI.2013.34    DOI 10.1109/IIAI-AAI.2013.34     Other studies of educational data analysis have been conducted in the research fields such as KDD (Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining) and in EDM (Educational Data Mining). The paper [15] gives a comparative study of data mining algorithms for classifying students using data from e-leaning system. Its major interest is on predicting the student?s outcome. Ours is on rather the student?s psycho- logical tendency in learning such as eagerness, diligence, seriousness, etc., which is different from that in KDD and EDM where they use the target data those are obtained from learning management systems, whereas our target data are those we can create in everyday lectures.

Our aim is to develop practical methods for extracting  tips for improving lectures from data. We intend to develop the tools which are applicable even to small data [6]. We have been taking such an approach in the analysis of library data. In the papers [7], [8], [10] and [11], we take library?s circulation records as the target data and analyze them with proposing new concepts such as expertise levels of books and library patrons. The seat usage data of a library were also analyzed in [5]. From these experiences we are convinced that such an approach is useful also for small data.

In order to achieve the aim, rest of the paper is organized  as follows. In Section II, we describe about the target data.

In Section III, we show some of our findings in our previous analysis. In Section IV, we conduct the analysis by focusing attention to the words used by the students in the answer texts of a question about their final evaluation on the effects of taking the class. Finally in Section V, we conclude the discussions and findings of this paper.



II. TARGET DATA The data used in this paper come from the class of ?In-  formation Retrieval Exercise? in 2009 in a women?s junior college [6][7][9]. There were 35 attending year 2 students who are going to graduate. This is one of the compulsory courses for librarian certificate. Thus the students of this course were more diligent than average.

The most important aim of the course is to let the students  become expert information searchers in the sense they have enough knowledge about information retrieval, search, find- ing, and also have enough skills in finding appropriate search engine site and search keywords based on the understanding of the aim and background of the retrieval. The course consists of 15 lectures. The attendant is supposed to solve a small quiz at every lecture, which turns into the attendance record and the basic data for attendance score.

Also homework is assigned every week. Its aim is to make  the students review what they have learned in the class and to study preliminary knowledge for the next class. At the same time, the students are requested to write a lecture note every week, which is also aiming to make the students review what they have learned. The homework score reflects the frequency and quality of the submitted homeworks.

A  C Group  A 73 8  EC3  Average = 73.8  Average = 65.5D2 D1  BD Group  Figure 1. Correlation between Examination Scores (x-axis) and Homework Scores (y-axis). Correlation Coefficient r ? 0.0  The term-end examination of the course consists of 3 problems/questions. The first question is about finding the Web sites of search engine, and summarizing their charac- teristic features, together with discussing about the methods for information retrieval. The second question is on finding the Web sites on e-books and on-line material services. The third question is to find and discuss about the information criminals in the Internet environment.

The aim of these questions is to evaluate the skill on in-  formation retrieval including the planning and summarizing skills that are supposed to be learned and trained in the course as they do their exercises in the classes and as they do their homeworks. The scores of term-end examination represent the evaluation results according to this aim.

The number of the answered items varies from student to  student. Among 35 students, 20 of them answered both of the evaluation scores for lectures and themselves. Thus we use these 20 score data in analysis on evaluations.

We also asked the students to answer to the questions  as the overall evaluation of them for the course. Some of them are: (Q1) what the student learns in the lectures, (Q2) good points of the lectures, (Q3) bad points that need to be improved, (Q4) the score of the lectures as a whole with the numbers from 0 to 100, where the pass level is 60 as in the same way to the examination score, ... (Q11) the score of the student herself in terms of her attitude and attitude toward the course from 0 to 100 as in the same way as in question 4, and finally (Q12) any other comments.



III. RESULTS OF PREVIOUS ANALYSIS  Figure 1 shows the correlation between the examination scores (x-axis) and the homework scores (y-axis). It is easy to cluster students with big central cluster together with some other students off the cluster, even though there is no statistical association between them; correlation coefficient r ? 0.0. The main cluster is the rectangular area that is formed from 50 to around 80 in examination scores and from 50 to around 90 in homework scores.

There exist some students away from this area. Student A, for example, takes the highest score in examination, whereas in terms of homework, her score is one of the more-than-average, but not the highest. Student B has the lowest homework score. However she gets the 4th highest examination score. She is a typical student who has high performance in comparison with effort.

On the other hand, the students in C group are the lowest  in examination scores. Their homework scores are mostly more than average and look like as if they do some amount of efforts. Thus they are opposite to Student B in the sense that their performances are very low in comparison with efforts they spent.

The students in D group have relatively low efforts in  homework scores and also have lower-than-average exami- nation scores. Actually these students belong to the major cluster in attendance score. Thus their efforts are somewhat superficial; they put efforts in attendance but they do not put more laborious efforts in homework.

By analyzing the relations of attendance and homework  scores as the indexes for effort and examination scores as the index for achievement, together with the scores in the questionnaires Q4 and Q11, we have found some interesting results. What we have found is that notable ratio of students have just attended the lectures and do their homeworks without intending to learn and thus without learning, which is against lecturer?s intention of letting them to learn. In other words, quite a lot of students? efforts are rather superficial which do not affect to the true improvement of their academic skills.

We have also analyzed the answers to Q11 and have  found that their self-evaluations have more correlation to their homework scores than achievement scores. This result also suggests that students major concern is rather on their efforts than on their achievements which is more important from the teacher?s point of view. See the papers [6], [7], [9], and [13] for more findings of the analysis.



IV. ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRES  A. Toward Analysis of Answers for Question 1  In this section, we chose Q1: ?What did you learn in this class? Did it help you?? for analysis because this question asked the students to summarize what they have learned in the class. The answer is given as a text that expresses the student?s recognition of her achievement.

In order to conduct text analysis, we have to transform  them into the data that are available for the analysis method we apply. One possible method might be creating data manually; one or more human(s) generate data by reading and judging the data for analysis. It is popularly done that a human judges if an opinion about a commercial product in a blog or twitter is positive, negative, or neutral, and create a raw data for opinion analysis.

Table I EXTRACTED WORD AND ITS OCCURRENCE (TOP 75)  Word Occ. Word Occ. Word Occ.

Search 88 Function 7 Site 3 Class 37 Result 7 Challenge 3  Information 37 Important 7 Answer 3 I think 34 Opportunity 6 Again 3 Library 33 Now 6 Overseas 3 Learn 32 Tag 5 Basic 3 Know 30 Previous 5 Find 3 Myself 21 Question 5 Device 3 How 21 Seek 5 Go 3 Now 17 See 5 Reference 3 Way 16 Type 5 Librarian 3  Examine 16 More 5 Time 3 Keyword 13 Adequate 5 Received 3 Are various 11 Various * 4 Collect 3  Use 10 Differ 4 Homework 3 Help 10 Exercises 4 Leave 3  Necessary 9 Use of 4 Introduction 3 Use 9 Lecture 4 Detailed 3 Internet 8 Learn 4 World 3  Personal Computer 8 Body 4 Correct 3 Think 8 Knowledge 4 Other 3 Do 8 Tune 4 Large 3 Get 8 Really 4 Content 3  Various * 7 Good 4 Difficult 3 Feel 7 Way 3 Usually 3  * different words in Japanese  However such method may cause of creating biased, or subjective, data because the created data produced by humans depend on their interpretation of the expression and thus may differ from human to human. In this paper we conduct analysis of word occurrences in text, in order to avoid such subjective bias and find more objective results.

On the other hand we are able to pursue analysis about words by using information about relations between words, their parts of speech, etc.

We use the KH Coder[4] as the analysis tool in this paper.

KH Coder is a free software, which is equipped with the facilities of morphological analysis for Japanese language, and can extract words, or inflection processing together with statistical analysis including correspondence analysis. In our analysis we consider the answer of each student as one document for KH Coder.

B. Extraction of Words which Appear in the Answers Table I shows the top 75 words in their frequencies of  appearance in the texts, together with their frequencies. The verbs are conjugated. Note that two appearences of the word ?Various? marked with ? are different expressions in Japanese which have the common corresponding expression     Grp1  Grp2 Grp3  %  ) p o n e n t2  ( .4   Grp4  C o m  p  Grp5  Component1 (10.59%)  Figure 2. Correspondence analysis map of related words with students.

(The underlines for each student, and the grouping line and the number by the author.)  in English. The shaded words are those relating deeply to the subject the students have learned in the lecture and other non-shaded words are generic words.

We can see in Table I the words related to the lectures  appear in high frequencies. For example, the word ?Search? appears 88 times in the answers to Q1, which is the most frequently used one among all words. Also the words ?Infor- mation?, ?Library? and so on appear in the list. The lecture- related words are 10 (13%) among 75 wrods, whereas 6 (21%) among 28 with frequencies more than 6.

C. Correspondence Analysis of Words and Students It is important to know not only the words themselves but  also their relations such as word to word, word to student.

Analysis of such association would give us more useful information about students and their attitudes to learning.

Figure 2 shows the results of the correspondence analysis  in a two-dimensional principle component space. The words appeared in the figure are those in Table I; those with more than 2 times of appearance for Q1. The underlined ones with st0** in the figure represent the students of the class.

Now we divide the students in Figure 2 into 5 clusters;  from Grp1 to Grp5. Table II summarizes some of their features such as number of students of the group, the member?s average examination scores, their variance, and some others. The groups consist of 3 members in minimum (Grp4) and 16 members in maximum (Grp5). For the average scores, Grp3 is the highest with the score 83.5, which locates in the upper-right part in Figure 2. Grp5 takes the lowest score with 59.3 which locates in the lower-left corner. As we check the P-value, which is 0.0469, and it can be seen  Table II ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE TABLE OF 5 GROUPS.

Group No. Number of samples Average Variance  Grp1 4 65.2 27.3 Grp2 5 70.5 98.8 Grp3 5 83.5 107.2 Grp4 3 69.8 68.7 Grp5 16 59.3 335.3  Source Sum ofSquares Degree of Freedom Mean Square  Between Samples 2399.34 4 599.84 Within Samples 6072.57 28 216.88  Total 8471.91 32 ?  F-Statistics P-value F- Critical Value  2.76 0.0469 2.71  Table III STUDENT CLASSIFICATION OF TEXT AND TEST SCORE.

Test Score Classification  Standardized Values Text Classi.Examination Homework Attendance  A 2.08 0.79 0.47 Grp3 B 0.97 -3.06 -3.18 Grp5 C1 -1.94 0.55 0.96 Grp5 C2* -1.65 0.31 -1.23 ? C3 -2.21 -0.05 0.96 Grp5 C4 -2.37 0.91 0.23 Grp5 D1 -0.70 -2.34 -0.50 Grp2 D2 -0.85 -2.34 0.23 Grp5 E -0.23 -0.05 0.23 Grp1  The item marked with ? indicates the student gives no answer to the question and thus does not belong to any group.

that there is a difference between the averages of these five test scores among the groups statistical significance at the 5% level.

D. Investigating Locations of the Students A to E  In Section III, we have classify the students based on the effort-achievement analysis. We picked up some students who are typical in some sense and called them from A to E.

We would like to see their positions in our correspondence map (Figure 2).

Table III shows the examination, homework, and atten-  dance scores in standardized values, together with the group (from Grp1 to Grp5) they belong to. Standardized scores in the table are obtained by standardized mean value becomes 0 and standard deviation becomes 1 so that the different scores are comparable in a uniform way. Thus negative values indicate that the score is less than average of the class. The shaded items indicate that the value is within the lowest 2.5%.

All the students except one locating in the lowest 30% in either scores of examination, homework, or attendance belong to Grp5. Even though the exceptional student belongs to Grp2, we can see in Figure 2 that Grp2 and Grp5 are located very closely so that we can say that all the students locate to within the area for Grp5 and its surrounding area.

Conclusively, we can say there is no significant difference between classification by effort and achievement scores and that by used word in the text analysis.

E. Relation between Used Words and Examination Scores We deal with the correlation between the characteristic  words that appear in the answers to Q1 and the examination scores. Table IV shows the top 10 characteristic words of some of the students using the Jaccard similarity measure.

Note that the Jaccard similarity of student p and q is defined as the ratio of the number of words which are commonly used by p and q against the total number of words which are used either or both of p and q. Thus the Jaccard similarity ranges between 0 and 1. The value becomes 1 if every words used by p and q are the same, and it becomes 0 if p and q do not use a word in common.

The words marked with ???, ??? and ??? in Table IV  indicate that they are classified as those for the general information, for frequently appearing words that relate to the lecture, and for characterizing the subject, respectively.

The values in the right-hand side of (st0**) represents the examination score of the student.

Table V shows the number of characteristic words, num-  ber of members, usage ratio of the characteristic words, and the average score of the examination, of each group from Grp1 to Grp5. The group having the highest examination score of 83.5 is Grp3, and it has the highest usage rate 2.40 as well. On the other hand Grp1 and Grp2 have the lowest usage ratio but have the 2nd and 4th highest examination scores. Thus we could not find a clear correlation between the usage ratios and the examination scores.

As we investigate further by taking attention on the words  used by the students, we can find that the students in Grp1 do not use many of the characteristic words and the correlations between the students are relatively low. Its examination score is the 4th highest among 5 groups.

For Grp2 (2nd highest in examination score) commonly  use such words as ?problem?, ?time?, and ?examination?, which are relating to the actual activity directly relating to the lectures. For Grp3 (the highest in examination score) characteristically use the technical characteristic words and those words from the broader point of view in comparing Japan and the world such as ?foreign?, ?national? and ?Japan?.

It is interesting to see that the words relating to the  homework matters do not appear in Grp3. Thus we can see that the students in Grp3 have the lectures in the standpoint of seeing things in a broad perspective of the lecture.

Table IV CHARACTERISTIC WORDS OF STUDENTS  Grp1 st001 st013 st015 st025  Think Method Answer Collect Keyword? Important Get TV Seek Consideration Data Practice Get Advance Arrangement Net Input Things Forecast Announcement Quick Important Angle Force Have a very hard time Think Surely Quality One Myself Extraction Art Put Search? Students Question Conceive Choose Necessary  Grp2 st007 st010 st012 st022 st034 How to choose Saving Give up Smooth Important Basic Effect Term Increase anddecrease Function Challenge Short time Words Margin Simple Other Lead Put in Occur Difficult Seek Everyday Other Collection Necessary Adequate Raise Collect Early Informa-tion? Get Familiar Tune Do Key? Do Time Differ A lot of Press Help Body Adequate Challenge PrintScreen Are vari- ous Internet? Help Time Search  Grp3 st005 st006 st003 st004 st014  Foreign? Library? Put to-gether Show Go  Library? Individuality Country Limit Foreigncountry Latest Summary Box Interesting Automatic Effort Take HP Photo Especially World Relationship Closed? Introduction Completely See Plus Books? Familiar Lending? IC? Wholecountry Appear Japan Electronic? Tags? At the sametime Root Copyright? Large Various Reference? Tackle Every time Usually Feel Also Province Learn Library?  Grp4 (Omitted) Grp5 (6 students out of 16) st002 st008 st011 st016 st017 st019  Layout Screen Website ?  Fresh Applica-tion A long time ago  Item Open Question In addi-tion to Uphill battle Question  Report Menu See Type Barry Really Study Word Rich Yahoo!? Find Now Writing style Save Qi Learn Nice I think  Master PC? Someday Now Accurate Learn Server? Help Little Google? Number Respond Begin Way Interest-ing Various  Com- pared Answer  Recently Sense Use Increase Prior Weak Problem Keyword?  Enor- mous Current     Table V USAGE RATE OF CHARACTERISTIC WORDS.

Group Charac- teristic Words  Number of Members  Usage Ratio  Average of Exam- ination Scores  Grp1 2 4 0.50 65.2 Grp2 3 5 0.60 70.5 Grp3 12 5 2.40 83.5 Grp4 4 3 1.33 69.8 Grp5 18 16 1.13 59.3  A lot of technical words appear in Grp4, the 3rd in examination score, and there does not appear frequent words.

The students in Grp5, the lowest examination score, uses quite a lot of words of frequent general information, and do not use technological words.

It is interesting to see that many students use the words  learned in the lectures such as ?learn?, ?master?, ?study?, ?useful? and ?used?. So we can guess they are too much concentrated on the words themselves and may not pay much attention to what they really mean to them and to the society they live.



V. CONCLUDING REMARKS We have conducted a morphological analysis of the an-  swers to Q1. With extracting the high frequency words using Jaccard similarity measure based on the hypothesis that students who use the similar words are close in their learning styles and thus in their outcomes. As we investigate by dividing the students into five groups according to the distance of the word usages, and have conducted an analysis of variance on the average of the examination scores, we found that there really are differences between the groups in their average scores.

We have the following problems for future research:  (1) To develop a method to devise new ideas further, and to perform refinement of dedication to the study of student effort, and attitudes to learning, especially further analysis of the text portion.

(2) By collecting data from a different class, to analyze them, and to verify if the results of this study are also holds.

(3) To generalize the analysis methods, and to integrate them into an automated data analysis system.

