Modeling MongoDB with Relational Model

Abstract? Relational databases have been prevailing for the last two decades, with features of clear semantics and ease of use with SQL supported by the underlying theory, relational algebra.

Relational databases provide good support for structural data management. However, recent development in IT brings forward big data, featuring extreme large volume and variety in data type and structures, and relational databases are difficult to handle such big data due to the strict constraints on data structure and data relations, and so on. On the other hand, NoSQL databases, including HBase, MongoDB, Cassandra, etc., are receiving their popularity for their capability in dealing with large amount of complex data in various structures. Currently there is no way to know the feasibility of the migration of traditional relational databases to NoSQL databases. The migration requires evaluating the feasibility of the migration and potential performance of the new systems. This paper investigates these issues by modelling one of the NoSQL database, MongoDB, with relational algebra. The modelling will allow the comparison of semantic expression powers between relational databases and MongoDB, analysing the feasibility of the migration of a relational database to MongoDB and its evaluation. The model is expected to facilitate the optimization of the new NoSQL database.

Keywords?Relational Algebra, Relational Model, SQL, NoSQL, MongoDB

I. INTRODUCTION Modern relational databases are established based on the  relational model of data proposed by E.F. Codd[1]. Codd defined the relational algebra and relational calculus on the basis of the relational model, with the primary set operators including union, intersection, selection, projection, and join.

Relational databases feature a simple and unified data model, with relations as the basic model to represent the world.

All entities are abstracted as relations, and the association and connection between entities are abstracted as relations as well.

All operations on the entities and their connections are performed on the corresponding relations.

Relations are represented as tables and views in relational databases, with tables as solid/physical representation of relations and views as virtual representation of relations.

Each row in a table represents an entity, and a table represents a set of the entities. Each column in table represents a property of the entities corresponding to each row.

Structural Query Language (SQL)[2] is a language designed for the query and management of structural data.

Typical operation of SQL including select, join, update, and insert, etc. The select operation specifies entities which properties are interested to the users. It allows the construction of a view which contains only specified properties and only satisfactory entities of query criteria. The join operation is to link two sets of entities together to construct a new set of entities. The update operation is to modify the specified properties of a set of entities that match the query criteria. The insert operation is to add a new entity into an existing set of entities with the same property format.

SQL promotes the development and deployment of relational databases due to its ease of use. Most relational databases have the SQL support as an essential part of the databases.

Along with the higher demand in various fields, the original relational database system could not fully meet the needs of the society. It can be seen that the querying efficiency of the relational database system is quite low when it works with a huge volume of data. And it is obviously that the original relational database system does not have a good scalability, making the system difficult to deal with the rapidly increasing data. What?s more, some features, such as consistency, are not required for the current database system, and these unnecessary features are making the performance of the database system worse. Also, the high maintenance cost of the relational database system could not satisfy current enterprises.

In recent years, a lot of new database systems integrated of various kinds of new technology have come out. These database systems had different models, like Key-value stores model, Table-oriented model, Document-oriented model, Graph-oriented model, etc. Most of these systems rely on models other than relational algebra. Generally, these database systems are called NoSQL database systems.

Carlo Strozzi used the term NoSQL in 1998 to name his lightweight, open-source relational database that did not expose the standard SQL interface[3]. Eric Evans, a Rackspace employee, reintroduced the term NoSQL in early 2009 when Johan Oskarsson of Last.fm wanted to organize an event to discuss open-source distributed databases.[4] The name attempted to label the emergence of a growing number of non-relational, distributed data stores that often did not attempt to provide atomicity, consistency, isolation and durability guarantees that are key attributes of classic relational database systems[5]. NoSQL database system has features of high performance, huge storage, high scalability and high availability.

DOI 10.1109/EIDWT.2013.25     So far, there are more than two hundred published NoSQL productions, and some of them are well-known to us, such as BigTable, HBase, Cassandra, Redis, MongoDB, CouchDB.

However, NoSQL systems are unfamiliar to most engineers and researchers; hence they think it difficult to migrate data to NoSQL systems from SQL system for the following reasons.

Firstly, there are no existing methods for guiding the migration from SQL to NoSQL. Most migration work suffers from lack of experience and lack of specialist tools, not to mention a method for converting the SQL design into a NoSQL design.

Secondly, there is no existing work for the evaluation of NoSQL system?s capability and performance, nor is there any work for the comparison of NoSQL systems with SQL systems. Users have extremely limited support for their decision choosing NoSQL systems.

Thirdly, there is insufficient work on how to optimize a NoSQL system for performance and capability. System optimization is of immense importance for system deployment and system maintenance. Being able to optimize the system at design time and runtime is of considerable importance for the actual adoption of NoSQL systems.

Hung-chih Yang, Ali Dasdan, Ruey-Lung Hsiao, and D.

Stott Parker had improved the framework of MapReduce [6].

They changed the MapReduce framework into Map-Reduce- Merge framework by adding the operation of Merge. Through this improvement, the framework provides MapReduce the capability of calculating relational algebra, which makes processing data in clusters possible.

Tomasz Nykiel, Michalis Potamias, Chaitanya Mishra, George Kollios, and Nick Koudas had proposed MRShare framework to optimize the efficiency of MapReduce in 2010[7]. They restructured the queries to create new batch tasks, which can reduce the query?s workloads, so that the efficiency of the query in clusters increases.

Foto N. Afrati and Jeffrey D. Ullman have optimized the Join operation in the clusters [8]. They continued to optimize the multiway joins to make the querying more efficiently in 2011[9].

In this paper, we will take MongoDB as an example of NoSQL database to examine the feasibility of the migration from SQL to NoSQL, create a relational model for MongoDB and realize the querying operation by means of relational algebra. We will introduce MongoDB in the Section II. A brief summary of relevant concepts in relational algebra is presented in Section III. Section IV proposes the relational model based on MongoDB and gives an introduction to the model. Section V and VI discuss the achievement of common relational operations in MongoDB based on the model proposed in Section IV, including the situations of Single Sharding and Multiple Sharding. In Section VII is a summary of our work.



II. INTRODUCTION OF MONGODB MongoDB is an open source document-oriented database  designed for exceptionally high performance and developed in C++. Data is stored and queried in BSON in MongoDB,  which is like JSON. It has dynamic schemas and is more flexible, which makes the integration of data easier and faster than traditional database productions.

MongoDB can support the following features: ? Ad hoc queries.

MongoDB is a document-oriented database with no transactions and joins. So it is easier to write queries.

? Indexing  Any attributes can be indexed in the database.

Secondary indices are also available.

? Replication.

MongoDB supports master-slave replication, which ensures redundancy, backup, and automatic failover.

? Load balancing.

MongoDB scales horizontally using sharding, which distributes a single logical database system across a cluster of machines.

? File storage.

Any files can be stored in MongoDB with the function GridFS. So MongoDB could be used as a file system.

? Aggregation.

MongoDB supports MapReduce, which enables users to obtain the result for which SQL GROUP BY clause is used.

With the features above, MongoDB has many advantages.

It is extremely fast. And it does not have data mapping, so it is easy to adapt quickly as requirements change. What?s more, MongoDB has high scalability, which makes it meet the demands of the current Web 2.0 applications.

Considering that there are many differences between MongoDB and the original database system, how the data can be migrated from SQL to MongoDB? We propose the following solution: due to the fact that all the SQL operations are based on relational algebra, relational model represents the capability set of relational database system. If MongoDB has the same capability set of relational database system, or even has a greater capability set, we can come to a conclusion that data can be migrated from SQL to MongoDB. Let?s review the relational algebra first.



III. RELATIONAL ALGEBRA Relational Algebra was proposed by E.F.Codd, the founder  of relational database, as a basis for database query languages.

Six primitive operators of relational algebra are set union,  set difference, Cartesian product, selection, projection and rename. Other operators that are more complicate can be deduced by the six primitive operators.

The intersection is not included in the six primitive operators, but it can be defined by the set difference.

The intersection, the set union and the set difference are taken from set theory. For these operators, the two relations involved must be union-compatible, which means that they must meet the following requirements:  ? They have the same number of attributes.

? They have the same scope of matching attributes from  left to right.

We will provide the operations of relational algebra precise definition in section V of this paper, combining with the specific concepts of MongoDB.



IV. THE RELATIONAL MODEL OF MONGODB MongoDB is a document-oriented database system. A  MongoDB system can have several instances of database. And a database instance could have many collections, which are comprised of different documents. Every document is composed by a series of interrelated keys. The collection does not have a predefined schema. To be specific, the keys in two documents can be quite different.

With such data structure mentioned above, we use the relation?s conceptual model to demonstrate MongoDB. In the macro level, collections in MongoDB do not have similar fixed schema as relational model. In other words, the schema in a collection can be changed at any time. In such a situation, if T? ?  T?  > 0, we cannot determine the schema at time T? even though knowing the schema at time T?. However, in the micro level, the schema can be considered fixed. To be specific, the schema at time T? is the same with the schema at time T? , where lim????? T?  ? T?   = 0 . That is, in such a moment, the schema of a collection could be decided.

In the situation of lim????? T?  ?  T?   = 0, the document?s model in MongoDB is the same with the relational model in relational database system. A collection is matching along with a table of a relational database. One document is like one tuple in a table, and the keys are similar to the fields in the table. There are no substantial differences between them.

In conclusion, the relational model of MongoDB is: The collection of MongoDB is a table, and the table?s structure is changeable in the macro level but fixed in the micro level. In the moment of calculation, the table?s schema is composed by all keys in the document. All the keys in the document would be defined in the table?s every tuple. Every value in the table is corresponding to a value of a key. The value will be null if the document does not have a corresponding key. The model could be presented in the chart I.

Chart I Mapping From Set to Table Additionally, the documents in the collection are not quite  simple in many situations. Documents could be embedded or linked in other documents. For example, document ?Book_A? is embedded into the document ?Order_A?, we call the document ?Book_A? Child Document, and the document ?Order_A? Father Document. When this Father Document is mapping to the relational model, the document would be flattening. That is, keys in Child Document would be added a prefix before it becomes a field in the table. The prefix would be the name of the key which Child Document embedded in the Father Document,  Moreover, we would face such a situation: there is not only one Child Document in a Father Document, for example, document ?Book_A? and document ?Book_B? are embedded in the document ?Order_A?. The method mentioned above could not work, because the keys in each Child Document would be the same in the Father Document, which is not permitted in the relational table.

Another viable solution is using the prefix which is consistent of the previous prefix and the id of the Child Document. With this solution, the problem can be solved easily. So the new key of a Child Document would be in the following format: [superkey]_[_id].[childkey]. Following is an example of the flattening.

Chart II Flattening Mapping  It should be noticed that because the document does not have a predefined schema, the mapped table would be sparse.

When a collection is mapping to a table in the relational model, the table would be extremely large, with many empty values. That is the reason why all the collection?s keys would not map into the table. Specially, when the values in Child Documents do not participate in the calculation, the flattening is unnecessary; the Child Document can be shown as a DBRef.



V. RELATIONAL ALGEBRA IN MONGODB As discussed previously, there are six primitive operators in  relational algebra, and other operations can be deduced through these primitive operators. According to the relational model proposed above, we could define the six basic operators of relational algebra in MongoDB?s collection.

A. Union Set Assuming that two operands are union-compatible, given  two collections C and T in MongoDB, the definition of the union set is:  C ? T = {x|x ? C ?  x ? T}, where C and T are union-compatible  B. Different Set It is similar with union set. Given two collections C and T,  the definition of the different set is: C ? T = {x|x ? C ?  x ? T},  where C and T are union-compatible  C. Selection A selection is a unary operation that extracts certain  documents ??  contending the given condition p  from a collection.

??(C) = {x|p(x)  ?  x ? C} where p is the query condition, for example age > 18.

D. Cartesian product The definition of the Cartesian product in relational algebra  is different from that in set theory. Tuples are considered to be 'shallow' for the purposes of the operation. That is, the Cartesian product of an n-tuple by an m-tuple has the 2-tuple "flattened" into an (n + m)-tuple. In set theory, the Cartesian product is a set of 2-tuple. The definition is:  R ? S = {r ? s|r ? R ? s ? S}, Supposed that R has n tuples and S has m tuples, the result  of R ? S has m ? n tuples.

E. Projection Projection is to acquire certain keys and its values in the  collection according to the given attribute set, and the result of the projection is a new collection.

???,??,?,??(C) = {(k?, k?, ? , k?)|k??C. k? ? i = 1,2, ? , m}  is one key in the collection C.

Note that because two identical documents cannot be in one  collection, although duplicate records would be appeared in the procedure of project operation, the final outcome of projection would be distinct.

F. Rename During the operation, every key has its own name in each  collection, and we can obtain its value through its name. But in the query of more than one collection, same key names would be defined in different collection, or when we want to rename certain keys in the result of the relational calculation, we need the rename operation to rename the keys and do not change any values. Following is its definition:  ??C?F?, T?, F = (T. t? ? C. c?, ? , T. t? ? C. c?) The set F which contains the new names of the keys in the  collection T and C, is the result of the rename operation. The relation T and C have the same documents? values but some different key names. To the keys whose names do not define in F, their names do not change after the operation.

Aside from the six primitive operators, there are some notable operatiors that can be deduced from them:  G. Intersection For the collection C and T,  C ? T = {x|x ? C ? x ? T}, where C and T are union-compatible As mentioned above, intersection can be defined by a  different set. To the universal set C, C ? T and C ? T are complementary, so:  C ? T = C ? (C ? T)  H. Conditional Join Conditional Join is to join more than one collection that  satisfies a specific condition that the result of the conditional join is a subset of Cartesian product. The definition is:  ? ?? = ??(? ? ?), where p is the condition

I. Natural Join  ic     Natural join is a peculiar condition of conditional join. It is demanded that the two documents in collection C and T could not be joined unless the keys with the same names in both documents have the same value. It is defined by the symbol :  C T = ??(C ? T) where  ? = ?(C. k? = T. k?) ?  (C. k? = T. k?) ? ? ? (C. k? = T. k?)!,  and k?  represents the keys with the same name in both relations, i = 1, 2, ? , m.

J. Division Although division is not very common in the database  query, it is a useful operator of relational algebra. Following is the definition of the division of collection C and T:  Assuming that the collection C has keys x and y, T only has key y, toany value V" of the key y in S and the value of key x V# in C, if <V#, V"> is contained in C, then V# ? C/T. That is, C/T is the collection of V# that meet the requirement above.

To the V# does not meet the requirement, it can be defined as:  ?$?(?$(?) ? ?) ? ?? So  C/T = ?$(?) ? ?$?(?$(?) ? ?) ? ?? To the situation that there are more keys in C and T, x  represents the keys only exist in C and y represents the keys exist in both C and T.

According to the implementations above, MongoDB can support all the six primitive operators of relational algebra. In the next section, we are going to testify the feasibility of the immigration from SQL to MongoDB.



VI. OPERATION OF MONGODB After the demonstration above, we can model the data  query capability of MongoDB, using the relational algebra.

The implementation would be considered in two situations in MongoDB: single sharding and multiple sharding, to be specific, the two different extended patterns.

A. Single Sharding Single sharding means that the whole MongoDB is  deployed on only one computer, and it is the only node of the database. The execution of the MongoDB operations is straightforward as all the evaluation of the queries is performed on a single node.

1)  Find Find is the querying command of MongoDB, equivalent to  SELECT command in SQL. Following is its command example:  db.clltn.find({p}, {k1:1, k2:1, ?, km:1}) It means to get a collection constituted by documents in the  collection ?clltn? which satisfy the condition p, and documents in the new collection only have the key-value pairs  whose key is contained in the set k? . We can achieve this query by the following relational algebra:  Find(C, p, {k?, k?, ? , k%}) = ?&',*+?,?,?,% ???(?)!

In the query, C is the collection; p is the query condition  and k? is the key which need to be extracted. The result of the query is a collection of documents that consist of key-value pairs, and the key-values are using {k?, k?, ? , k?} as their keys.

2)  Distinct Distinct is an aggregation command of MongoDB. It is  used to query all the values of the given key. For the following command:  db.cllctn.distinct(?k?) or  db.runCommand({?distinct?:?cllctn?, ?key?:?k? }) we can get all the values of key ?k? in the collection  ?cllctn?. And it can be defined by following relational algebra: Distinct(C, k) = ????(C)?  In the equation, ? is not a relational calculus. It is just a formatting for the query result. And it should be noticed that the result of the query would not have key-value pairs like ?k = -?.

3)  Group Group is another aggregation command of MongoDB, that  is equal to GROUP BY command in SQL. To the following command:  The command divides the documents in the collection into groups according to key ?k?, and documents with same key ?k??s value would be merged by the function defined in ?reduce?. The operation will return the result of reduce.

Following is the relational algebra calculation of the operation Group(C, k, reduce):  1. Distinct(C, k) = ??3&(?)? = {"k": v?, v?, ? , v%} 2. For  v5, i = 1,2, ? , m  R5 = ?6=v5(?) 3. Group(C, k, reduce) = ? reduce(R*)%*+?  To support more complicate group queries, MongoDB defines more parameters for them. For example, the parameter ?condition? only allows the documents that meet the requirement of ?p? to be contained in the operation; the parameter ?finalize? provide the function to process the result.

For an instance,     The command Group(C, k, reduce, p, finalize) has the following equivalent relational algebra calculation:  1. ??(?) = T 2. Distinct(T, k) = ??3&(?)? = {"k": v?, v?, ? , v%} 3. For  v5, i = 1,2, ? , m  R5 = ?6=v5(?) 4. Group(C, k, reduce, p, 9inalize) =  9inalize(? reduce(R*))%*+? 4)  ?Join? In the relational database, Join is a widely used operation.

By using Join, relational database increases its flexibility of  querying and enlarges its scope of application.

But to our disappointment, MongoDB could not support  Join yet. However, we are going to use relational algebra to achieve the Join operation for MongoDB, to increase the efficiency of query and to make it support more complicate queries.

Following is the definition: To the collection C and T,  C ?T = ??(C ? T)  p is the condition for joining.

Let?s consider a common scene: when using MongoDB, sometimes we need to query two  collections to get the result we want, just like:   It is doubtless that we need to conduct two querying to  obtain the result, and it is in poor efficiency. With relational algebra, we can use a Join to achieve the result: 3?;<?@ABE<.65 HIEJBE< IEJBE<.5J=q179? Orders.custid=Customers._id?;<?@ABE<M  where Customers. 6*  means the keys of the collection Customers. (i = 1,2, ? , n)  B. Multiple sharding Load balancing is an essential feature of MongoDB. That is,  MongoDB can increase or remove its nodes on its clusters on the basis of its requirements. When there is more than one node in the MongoDB, data in a collection would be split and distributed across multiple shards to accomplish the goal of load balancing. This operation is called sharding in MongoDB.

Assuming that the collection C has n shards, we can define C = ? C?N?+? . Following we will provide the realization of relational algebra in the multiple sharding pattern.

1)  Find On the basis of the discussion above, we can conclude that:  Find(C, p, {k?, k?, ? , k%}) = ?&',*+?,?,?,% ???(?)!, where C = ? C?N?+? ,  ?65,5=1,2,?,A ??P(?)! = ?65,5=1,2,?,A Q?P UW ?5  X  5=1  YZ  = W ?&',*+?,?,?,% ???(?*)!

[  ?+? so,  Find(C, p, {k?, k?, ? , k%}) = W ?&',*+?,?,?,% ???(?*)!

[  ?+? C? is the shards of the collection C, restoring in different  nodes.

2)  Distinct The distinct operation is similar with Find operation. What  we need to do is to find out all the values in each shard, to integrate the values and to delete the reduplicate ones.

According to the discussion above, Distinct(C, k) = ??3&(?)?  When C = ? C?N?+? ,  Distinct(C, k) = ? Q3& UW ?*  [  *+?  YZ  = ? UW 3&(?*) [  *+?  Y  In the equation, ? is not a relational calculus, it is just a format for the query result. Something should be noticed that the result of queries has no key-value pairs like ?k = -?.

3)  Group In the discussion about Group above, we mentioned two  situations. In fact, the first situation could be contained in the second one. So we just consider the second situation here.

To the collection with multiple sharding, C = ? C?N?+? following is the relational algebra calculation of the operation Group(C, k, reduce, p, finalize):  1. ??(?) = ??(? ?* [ *+? ) = ? ??(?*)[*+? = T  2. Distinct(T, k) = ??3&(?)? = {"k": v?, v?, ? , v%} 3. For  v5, i = 1,2, ? , m     R5 = ?6=v5(?) 4. Group(C, k, reduce, p, 9inalize) =  9inalize(? reduce(R*))%*+? 4)   ?Join?  To the collection C and T, C ?T = ??(C ? T)  p is the condition for joining  When  C = ? C?N?+? , T = ? T\?\+? ,  ? ?? = UW ?*  [  *+?  Y ?(T)  = W ??*  ?(T)!

[  *+?    = W ]?*  ? QW ?? %  ^+?  Z` [  *+?    = W QW ?*  ??? %  ^+?  Z [  *+?

VII. CONCLUSION Based on the relational model proposed above, MongoDB  can support relational calculus just like relational database system. We are certain that they have the same capability set.

Therefore, we can get to the conclusion that theoretically data can be migrated from SQL to MongoDB safely and easily.

NoSQL databases have become a popular alternative to traditional SQL databases, especially in the scenario where extremely large scale of data needed to be managed. The adoption of NoSQL solutions is called for theoretical and technical supports on evaluation of the solutions, comparison with SQL solutions and optimization of NoSQL solutions.

The contributions of this paper are as follows. Firstly, we identify the need for theories and methods to support users? evaluation of NoSQL solutions, comparison of NoSQL solutions with RDBMS. Secondly, we model MongoDB with relational algebra, allowing the understanding and analysis of MongoDB independent of the actual implementation. Thirdly, we prove the migration?s feasibility of traditional SQL applications to MongoDB.

The current research suggests that it is possible to provide mappings between MongoDB and RDBMS. To be specific, given a RDBMS instance with its relation design, it is possible to construct a MongoDB instance that provides the same data management and query features as the RDBMS instance does.

This work is the first attempt to investigate and understand NoSQL database formally, focusing on the mathematical  modeling of MongoDB. For the comparison of MongoDB and RDBMS, the mathematic model of MongoDB is constructed with relational algebra, which is also the primary model of RDBMS.

Further work includes the improvement of the current model as well as the investigation of automatic transformation of RDBMS designs into MongoDB designs. The optimization of MongoDB design is also of interest to us.



VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT Research supported in part by the Guangzhou Research  Infrastructure Development Fund (No. 2012224-12), the Guangdong Nature Science Fund (No. S2012030006242), the Guangdong-CAS Cooperation Fund (No. 2011A090100003), the Guang-dong Emerging Industry Key Technology R&D Fund (No. 2011A010801007), the Guangzhou Zhujiang Science and Technology Future Fellow Fund (No.

2011J2200089), and the MOE-China Mobile Research Fund (No. MCM20121051).

