Global Space-time Association for Probability Hypothesis Density Filter

Abstract?The Probability Hypothesis Density (PHD) method can handle multi-target tracking problem, but it needs a specific association method to extract the target tracks. Up to now, such association methods are limited in the scope of temporal association, for example, the track labeling method. In this paper, we present the concept of the consistency measure between any two local peaks at the adjacent two time instants by using both spatial structure information and temporal evolution information. Furthermore, the global-space-time association is proposed through extracting the tracks one-by-one based on the consistency measure and three rules. The proposed method is testified via a simulation comparison with the track labeling method.

Index Terms?Probability Hypothesis Density (PHD); the track labeling method; global-space-time association; spatial structure information; consistency

I. INTRODUCTION  Theoretically, the recursive Bayes nonlinear filter is the optimal approach to multi-target tracking. From an imple- mentation view point, Bayes multi-target filtering propagates the multi-target posterior density recursively in time [1], [2], [3], [4]. This involves the evaluation of multiple set integrals and the computational intractability is far more severe than its single-target counterpart. A more tractable alternative to optimal multi-target filtering is the probability hypothesis density (PHD) filter [4], [5] proposed by Mahler. The PHD filter propagates the PHD or the first moment of the multi- target posterior density, where the integral of the PHD over a region in the state space is the expected number of targets within this region and the peaks in the PHD can be regarded as the estimated locations of the targets at a given time step. Since the domain of the intensity function is the space where individual targets live, its propagation requires much less computational power than the multi-target posterior.

Though the PHD recursion consists of equations that are considerably simpler than those of the optimal multi-target Bayes filter, it still requires solving multi-dimensional integrals that do not have closed-form solutions in general. Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) approximation provides a way of solving such integrals [6], [7] and a generalized SMC implementation of PHD filter (SMC- or particle-PHD filter) has been proposed in [8], [9]. Similar SMC implementations of the PHD filter have also been proposed in [10], [11]. Mathematical proofs of convergence for the particle PHD filter have demonstrated that the empirical measures represented by the particles converge  to their true measures, which was first established in [9], and further results were established in [12]. Practical applications have included tracking vehicles in different terrains [10], tracking targets located on ellipses by passive radar [13], and tracking a variable number of targets in forward scan sonar [14].

However, the existing implementations of the PHD (or the particle-PHD) filter only provides identity-free estimates of target states and hence no temporal association of estimates over time. Several methods for associating the targets between frames have been reported in the literature. One of these, by Panta et al. [15], used the PHD filter for prefiltering the data input to a multiple hypothesis tracker. Another technique, proposed by Lin [16], represents the PHD in a resolution cell to differentiate the peaks of the PHD posterior, and uses validation gates to determine the weights of the particles.

There is also a method called track labeling (TL) [17], [18].

The method can be informally explained as follows. At each iteration, partition the particles in the position domain and give each particle in the same partition the same label (partitioning is initially only done in the position domain because the variance of the particle distribution in this domain is usually lower than in the velocity domain, so it is a better discrimina- tor; it is also computationally faster to do so). In subsequent iterations, when resampling, give the children of a particle the same label as its parent. After resampling, repartition the data, and if the majority of the particles in one partition have the same label, then associate these partitions. Simulations prove that the TL is an effective method, but it only uses the temporal information. If we can use both spatial information and temporal information, it is likely to improve the quality of track extraction. In this paper, we present the concept of the consistency measure (CM) between any two local peaks at the adjacent two time instants by using both spatial structure information and temporal evolution information. Furthermore, the global-space-time association (GSTA) is proposed through extracting the tracks one-by-one based on the CM and three rules.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews the random-finite-set (RFS) model and the PHD filter. In Section III, the concept of CM and the GSTA are proposed.

The simulation comparison of the GSTA with the TL is presented in Section IV and the conclusion is drawn in Section V.

Istanbul, Turkey, July 9-12, 2013  978-605-86311-1-3 ?2013 ISIF

II. PROBLEM FORMULATION  Denote Xk?1 = { xi  k?1  }Mk?1 i=1  as the multiple-target state set at time k ? 1, where Mk?1 is the target number at time k?1 and xi  k?1 is the state of the i-th target at time k?1. Xk  is the union of the surviving targets, the spawned targets, and the spontaneous births  Xk =  [ ?  x?Xk?1 Sk|k?1 (x)  ] ? [ ?  x?Xk?1 Bk|k?1 (x)  ] ? ?k (1)  where ? x?Xk?1  Sk|k?1 (x) denotes the RFS of targets survived  up to time k; ? x?Xk?1  Bk|k?1 (x) denotes the RFS of targets  spawned from Xk?1; ?k denotes the RFS of targets appeared spontaneously at time k. Denote the multi-target measurement set at time k by Zk as follows  Zk = Kk ? [ ?  x?Xk ?k(x)  ] (2)  where Kk is the RFS of clutter or false alarms; ? x?Xk  ?k(x)  is the RFS of measurements generated by Xk.

The optimal multi-target Bayes filter is given by the recur-  sion  pk|k?1 (Xk|Z1:k?1) = ? fk|k?1 (Xk|X) pk?1 (X|Z1:k?1) dX  (3)  pk (Xk|Z1:k) = gk (Zk|Xk) pk|k?1 (Xk|Z1:k?1)? gk (Zk|X) pk|k?1 (X|Z1:k?1) dX  (4)  In Eqs. (3) and (4), fk|k?1 (?|?) is multiple-target transi- tion density function; gk(Zk|Xk) is multiple-target likelihood function; pk?1(X|Z1:k?1) is multiple-target posterior density function at time k ? 1; pk|k?1(Xk|Z1:k?1) is multiple-target predicted posterior density function; pk(Xk|Z1:k) is multiple- target updated posterior density function.

It needs set integral in equation (3) and (4) and it has large computational load. In a way, it cannot be computed, so we should look for other available methods. PHD is a method with low computational load and under some conditions with hypothesis it can compute instead of RFS method. PHD is defined as first-order statistical moment of the multiple-target posterior probability density. The integral of the PHD over a region in the state space is the expected number of targets within this region and the peaks in the PHD can be regarded as the estimated locations of the targets at a given time step.

Let vk and vk|k?1 denote the respective intensities associated with the multiple-target posterior density pk and the multiple- target predicted density pk|k?1, then the iterative equations of target RFS are as follows  vk|k?1(x) =?k(x) +  ? ( ek|k?1(?)fk|k?1(x|?)vk?1(?)  + ?k|k?1(x|?)vk?1(?) ) d? (5)  vk(x) =[1? pD(x)]vk|k?1(x)+? z?Zk  pD(x)gk(x)vk|k?1(x)  k(z) + ? pD(x)gk(z|?)vk|k?1(?)d?  (6)  In Eqs. (5) and (6), ek|k?1 (?) is the probability that the target still exist at time k given that it has previous state ?, ?k|k?1 (x|?) is the PHD of the RFS spawned by a target with previous state ?, ?k (x) is the PHD of the spontaneous birth RFS. k (z) is the PHD of the RFS of clutter, pD(x) is the target detection probability.

The existing implementations of the PHD (or the particle- PHD) filter only provides identity-free estimates of target states and hence no temporal association of estimates over time. In the available literature, the TL is proved an effective method. The method can be described as follows. Identities of the target estimates given by PHD recursion can be created by introducing identifiers to the clusters created during the peak extraction from the posterior PHD particles. The method stores the associated cluster identifier of each particle in what it is  called cluster indices { j (i) k  }Lk i=1  . The cluster indices associated with the posterior PHD particles can be used to initiate a track, to label it as well as to perform PHD estimates-to-track association. In the method, the new born particles are assigned zeroes as their cluster indices. The resampled particles will preserve the cluster indices of the original particles that are resampled. Given the posterior PHD particles and their associated cluster indices at time k for each of the cluster created at time k, its associated identifier is determined as follows: Group the particles in the cluster at hand according to their cluster entries so that particles in a group share the same cluster entry, then sum the weights associated with the particles in each group and finally, the value of cluster indices belonging to the group with the maximum summed weight is assigned to current cluster as its identity. Then, assume, the set of tracks at time k is represented by Tk and a track in Tk is given by ? rks:k that represent a track started at an earlier time step ks and has a track identity r. The identity r associated with any track can be used as a track label and can take any value from one to the total number of tracks rmax created from time step zero to k. At time k, Tk might not have all the tracks as some tracks may have already ceased to exist. Given the posterior PHD  particles { ? (i) k , x  (i) k  }Lk i=1  and their associated cluster indices{ j (i) k  }Lk i=1  at time k, the process of obtaining the set of tracks Tk at time k from the set of tracks Tk?1 at time k ? 1 is as follows: Once the  { ? (i) k , x  (i) k  }Lk i=1  are clustered to produce N?k clusters, for each cluster we find its cluster identifier. If the cluster identifier is zero, a new track is initiated with the target estimate given by its centroid location as it starting point and is included in Tk. The track identity r for the new track is given by r = rmax + 1 and ks = k. Every time a new track is initiated, rmax is incremented by one. Finally the cluster indices of all particles with zero as their respective cluster     indices are belong to this cluster are assigned the associated track identity r. When the cluster identifier is a number, say m, we extend the track with identity r from Tk?1 and associate it with the target estimate given the cluster at hand. The track is then copied into Tk. Track in Tk?1, which are not associated with any estimates at time step k, are not copied into Tk and are stored for data output purposes. Although the TL is an effective method, it only uses the temporal information. If we can use both spatial information and temporal information, it is likely to improve the quality of track extraction. In this paper, we present the concept of the CM between any two local peaks at the adjacent two time instants by using both spatial structure information and temporal evolution information. Furthermore, the GSTA is proposed through extracting the tracks one-by- one based on the consistency measure and three rules.



III. GLOBAL SPACE-TIME ASSOCIATION FOR PHD The proposition of the GSTA can be divided into two  parts. One of the two is the concept of the CM between any two local peaks at the adjacent two time instants by using both spatial structure information and temporal evolution information. Another is the strategy of extracting the tracks one-by-one.

A. CM  In this subsection, we should compute CM matrix. Suppose that we gain the estimated points of tracks at time k denoted by xik(i = 1, 2, ? ? ?nk) and we gain the estimated points of tracks at time k + 1 denoted by xjk+1(j = 1, 2, ? ? ?nk+1), where, nk and nk+1 are not always equal. Use  { xik, i = 1, 2, ? ? ? , nk  } and  { xjk+1, j = 1, 2, ? ? ? , nk+1  } to form two peak sets.

First, extract the information of { xik, i = 1, 2, ? ? ? , nk  } and  { xjk+1, j = 1, 2, ? ? ? , nk+1  } and compute the relative  coordinates, i.e., compute the length of oriented segmen- t of any two points in  { xik, i = 1, 2, ? ? ? , nk  } and com-  pute the length of oriented segment of any two points in{ xjk+1, j = 1, 2, ? ? ? , nk+1  } respectively. And then, compute  the distances between relative coordinates, i.e., compare the difference of length between two oriented segments.

Define CM  ? ( xik, x  j k+1  ) =?  g 6=i (i=1,2,...nk)  (j=1,2,...,nk+1)  max l 6=j  { exp  ( ? 1?r  ( xgk ? xik, xlk+1 ? x  j k+1  ))}  (7) where g = 1, 2, ? ? ? , nk, but g 6= i; l = 1, 2, ? ? ? , nk+1, but l 6= j, r (x, y) = ?x? y?.

Found CM matrix ? = [ ? ( xik, x  j k+1  )] nk?nk+1  .

For convenient computation, normal the elements  ?? ( xik, x  j k+1  ) =  ? ( xik, x  j k+1  ) ?min  i,j  ( ? ( xik, x  j k+1  )) max i,j  ( ? ( xik, x  j k+1  )) ?min  i,j  ( ? ( xik, x  j k+1  )) (8)  B. The strategy of extracting the tracks  The rules of extracting the tracks are as follows: Rule 1: If the similarity between any two estimated target  states at the adjacent two time instants is large enough, it is assumed that the two estimated target states is survived from the same one target, i.e., it is assumed that they are two separate estimated states of the same one target at the adjacent two time instants. As a result, it is assumed that they are related and they can be associated.

Rule 2: For one estimated target state at this time step, if there are several estimated target states at the next time step that have large enough similarity with it and the difference of these similarities is not obvious, it is assumed that these several estimated targets belong to impartibility targets.

Rule 3: For one estimated target state at this time step, if there is no estimated target state at the next time step that has large enough similarity with it, predict one more time step for the target. If there is also no corresponding estimated target state with it, it is assumed that the target disappears. For one estimated target state at this time step, if there is no estimated target state at the previous time step that has large enough similarity with it, it is assumed that the target is a birth target.

The implementations corresponding to the rules are as follows:  Implementation of Rule 1: Found Target?s Track Set = ?, TTS = ? for short. For some row (ith row) of consistency matrix, find the largest one of elements and the element must be larger than some threshold ? (0 < ? < 1 and the value of ? depends on the scenario and demand). If the selected element is also the largest in the column where it?s in (jth column), the corresponding row element xik is related to column element xjk+1. Namely, given i, find maxj  ? (i, j), if max j ? (i, j) > ?  and max j ? (i, j) = max? (:, j), it is assumed that xik is related  to xjk+1. Then put the related pair (i, j) to TTS and cross out the ith row and jth column of consistency matrix. Denote the reduced consistency matrix as ?? and then we have ?? =[ ?1 ?2 ?3 ?4  ] , where ?1 = ?1:i?1,1:j?1, ?2 = ?1:i?1,j+1:nk+1 ,  ?3 = ?i+1:nk,1:j?1, ?4 = ?i+1:nk,j+1:nk+1 .

Implementation of Rule 2: Found Impartibility Set = ?, IS  = ? for short. Given a threshold ? (0 < ? < 0.001) and suppose that the consistency matrix is nk?nk+1, if we have descending order about the elements of some row (ith) (the number of elements is nk+1) of consistency matrix, for example, if we have ? (i, 1) > ? (i, 2) > ? (i, 3) > ? ? ? > ? (i, nk+1) > 0, define  j? = arg max j  { ? (i, j)? ? (i, j + 1)  ? (i, j) < ?&? (i, j) > ?  } (9)  where, the definition of ? is described as Implementation of Rule 2. Then it is assumed that the corresponding targets of the columns which ? (i, 1), ? ? ? , ? (i, j?) are in belong to impartibility targets, i.e., it is assumed that 1, ? ? ? , j? belong to impartibility targets. Put 1, ? ? ? , j? to IS and if there are     Compute CM matrix  Impartibility targets  Related target states  Disappearing target  Birth target  Implementation of Rule 2  Implementation of Rule 1  Implementation of Rule 3  Implementation of Rule 3  N  N  N  Input  Reduce CM matrix  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  Y  Output  Impartibility set  Target track set  Disappearing target set  Birth target set  ? ? ?  Fig. 1. Function flow chart of the GSTA  elements of 1, ? ? ? , j? which are in IS, only put the rest to IS.

In the end, reduce the corresponding row and columns.

Implementation of Rule 3: For the rows and columns which are not related, if the ith row of consistency matrix has no related column, it is assumed that the corresponding target of this row may disappear. Predict one more time step for this target and if the target also has no related track point when judging at next step, it is assumed that the target disappears. Then output a disappearing target set. If the jth column of consistency matrix has no related row, it is assumed that the corresponding target of this column is a birth target.

Then output a birth target set. After judging, reduce the corresponding rows and columns.

The function flow chart of the GSTA is given as Fig.1.

Remark 3.1. The principle of the GSTA is to form two  geometries using the estimated points of tracks at the adjacent two time instants respectively and measure their consistency.

Then associate the corresponding vertexes of similar geome- tries and implement the matching of track points and track points.

Remark 3.2. Remark 3.2. In the principle of the GSTA, it is not concerned with correlation gate problem and it does not use the distances of points and tracks directly. This is the difference between the GSTA and various available association methods based on correlation gate. In addition, we can introduce other physical quantities such as the velocity of tracks, course and echo amplitude to the principle of global space-time association conveniently and consequently further improve the correctness of association of points-tracks.



IV. SIMULATION  In this section, three simulation scenarios are tested to show the efficiency of the proposed method.

In all the simulation scenarios, target detection probability is Pd = 0.98 and target surviving probability is Pe = 0.99.

-500 0 500 1000 1500 2000 -40  -30  -20  -10        x(m)  y( m  )     Real target one Estimated track one Real target two Estimated track two Real target three Estimated track three  Fig. 2. Tracks of the GSTA  Consider three targets within the two-dimensional plant. State equation is  X (k + 1) = F (k)X (k) + v (k) (10)  where state vector X (k) = [ x x? y y?  ]? , state tran-  sition matrix F (k) is F (k) = [  1 T 0 1  ] ? I2 and the  covariance of process noise is Q = ?Q2 [  T 4  T 3  T 3  2 T  ] ? I2,  where sampling interval is T = 1s, process noise is zero- mean Gaussian and white independent of measurement noise.

?Q = 0.25, I2 is unit matrix of 2 ? 2, true initial states of targets are:X1 (0) =  [ 0m 100m/s 20m 0m/s  ]? ,  X2 (0) = [ ?500m 100m/s 0m 0m/s  ]? , X3 (0) =[  0m 100m/s ?20m 0m/s ]?  .

Measurement equation is  Z(k) = H(k)X(k) + w(k) (11)  where measurement noise is zero-mean Gaussian and white.

Measurement matrix is H (k) =  [ 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0  ] and the  covariance of measurement noise is R = 100I2.

A. Scenario I  There exists no targets birthing and disappearing in this sce- nario. There are always three targets moving in the surveillance zone. The purpose is to test the tracking performance of the proposed method while the targets are close enough but they always keep a stable shape.

Simulation results are as Figs.2-6. Fig.2 depicts tracks of two-dimension of the GSTA. Fig.3 depicts tracks of two- dimension of the TL. Figs.4-6 give the identification cluster decision (ICD) of each estimated track which belongs to one of the real targets. Table I presents method comparison about association between the GSTA and the TL. In all the tables of the paper, target is abbreviated to T.

-500 0 500 1000 1500 2000 -40  -30  -20  -10        x(m)  y( m  )     Real target one Estimated track one Real target two Estimated track two Real target three Estimated track three Estimated track four  Fig. 3. Tracks of the TL  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20      Target state of the estimated track which belongs to target 1  R ea  l t ar  ge t n  um be  r      GSTA  TL  Fig. 4. The ICD of the estimated track belonging to real target 1  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20     Target state of the estimated track which belongs to target 2  R ea  l t ar  ge t n  um be  r      GSTA  TL  Fig. 5. The ICD of the estimated track belonging to real target 2  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20      Target state of the estimated track which belongs to target 3  R ea  l t ar  ge t n  um be  r      GSTA  TL (1)  TL (2)  To target 3, the TL corresponds to 2 tracks.

Fig. 6. The ICD of the estimated track belonging to real target 3  TABLE I METHOD COMPARISON ABOUT ASSOCIATION  Number of Number of Target right-association wrong-association  GSTA TL GSTA TL T1 19 10 (initialize delayed) 1 4 T2 20 18 0 2  5 (track break off) 0T3 19 7 (initialize delayed)   From Fig.2, it is seen that, the GSTA can result in steady tracks and tracking results present no phenomena of tracks breaking off and initializing delayed. Contrastively, from Fig.3, it is seen that although the TL can gain target tracks, it is obvious that tracking results have phenomena of tracks breaking off and initializing delayed.

According to Table I and simulation figures, it is seen that, the GSTA can result in steady tracks and results do not have phenomena of tracks breaking off, tracks lost and one target which corresponds to several tracks. Simulation results of the TL initializes delayed for target 1 and target 3 corresponds to two tracks, where, one has phenomenon of tracks breaking off and another has phenomenon of initializing delayed. It is also seen that for the targets which are tracked correctly, the number of wrong association of the GSTA is less than that of the TL. In general, without targets birthing and disappearing, the performance of tracking steadily of the GSTA is better than the TL.

B. Scenario II  There exists one target birthing in this scenario. In the beginning there are three targets moving in the surveil- lance zone and then there is a target which births at t = 10s. The birth target?s state is Birth State =[  1000m 100m/s 50m 0m/s ]?  .

The purpose is to test the performance of the proposed  method while there is a target birthing. Simulation results are as Figs.7-12.

-500 0 500 1000 1500 2000 -40  -20       x(m)  y( m  )     Real target one Estimated track one Real target two Estimated track two Real target three Estimated track three Real target four Estimated track four  Fig. 7. Tracks of the GSTA  -500 0 500 1000 1500 2000 -40  -20       x(m)  y( m  )     Real target one Estimated track one Real target two Estimated track two Real target three Estimated track three Real target four Estimated track four Estimated track five  Fig. 8. Tracks of the TL  From Fig.7, it is seen that, the GSTA can result in steady tracks and tracking results have no tracks breaking off. And for the birthing target, the method can start new track correctly.

Contrastively, from Fig.8, it is seen obviously that tracking results of the TL have phenomena of tracks breaking off and initializing delayed. And for the birthing target, the TL cannot start new track correctly.

According to Table II and simulation figures, it is seen that, tracks obtained by the GSTA do not have phenomena of tracks breaking off, tracks lost, tracking failed and one target which corresponds to several tracks. Simulation results by the TL indicate that target 1 corresponds to four tracks, where, one has phenomenon of tracks breaking off and two tracks of four have phenomenon of initializing delayed. For target 3 and target 4, the TL fails tracking, i.e., the TL fails tracking for the birthing target. In general, the GSTA can start new target track correctly and track steadily, however, the TL fails tracking for  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20      Target state of the estimated track which belongs to target 1  R ea  l t ar  ge t n  um be  r      GSTA  TL (1)  TL (2)  TL (3)  TL (4)  To target 1, the TL corresponds to 4 tracks.

Fig. 9. The ICD of the estimated track belonging to real target 1  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20    Target state of the estimated track which belongs to target 2  R ea  l t ar  ge t n  um be  r      GSTA  TL  Fig. 10. The ICD of the estimated track belonging to real target 2  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20      Target state of the estimated track which belongs to target 3  R ea  l t ar  ge t n  um be  r      GSTA To target 3, the TL failed tracking.

Fig. 11. The ICD of the estimated track belonging to real target 3     10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20       Target state of the estimated track which belongs to target 4  R ea  l t ar  ge t n  um be  r      GSTATo target 4, the TL failed tracking.

Fig. 12. The ICD of the estimated track belonging to real target 4  TABLE II METHOD COMPARISON ABOUT ASSOCIATION  Number of Number of Target right-association wrong-association  GSTA TL GSTA TL 8 (track break off) 4  14 6T1 8 6 (initialize delayed)   8 (initialize delayed) 1 T2 20 20 0 0 T3 14 Track failed 6 Track failed T4 7 Track failed 4 Track failed  the birthing target.

C. Scenario III  There exists one target disappearing in this scenario. In the beginning there are three targets moving in the surveillance zone and then target three disappears at t = 10s. The purpose is to test the performance of the proposed method while there is a target disappearing.Simulation results are as Figs.13-17.

TABLE III METHOD COMPARISON ABOUT ASSOCIATION  Number of Number of Target right-association wrong-association  GSTA TL GSTA TL 5 (track break off) 4T1 19   T2 20 20 0 0 T3 9 Track failed 0 Track failed  From Fig.13, it is seen that, the GSTA can result in steady tracks and tracking results have no tracks breaking off. And for the disappearing target, the proposed method can terminate its track correctly. Contrastively, from Fig.14, it is seen obviously that tracking results of the TL have phenomena of tracks breaking off. And for the disappearing targets, the TL cannot terminate its track correctly.

-500 0 500 1000 1500 2000 -40  -30  -20  -10        x(m)  y( m  )     Real target one Estimated track one Real target two Estimated track two Real target three Estimated track three  Fig. 13. Tracks of the GSTA  -500 0 500 1000 1500 2000 -40  -30  -20  -10        x(m)  y( m  )     Real target one Estimated track one Real target two Estimated track two Real target three Estimated track three  Fig. 14. Tracks of the TL  According to statistical results and simulation figures, it is seen that, tracks obtained by the GSTA do not have phenomena of tracks breaking off, tracks lost, tracking failed and one target which corresponds to several tracks. Simulation results of the TL indicate that target 1 corresponds to two tracks and one of which has phenomenon of tracks breaking off.

For target 3, the TL fails tracking, i.e., the TL fails tracking for the disappearing target. In general, for the disappearing target, GSTA can terminate the corresponding track correctly; however, the TL fails tracking for the disappearing target.



V. CONCLUSION  Motivated by the drawback of PHD and the available data association methods for PHD, a novel data association method for PHD called GSTA is proposed in this paper. We present the concept of the CM between any two local peaks at the adjacent two time instants by using both spatial structure     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20      Target state of the estimated track which belongs to target 1  R ea  l t ar  ge t n  um be  r      GSTA  TL (1)  TL (2)  To target 1, the TL corresponds to 2 tracks.

Fig. 15. The ICD of the estimated track belonging to real target 1  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20    Target state of the estimated track which belongs to target 2  R ea  l t ar  ge t n  um be  r      GSTA  TL  Fig. 16. The ICD of the estimated track belonging to real target 2  information and temporal evolution information and GSTA is proposed through extracting the tracks one-by-one based on the CM and three rules. The proposed method is testified via a simulation comparison with the TL and the simulations show the efficiency and superior performance of the GSTA.

