AXIe Local Bus architecture delivers unprecedented  bus speed and flexibility

Abstract?AXIe is commonly referred to as the "big brother" of PXI. This is because it shares many of the features of PXI (open modular structure, PCI Express fabric, similar software) while deploying a large board size, power, and cooling matching that found in high performance instruments. However, it also adds one very unique aspect: the AXIe local bus. In this paper the authors describe the local bus, and compare it to other common bus topologies. The authors describe local bus capabilities, and real world implementations and applications that demonstrate breakthrough system performance utilizing the local bus. These capabilities include real time streaming and processing in excess of 40GB/s per link, with up to 12 links per chassis. Real time high-speed streaming enables a number of applications previously unrealized. Radar system evaluation and simulation is an example, where data is streamed indefinitely from high-speed digitizers into a data processing module or RAID array. High-energy physics is another example where data is recorded for long periods, to be triggered by an event that is detected by a digital processor unit. Indeed, there is a broad range of data acquisition applications where long data streams need to be recorded or processed while searching for an intermittent event. The AXIe local bus enables this capability at previously unattainable speeds.

Keywords?AXIe; PXI; PXI Express; PCI Express; PXIe; PCIe; ATCA; AdvancedTCA

I. INTRODUCTION TO AXIE AXIe is a modular instrument standard, abbreviated from  AdvancedTCA Extensions for Instrumentation and Test.  Like VXI (VMEbus Extensions for Instrumentation) and PXI (CompactPCI Extensions for Instrumentation), AXIe is based on an industrial bus architecture with extensions for instrumentation, AdvancedTCA.  AdvancedTCA itself is high peformance modular architecture focused at telecom applications requiring high power, high performance, scalability, and long deployment life.  AdvancedTCA and CompactPCI are managed by PICMG (PCI Industrial Computer Manufacturers Group), a standards body.  Like PXI and VXI, AXIe has added timing, synchronization, and triggering capabilities to make it suitable for test applications.

AXIe module size is approximately 14% larger than VXI, which is itself several times larger than a PXI module.  AXIe modules are 3cm wide, as is VXI, but with a taller height (322mm vs. 233mm) and shallower depth (280mm vs.

340mm).  AXIe has a little more than eight times the volume of  a 3U PXI module.  AXIe modules typically are mounted horizontally in a chassis,  allowing very short chassis heights and maximum rack density.  The availability of 2-slot and 5- slot horizontal chassis  allows system integrators to deploy AXIe either as the principal modular architecture in a system, or complementing a PXI or VXI subsystem.  In particular, small horizontal chassis avoid the typical ?two half-filled? chassis drawback of deploying two vertically-oriented architectures in a single system.  A single 48V backplane power supply enables modules up to 200W (200 watts) to be powered from just over four amperes, supporting high power components found in high-speed digital and data converters.

Airflow moves unobstructed across a horizontal chassis to effectively cool high power densities.  A 5-slot 4U AXIe chassis can support up to 1000W of instrumentation, which compares favorably to other architectures.  14-slot AXIe systems are vertically mounted, similar to PXI and VXI.

AXIe is often refered to as the ?big brother? of PXI because, despite its much larger module envelope, it acts logically as a PXIe (PXI Express) system.  Communication is preformed over a 4-lane PCIe  (PCI Express) bus on the backplane either through external or embedded controllers.

The AXIe-2 specification adopts the software structures from PXI.  To a controller, an AXIe system is just another PXI chassis, though one with much larger board area and power capability.  The continued viability of VXI demonstrates the need for large module formats.



II. BUS TOPOLOGIES  A. Backgound A modular backplane, such as VXI, PXI, or AXIe, consists  of a PCB (printed circuit board) with copper paths creating buses between the various slots.  In this sense a modular backplane is not a single bus, but several buses, all bringing unique functionality.  The geometric pattern of each bus is called its topology.  There are three common bus topologies in a modular standard: parallel, star, and local.

These topologies are critical to modular instruments and are the basics that enable many of the unique features that modular instrumentation brings to the marketplace.  A quick review of each is given below.

Fig 1.  The figure shows three bus topologies common in c instrumentation systems.  Slot 1 acts as a hub for the star b spans all slots.  The local bus is segmented, connecting on slots.  In some cases, such as VXI and AXIe, the local bus the hub slot (Slot 1 in the diagram), but connects between    B. Parallel Bus (also called multidrop) Until recently, this was the most common  structure where the same pin on each slo connected to the similar pin on all other slots computer data buses used this topology ubiq the early 2000s, before the advent of serial b PXI-1 (pre PXI Express) use a parallel bus for a parallel bus the data is present across a address determines which slot is being written  Parallel buses are also used for many tr lines.  Here, a signal from one device can trig other devices, since all devices have access lines.  Clock signals can be routed in this VXI, PXI, and AXIe all have some number o lines.  In the case of AXIe, 12 MLVDS ( Voltage Differential Signaling) paths span parallel topology is a very useful topology, bu defect: speed.  The large number of loads plus at each slot limit the top bus speeds to the 100MHz. Even if 100Mhz can be achieved ramps make parallel buses largely unsuitab timing.  This was a fundamental limit for comp which led the industry to embrace serial desig topology.

C. Star Bus (also called radial bus) In a star topology, one device is a ?hub? a  dedicated line going to each slot.  Visually, th coming from a star, thus the name ?star?.  Th differential pairs, called lanes.  Since each point, it can be operated at much higher sp clock is encoded within the data pattern itself as a serial bus.  Very high speeds are possib point serial buses.  Gen 1 (Generation 1) of P for VXI 4.0, PXI Express, and AXIe) enab Gigabit per second) on each lane.  Using a com (a link is a bundle of lanes), PCIe can transf (One Gigabyte per second, where each byte i   computer and bus.  The parallel bus  nly between adjacent does not connect to all other slots.

n bus topology: a ot is electrically .  Instrument and  quitously through buses.  VXI and  r data transfer.  In all slots, and the  to.

rigger and clock gger one or more to these parallel manner as well.

of parallel trigger (Multipoint Low n all slots. The ut suffers one key  the stubs created neighborhood of  d, the slow edge ble for precision puter backplanes,  gns that use a star  and has a separate hese are like rays hese are typically lane is point-to-  peeds. When the f, it is referred to ble with point-to- CIe (the data bus  bles 2.5Gb/s (2.5 mmon 4-lane link fer data at 1GB/s s 8 bits).  Due to  the high speeds to be discussed, th GB/s going forward.

PCIe Gen 2 essentially doubl generation PCIe.  Many PXIe and A PCIe Gen2, doubling the speed of a chassis support 8-lane links, doubli these speeds are impressive, and m LAN interfaces found on traditiona match the speed of ultra-fast data co third topology, the local bus, makes  It should be noted that the hub s the same between instrument system Slot 0, while PXI and AXIe (which have hubs at Slot 1.  PXI may also timing module slot, which has ded for precision timing.  In AXIe, Slot PCIe communication and the precisi  D. Local Bus (also called segmente The local bus is a unique bus  hidden benefits.  Local buses are a s that connect pins between adjacent called ?local? buses.  For example connected to the left side of slot 3.  T is connected to the left side of slot 4 copper path lengths are short, onl high-speed signals can be routed fro enable high-speed private commu modules of an instrument set.  Sinc ends between the modules of an ins modules may use their local buses c way, instrument sets from different v same chassis, each exploiting the local bus.

Local buses are not new to mod deployed a 12-line local bus (12 c adjacent slot). The Agilent 81250 P of how it was used to extend pri modules to create a modular bit erro 13-line local bus, and some digita Unfortunately, these pins conflicted PXIe standard, leaving only a singl For this reason, the local bus is ra systems.

AXIe reintroduced the local bus match its high performance missi consists of 124 lines organized as pairs.  With 60 pairs dedicated to a common FPGA (field programma (Serializer/Deserializer) technolog bandwidth totals 40GB/s from one order of magnitude beyond other b only defines the topology of the bandwidth will increase proportion speeds deployed.

his paper will use units of  les the speed of the first AXIe products now deploy 4-lane link to 2GB/s.  PXIe ing the speed again. While much higher than USB or al instruments, they do not onverters.  This is where the a disruptive contribution.

slot might not be numbered ms.  The hub slot for VXI is have no slots numbered 0) designate another slot as a  icated star bus to each slot t 1 includes the hub for the ion timing buses.

ed or daisy chain bus) structure that brings many  set of short copper segments slots. This is why they are , the right side of slot 2 is Then the right side of slot 3  4, and so forth.  Because the ly a few centimeters, very om slot to slot.  Local buses unication between related ce the local bus begins and strument set, another set of  completely differently.  This vendors may co-exist in the unique capabilities of the  dular instrumentation.  VXI copper paths between each  ParBERT is a good example ivate timing signals to all  or rate tester.  PXI adopted a al products exploited this.

d with pins defined in the le remaining local bus line.

arely, if ever, used in PXIe  concept, but at the scale to on.  The AXIe local bus 62 high-speed differential  a data path, and using fairly able gate array) SERDES gy, the aggregate bus slot to the next.  This is an  bus structures.  Since AXIe local bus, the aggregate  nally with the interface bus    Figure 2.  This diagram demonstrates the high-speed d enabled by the AXIe local bus.  Using current techno transfer data up to 40GB/s to the slot to its right.  Th generate another data stream for the slot to its right up to data path on the local bus is independent, the aggregate multiplied by the number of links.  As technology im attainable link speed.

Newly announced FPGA SERDES speed the aggregate bandwidth to 80GB/s, with doubling it again to 160GB/s.  Since this is t segment between slots, and each segment acts large AXIe system can support aggregate ch into the TB/s (Terabyte/second) range.

It should be noted that the AXIe local bus to Slot 1, but between all other slots.



III. LOCAL BUS REALIZATIO There are two key methods of exploiting th  is that of a multidrop bus, where each module towards it right by connecting the copper p This may be used by modules that need to sha or utilize complex handshakes between the local bus enables private communication b within an instrument set, there is no requireme the protocols used.

The second common method of exploiting daisy chain data flow architecture that flows fr the left to a module on the right, as demonstra Useful modules in such a system include dig DSP (digital signal processing), and A waveform generators).

Figure 3.  ADCs (Analaog to Digital Converters) will ge the left, AWGs to the right, and DSP or memory in between   data flow architecture ology, each link may hat slot, in turn, may o 40GB/s.  Since each bandwidth is 40GB/s  mproves, so will the  ds should double the next wave  the speed of each s independently, a hassis bandwidths  does not connect  ONS he local bus.  One e extends the bus paths electrically.

are timing signals modules.  Since  between modules ent to standardize  the local bus is a from a module on ated in Figures 2.

gitizers, memory,  AWGs (arbitrary   enerally be placed to n.

Since data flow is commonly lef other sources of data would genera and other data sinks on the rig somewhere in between, as shown DSP modules could also have the external storage devices off-board.

This paper will focus on this lat enabled by the local bus.

A. Real World Speeds The sections above give a the  local bus.  The Guzik family of digi Measurement were the first product capabilities. The Guzik ADC6000 s of high-fidelity 8-bit digitizers base sampling rate.  Single-slot AXIe pro digitizing combinations:  ? 1 channel x 40Gs/s  ? 2 channel x 20Gs/s  ? 4 channel x 10Gs/s  Each product hosts 64GB of m shot waveform capture of greater tha Since the aggregate data generation the local bus interface was designed time data transfer to the adjacent claim.  This is an order of magn fastest PCIe-based digitizers found i achieved using the Altera Strat implement the local bus.

While digitizers are perceived t the Guzik digitizers can also acce source it to the right as shown i digitizers to be chained together, u between digitizers in order expan window proportionally.  Indeed, ha digitizers, AWGs, DSP, and memor long as the aggregate bandwidth of exceed the 40GB/s limit, multiple in be used.

Figure 4.  Two Guzik ADC6000 digitizers s cards on the right.  These may be other AD dedicated memory or DSP modules.  As lon any one link does not exceed 40GB/s, multipl used.  This architecture is particularly valua or DSP module, or a DSP module is calcula across channels that span more than one mod  ft to right, digitizers and any ally be on the left, AWGs ht, and memory or DSP in Figure 3.  Memory and e capability to connect to  tter ?data flow? architecture  eoretical description of the itizers from Guzik Test and ts to exploit AXIe local bus series is essentially a family ed on an aggregate 40Gs/s  oducts include the following  memory, allowing a single an one second at full speed.

of each digitizer is 40GB/s,  d to support full speed real- slot, proving the 40GB/s  nitude faster than even the in PXIe or AXIe.  This was tix family of FPGAs to  to be only sources of data, ept data from the left, and in Figure 4.  This allows useful for sharing memory nd the single shot capture aving multiple instances of ry is a key requirement.  As f any local bus link doesn?t nstances of any module may   source data on the left to memory  DC6000s configured as memory or ng as the aggregate bandwidth of le instances of any modules may be ble when there is a single memory  ating measurements based on data dule, such as radar applications.

Figure 5. If the aggregate bandwidth exceeds 40GB/s on Figure 4 example, a user may configure the ADCs and me systems within the same chassis, thus keeping each link to aggregate speed is 80GB/s.

In situations where link speed may excee aggregation an alternative is to disaggregate b independent data flow systems, as shown in number of independent systems deployed in an only limited by the number of slots.

Figures 3, 4, and 5 show the diversit architectures enabled by the local bus.

B. Digital Signal Processing While the above digitizers show proof  AXIe?s 40GB/s rates over the local bus, introduction of a digital processing module t the powerful capabilities enabled by the AXI Guzik DP6000 Digital Processor Module is a module that is local bus enabled. The DP 600 user-configurable Altera Stratix V FPGAs, 3,550 multipliers and 583,000 logic elemen 64GB of on-board memory.  This product hig of the advantages of the AXIe local bus archi digitizers, it accepts data from the left, and right, at the full 40GB/s bandwidth.  Additiona 8-lane PCIe Gen 3 links on the front panel t 25.6GB/s data transfers to or from an external RAID array for continuous streaming.

Figure 6.  The Guzik DP6000 DSP module can acc from one of more digitizers.  It can send the processed da to its right, or result data over the standard AXIe PCIe memory for additional storage.  For applications where co needed, its external PCIe ports can forward data at 25.6G external host or RAID array.

the middle link in the  emory as two separate to 40GB/s, though the  ed 40GB/s due to by deploying two n Figure 5.  The n AXIe chassis is  ty of data flow  f by example of it is the recent  that demonstrates e local bus.  The single-slot AXIe  0 hosts two large each delivering  nts, and includes ghlights a number tecture.  Like the sources it to the  ally, it sports four that allows up to host computer or   cept data from its left ata at full 40GB/s rate  bus.  It has 64GB of ontnuous streaming is GB/s indefinitely to an  Figure 7.  To achieve an aggreagate 40GB DP6000 may be cascaded.  This enables ind rate.

Readers may note that the 25.6 rate is less than the 40GB/s maximu pragmatic limitation of the DP6000 current PCIe speed at Gen 3.  In man rate is sufficient, and is already supe Nevertheless, the AXIe local bus modules, as shown in Figure 7.  Her the data stream at its full 40GB/s r data and streams it out over its ex 25.6GB/s limit.  The other half, no right to another DP6000.  That remaining data to its own external p stream can now be streamed indefin a host computer.  This is a good exa bus architecture overcomes an appar  The DP 6000 is useful in its connecting to an external RAID module can perform fast real-time time capture into its 64GB of memo essentially increases the number same data stream, or expands the am Typical applications include user filtering, and triggering.  Of particu trigger on the data, or some mathem  In any of the figures, multiples o processors, or waveform generators alternatives show the powerful architecture.  As long as any one l 40GB/s, there are nearly an infinite digitizers, DSP modules, and exter that may be configured.  While th single instrument sets where modu left and right, the local bus arc adjacent instrument sets, operating Figure 5.

C. Future Capabilities The digitizer and digital proces  the breakthrough capability promis bus in particular.  As noted earlier, specifies the backplane paths fo particular semiconductor technology allows AXIe local bus speeds to Doubling the device speed, for exa   B/s off-board streaming rate, two definite streaming at a full 40GB/s  6GB/s off-board streaming um local bus rate.  This is a 0 faceplate connectors and ny applications, a 25.6GB/s erior to current alternatives.

allows cascading of DSP  re the first DP6000 receives ate.  It removes half of the  xternal port, well within its ow at 20GB/s is sent to its  DP6000 can stream the port.  The complete 40GB/s nitely to two RAID arrays or ample where the AXIe local rent module limitation.

s own right, even without or host computer.  Each digital processing or real-  ory.  Adding more modules of FPGAs processing the  mount of real time memory.

defined signal processing,  ular interest is the ability to matical element of the data.

of digitizer modules, digital s may be deployed.  These flexibility the local bus  link may be constrained to number of combinations of  rnal PCs or RAID systems he figures principally show ules communicate on their chitecture allows multiple independently as shown in  sor modules show some of sed by AXIe, and the local , the AXIe standard merely r the local bus, not the y, speed, or protocol.  This grow with Moore?s Law.

ample, allows 80GB/s data    transfers on each local bus link.  While the examples showed digitizers, the architecture is equally applicable to AXIe arbitrary waveform generators deploying the local bus.  In this case, memory, data processing and massive external waveform storage may all be deployed to drive one or more wide- bandwidth arbitrary waveform generators.



IV. APPLICATIONS In general, the AXIe local bus is optimized for data  streaming applications where high bandwidth and long records are needed simultaneously.  Mil/aero communication and radar systems are excellent examples of applications that require both.  This is particularly useful for searching for intermittent or transient signals over long periods of time.  Here, a signal may be recorded nearly indefinitely until the DSP module detects an event, which serves as a trigger.  Long records can supply critical information leading up to an event, and the reaction of the system later.

The AXIe local bus also has applications in high energy physics, where DSP modules are searching for events that coincide with particle collisions, and subsequently decide to keep or delete recent data.

Each of these applications has a twin application, where a long data stream is sent to one or more AWGs to simulate an environment.  Sometimes this is recorded information, or information that has been digitially processed in some manner.

Finally, the DSP modules may be used in non-test applications as powerful computational accelerators.  Here, data is streamed by a host PC to one or more DSP modules in an AXIe chassis.  These modules have powerful number crunching capabilities embedded in their FPGAs, and can coordinate between modules via the AXIe local bus.  The result data may be retrieved over another PCIe link.

Each of the applications above assume that the local bus is being exploited as a data flow architecture.  As mentioned earlier, the local bus may also be used to coordinate timing signals between modules, or a combination of data flow and timing.



V. SUMMARY AXIe delivers the board area, power, cooling and tight  timing synchronization required by very high performance digital instrumentation and data converters.  With the addition of the AXIe local bus, AXIe systems can now deploy real time streaming and digital processing performance an order of magnitude beyond traditional techniques. The speed and flexibility is unprecedented, and not achievable through traditional bus architectures.  These features enable new applications in aerospace, defense, and high-energy physics.

The unique local bus topology allows this to be accomplished in an open-system architecture that allows new levels of flexibility and scalability.  Recent products from Guzik Test and Measurement show that these breakthrough performance levels may be achieved using today?s technologies.  As technology advances, so will the attainable speeds of the local bus.

