Privacy and Security in Cyberspace:  Training Perspectives on the Personal Data Ecosystem

Abstract? There is a growing understanding that privacy is an essential component of security. In order to decrease the probability of having data breaches, the design of information systems, processes and architectures should incorporate considerations related to both privacy and security. This incorporation may benefit from the offering of appropriate training. In this way, this paper intends to discuss how to better offer training while considering new developments that involve both multimedia production and the ?gamification? of training.

The paper suggests the use in conjunction of two frameworks: the EduPMO Framework, useful for the management of large scale projects that may involve a consortium of organizations developing multimedia for the offering of training, and the Game Development Framework, useful for the identification of the main components of the serious game for training on privacy by design to be developed as part of the training offering.

Keywords?big data; privacy; security; training.



I.  INTRODUCTION Research on cyber security training is relevant to  applications related to the protection of local. national, international, and global assets as well as for security in cyberspace. One of the main reasons is the need to train all stakeholders from an organization on cyber security, from the chief information officer to the end user. There are different training needs according to the profile of each stakeholder, which may drive the development of content in media like audios, videos, texts, hypertexts, animations, simulations, serious games, and so on. The offering of training in complex courses like the ones on security may demand the creation of a consortium of organizations that may have to work in collaboration to develop the content and even to teach it.

Considering that security is an international concern, there is a tendency that more and more national and international consortiums will be formed, which brings additional complexity to the task.

While discussing the creation of the National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), a public-private collaboration (PPC) for accelerating the widespread adoption of integrated cyber security tools and technologies, Jackson [14] suggests that "there is no lack of commercially available tools to counter rapidly evolving cyber threats, but putting them into place and having them work together efficiently can be a challenge". The author mentions different demands that may benefit from good quality training, like the difficulty to use available tools and the fact that many solutions are not widely known.

The importance of security in the cyber world is growing in a way that new specialty areas with the cyber security field are being created and consolidated. As an example, according to the National Cyber Security Workforce Framework [12], the typical duties and skill requirements of cyber security workers involve 31 common types of cyber security tasks. Many competencies, or areas of expertise, are required for successful performance of these tasks by each specific role: Knowledge Management; Legal, Government, and Jurisprudence; Logical Systems Design; Mathematical Reasoning; Modeling and Simulation; Multimedia Technologies; Network Management; Personnel Safety and Security; Project Management; Requirements Analysis; Risk Management; Software Testing and Evaluation; and others. The many competencies that are required suggests part of the training needs.

The cyber security field may be analyzed in many different perspectives. One of these perspectives is the one related to privacy. Privacy may be understood as freedom from unauthorized intrusion. With the increase in the use of informatics by citizens of all nations, privacy turned to be an essential element to be considered for financial transactions, for medical information exchange and so on. As an example, while people want to buy items on the web, they don't want their credit card numbers to be shown to unauthorized people. In another example, while they want doctors to save all their  2013 European Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference  DOI 10.1109/EISIC.2013.30   2013 European Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference  DOI 10.1109/EISIC.2013.30   2013 European Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference  DOI 10.1109/EISIC.2013.30     health history in databases, they don't want these databases to be easily accessed by intruders.

In the last few years, a new approach that considers the Personal Data Ecosystem, or PDE [7], turned to be of increased relevance: "The challenge we face is protecting and promoting individual privacy while at the same time allowing for the socio-economic opportunities and benefits derived from the permissioned contextual use of our personal information". In the so called ?age of big data?, new ways of using data may bring innovation but the protection of personal data is essential to guarantee the rights of individuals [13].

In this research, the training needs related to both privacy by design and security by design are considered in the perspective that these two paradigms are both converging and complementary [6].

This work will take into consideration new developments for training. These developments involve both multimedia production and the ?gamification? of training. For this purpose, the paper suggests the use in conjunction of two frameworks.

The first framework is useful for the management of large scale projects that may involve a consortium of organizations developing multimedia for the offering of training. The second framework, on the other hand, is useful for the identification of the main components of the serious game to be developed.

This paper is organized as follows. After this introduction, the second section presents important concepts related to privacy and security by design in the cyberspace.

The third section presents in detail the first framework, which is useful for large scale multimedia production and for management of training. This framework has been applied by the authors in real projects [3]. The fourth section presents briefly the second framework and focuses on the ?gamification? of training as a new approach.

The fifth section presents trends, future work and the conclusion of the paper.



II. PRIVACY AND SECURITY BY DESIGN IN CYBERSPACE The next paragraphs present relevant concepts related to  privacy and security by design in the cyber world. According to the Swedish Data Inspection Board [8], the operator who has control over the handling of personal data is always responsible for following the legislation of the EU data protection directive 95/45/EC [9]. This includes ensuring that IT systems, used in business, do not lead to privacy risks. Therefore, clear requirements for suppliers who deliver IT systems, and for the organization themselves, must be considered while mechanisms and routines to minimize privacy risks must be implemented. Even if organizations not always develop or purchase IT systems, but instead use other services for their purposes (cloud services, outsourcing, etc.), the responsibility is always with the organizations and they must ensure that the supplier meets the requirements for security and privacy [8].

There are four main areas that need attention: 1) minimizing the amount of personal data, 2) limiting access to the personal data, 3) protecting personal data, and 4) letting the system guide the user in the right direction [8][11]. By  considering privacy issues from start to end during the system?s life cycle, the ability to comply with applicable laws and to improve security can be increased. Simultaneously, the risk of unnecessary costs and time-consuming work, which easily arises when one has to deal with the problems afterwards, can be reduced [11].

Our earlier research shows that socio-critical systems like, for instance, healthcare, have significant shortcomings in limiting access control, protecting personal data and ability to guide the user in the right direction in the healthcare systems, concerning privacy aspects [1][2]. Many factors can be the cause for this situation. However, results show clearly that knowledge and skills are missing about the need for including privacy aspects already in the early phases of systems development. Healthcare is an important area for society.

Therefore, there is a need to focus on skills-enhancing security measures generally, in order to protect patient information as well as to include necessary security measures in the form of training and competences for privacy reasons [1][2][6].



III. LARGE SCALE MULTIMEDIA PRODUCTION AND THE MANAGEMENT OF TRAINING  In this section, a framework that benefits from the concept of ?multimedia factory? will be presented and discussed.

Greenfield [10] defines a software factory as a ?development environment configured to support the rapid development of a specific type of application?. As this author proposes, software factories promise to change the characteristics of the software industry by introducing ?patterns? of industrialization. In the same way, a ?multimedia factory? would be a development environment configured to support the rapid production of different types of digital media, which may include audio, video, software or hypertext, among others. While a mature software factory would intend to have high levels of code reuse, a mature digital ?multimedia factory? would intend to reuse as many parts of products as possible. As a tendency, future may present increasing cases of systematic family-based product development, with product line practices getting better understood both in the software industry and in the educational digital multimedia industry.

The following paragraphs present a framework for the management of projects on educational multimedia production while considering the use of the multimedia products on training projects. The framework is named EduPMO [3], an abbreviation of ?Educational Project Management Office?. It has three components: the model, the methodology and the implementation. The components should be understood as related but independent entities.

In such a model, the dimensions are divided in two categories: implicit and explicit. The explicit dimensions are directly expressed, in total or in part, to the different people participating on projects. The implicit dimensions, on the other hand, still affect the work of the teams, but they are not directly expressed to them since these dimensions represent a set of strategies used by the managers and the educational project management office to manage projects. Despite the obvious interrelationship between the dimensions, they were divided into four explicit dimensions and five implicit dimensions in     order to facilitate the understanding and the use of the processes involved.

The explicit dimensions go from D1 to D4, as follows. The first dimension, or D1, is the content dimension, and refers to the appropriate understanding of the fundamental project requirements involved, in particular in terms of the content to be considered on multimedia production and/or use. The second dimension, or D2, is the pedagogical dimension, and refers to the teaching and learning aspects involved. The third dimension, or D3, is the technological dimension, and refers mainly to the processes related to the technical requirements of products to be produced and/or used. The fourth dimension, or D4, is the management dimension, and refers to knowledge areas known as project integration, project scope, project time, project cost, project quality, project human resource, project communications, project risk and project procurement.

The implicit dimensions go from D5 to D9, as follows. The fifth dimension, or D5, is the strategic dimension, and refers to meeting the specific strategic objectives through the centralized management of several portfolios and programs, which may include identification, prioritization, authorization, management and control of the projects. The sixth dimension, or D6, is the knowledge dimension, and refers to essential aspects to favor an effective management of knowledge, like harvesting, selection, configuration, dissemination and application. The seventh dimension, or D7, is the change dimension, and usually refers to the management of transitions related to the project itself or in the way in which the teams work. The eighth dimension, or D8, is the maturity dimension, and refers to process improvement. The ninth dimension, or D9, is the rights dimension, and refers to aspects involving innovation management and intellectual property.

For each dimension, guidelines focused on multimedia production and/or use may be presented for the processes, in a way that six artifacts would be available to managers and/or to the management team for each process: (1) description; (2) diagram; (3) inputs; (4) outputs; (5) tools and techniques; and (6) template documents. In general, the processes would be generic but the template documents would be specific to the type of project under consideration.

The methodology from the framework refers to the implementation of the model and has three phases per cycle: (1) ?D?, or Design phase; (2) ?I?, or Implementation phase; and (3) ?A?, or Assessment phase. The methodology may be applied for one or more projects of the organization. The design phase should consider the context of the project in order to determine what is possible to be implemented in the short, medium and long terms. After the design, the implementation phase will implement the short term plan and then assess the results in order to bring about elements for the next D-I-A cycle.

The first phase, ?D?, or Design, would have the following fundamental activities: (i) identification by the educational project management office of the methodology components to be implemented in the organization while considering the context of the moment, which may include the definition of the relevant dimensions and the development of glossaries, guides, etc., as a way to define standards and practices; (ii) plan the life  cycle processes, an activity that entails defining the useful processes for each dimension, with description, diagram, inputs, outputs, template documents, tools and techniques to be used; (iii) select the platform that will facilitate the methodology implementation; (iv) if needed, elaborate a formal written document detailing the management office operation during the specified cycle, with objectives, cost, scope, schedule, etc.

The second phase, ?I?, or Implementation, would have the following fundamental activities: (i) training of the project manager by the management office; (ii) plan in detail of the transition (change) in the way of working in order to improve the management of the project under consideration; (iii) training of the project team by the project manager or by the management office, in this way facilitating the transition (change) in the way of working in order to improve the management of the project under consideration; and (iv) execution, which may include actions going from starting the use of new software to the implementation of a series of processes of a specific dimension.

The third phase, ?A?, or Assessment, would have the following fundamental activities: (i) assess the implementation while considering the detailed planning of the transition (change) in the way of working in order to improve the management of the project under consideration; (ii) suggest possible actions for the next D-I-A cycle in the specific project being considered; (iii) search for improvement opportunities on the methodology based on the assessment of the implementation; and (iv) suggest possible reviews on the life cycle processes, which implies on possible reviews on descriptions, diagrams, inputs, outputs, template documents, tools and techniques.

In this perspective, the D-I-A cycle will be used continuously as a way to allow the improvement of the methodology based on the different assessments happening in each project. In parallel, different cycles could happen in the same project in the perspective of improving its management during its execution. As a consequence, the improvements tend to happen more often and according to a planned schedule.

This context tends to favor the use of contributions from both the managers and the teams with the potential to affect the organization as a whole. In the proposed framework, there are 199 processes in the nine dimensions [3].



IV. THE ?GAMIFICATION? OF TRAINING AS A NEW APPROACH  After a brief discussion related to the ?gamification? of training, this section presents a framework useful for the development of a serious game for training on privacy by design. The framework presented here may be used in conjunction with the EduPMO framework that was presented in the last section.

In a recent report on the educational value of serious games [4], research on the effect and effectiveness of serious games is summarized in an analysis of 99 scientific articles published in journals over the last 10 years. The report shows that serious games and game based learning seem to be useful to almost all subjects, a fact that suggests its applicability to the kind of     training discussed in this work. Moreover, the report concludes that "if they are not always superior to other types of learning material, the evidence that serious games can be effective learning materials in their own right is quite strong".

A ?gamefied? training may be presented in different ways.

One of these ways involves using frameworks, as we present in the next paragraphs. The Game Development Framework [5] may be useful for the identification of the main components of the serious game to be developed as part of the training under consideration. The framework assumes that ?playing a game can be described as making changes in quantitative game states, where each specific state is a collection of all values of all game elements and the relationships between them?. This framework divides the game components into four categories: holistic, boundary, temporal and structural.

Initially, for the holistic category in the framework, the proposed serious game discussed in this paper would have the following components: game instance, game session, play session and extra-game activities. Secondly, for the boundary category in the framework, the proposed serious game discussed in this paper would have the following components: rules, modes of play, goals and subgoals. Thirdly, for the temporal category in the framework, the proposed serious game discussed in this paper would have the following components: actions, events, closures and subclosures, end conditions and evaluation functions. At last, for the structural category in the framework, the proposed serious game discussed in this paper would have the following components: interface, game elements, players, game facilitator and game time.

The next steps in this research will focus on detailing the game components suggested by the Game Development Framework [5], which is a generic one. Eventually, after presentation of appropriate justifications, only the aspects of the framework that are relevant will be considered.



V. CONCLUSION This work involved two relevant trends perceived by the  authors: (1) the growing importance of privacy and security in the cyberspace and (2) the ?gamification? of training. While ?big data? may benefit the society in many ways, privacy and security in the cyberspace cannot be neglected. And while training may be based on traditional media like videos and books, ?gamification? must be investigated as a new approach with many potential positive benefits.  This research may be considered relevant to the protection of assets in the cyberspace if the very specific demands of training here discussed are considered. The appropriate use of computers and other devices tends to depend more and more on training due to the increased complexity of IT.

Future work may focus on describing and validating a serious game for training on privacy by design. The fact that international networks like the Internet are omnipresent suggests that new research should consider a global perspective on training.

