Using of Cloud Computing, Clustering and  Document-oriented Database for Enterprise Content

Abstract?The paper deals with NoSQL Document-oriented database technology and its implementation in Enterprise Content Management area. The results of performance tests of the SQL and NoSQL solutions and suggestions on the conceptual architecture of the ECM system based on NoSQL Document- oriented database are provided. Using of cloud computing, clustering, data ranking and other Big Data related technologies is discussed.

Keywords? Big Content, Big Data, cloud computing, clustering, data ranking, document-oriented databases, ECM, NoSQL

I.  INTRODUCTION As stated in the recent report of the U.S. Chamber of  Commerce [1] the Big Data market is expected to grow to $16.9 billion in 2015. IBM?s statement [2] ?Every day, we create 2.5 quintillion bytes of data ? so much that 90% of the data in the world today has been created in the last two years alone? might be questioned by the skeptics. Still there is no doubt that the Big Data is already an integral part of the global economy, which could not function without it anymore. This extremely rapid growth of the data amount and complexity has introduced new dimensions in data processing that are out of the comfort level for the old one-size-fits-all database products and that has led to the introduction of new ones ? dedicated for use in separate areas ? transaction processing, data warehouses, stream procession, data aggregation  etc. Our area of interest is Enterprise Content Management (ECM) and, in particular, Document Management, that is influenced heavily by the rapid growth of data amount as well. Currently we run ERDF (European Regional Development Fund) funded research project to evaluate and compare the performance on large document databases of our in-house ECM system Namejs and the NoSQL database system Clusterpoint, and design the architecture of the new NoSQL based ECM system.

Chapter II examines the state of the art of the Big Data related development in ECM area.

Chapter III and chapter IV briefly describes the two platforms used for performance tests - SQL based Namejs and NoSQL Document-oriented Clusterpoint.

Chapter V discusses the important differences between SQL and NoSQL platform.

Chapter VI summarizes  the results of performance tests and advantages of NoSQL for ECM.

Chapter VII details the concepts of the proposed ECM architecture.

Conclusion outlines the results and suggests the direction for the future work.



II. ECM AND BIG DATA Enterprise content management (ECM) is ?the  technologies, tools, and methods used to capture, manage, store, preserve, and deliver content across an enterprise? [3].

ECM covers a wide area of functionality [4][5][6]. Fig. 1 [7] depicts the traditional application areas:  ? DM or Document Management;  ? Collab (Collaboration of supporting systems, group- ware);  ? WCM or Web Content Management (including portals);  ? RM or Records Management (archive and filing management systems);  ? Workflow/BPM or Business Process Management.

Traditionally ECM systems use SQL databases for persistence. Lately this has started to change and some players in ECM market (e.g. Alfresco [8]) are already looking in direction of NoSQL databases. Recently (July 24, 2013) Aegif Corporation announced the release of CouchDB based ECM  The project is funded by the European Regional Development Fund.

Fig. 1. Enterprise Content Management     server NemakiWare [9].

Big Data is both an issue and an opportunity for ECM because using large sets of data and sophisticated methods of analysis can lead to enhancement of the existing products and services. Still Big Data means a lot of change ? ?you cannot add earthquake to your line of employee relocation options and tools. No doubt an earthquake will move people but it probably will not relocate them as you planned? [10]. Researchers talk about significant changes to the architecture of ECM systems.

To stress the importance of these changes Gartner introduced the new term ? Big Content [11] that marries Enterprise content with Big Data. Big Content means that an enterprise content should be augmented with public information [11] and that it gets new qualities, like being human (speaks with a conversational voice), simple, visual, conversational (supports comments, reviews, ratings etc.) and organic (published fast, often in response to unpredictable moments) [12].



III. NAMEJS Namejs [13] is a MS SQL based ECM system fit both for  public bodies (like municipalities) and privately owned companies.  The system provides document registration and management within one or several organizations, maintenance of different types of documents, files and related information existing in the organization, as well as business process automation.

Namejs is implemented in more than 30 municipalities in Latvia as well as in number of other organizations. We are not confident though that the system is able to cope with really large data amounts. We had to develop from scratch a separate Namejs-like ECM system for the Latvian Ministry of Agriculture, for example, because Namejs did not qualify to the customer?s requirements, in particular, for the data volume to be processed. The system for Ministry of Agriculture is based on MS SQL as well but uses a replicated Clusterpoint database to provide an acceptable response times for full-text search.

We consider that the platform shift might be necessary for our ECM system and Clusterpoint is one of the candidates for the new platform. Our research project should help us to learn if the Clusterpoint fits as the technology platform for our ECM product and to develop the main architectural concepts for the system in question.



IV. CLUSTERPOINT Clusterpoint DBMS (DataBase Management System, see  Fig. 2) [14][15] is a document-oriented shared nothing NoSQL database that uses sharding (database horizontal partitioning across multiple instances of the database schema) to split the data volume and computational load over potentially multiple servers.

A database (or store as it is called by the authors of Clusterpoint) can be sharded by document id or using a hashing algorithm. Shards are distributed across nodes on either physical servers or virtual machines in a shared-nothing architecture. The same Clusterpoint software image is installed  on each node so the cluster operates in multi-master mode i.e.

all nodes are equal and can handle all the operations [14].

A Clusterpoint database comprises one or more stores.

Each store contains a repository and its associated index. The repository contains all data objects and is written back to disk.

The index contains information for all of the fields that the user has asked to be indexed (regardless of data type). The index is written to disk for persistency but is partially cached in memory for performance [14].

Each Clusterpoint store is a collection of XML documents.

The XML structure can be defined by user when creating the data store and can contain as subparts the document as well as metadata (Title, Author, Release Date, Rate etc.) fields. Data is stored and retrieved through an API which supports a full range of CRUD (Create, Read, Update and Delete) operations and provides both Google-like search and SQL-like query [14].



V. NOSQL VERSUS SQL ECM mainly stores unstructured information (almost 85%  of all the data in 2011 was of this type according to [16]) like e-mails, word processing documents, digital images and PDF files. SQL databases are not well suited for management of such kind of data, traditionally it ?exists outside the confines of databases or systems with fixed routines and pathways, such as enterprise resource planning systems and workflow applications? [3]. The content management (document and workflow management in particular) in case of SQL database is based on extracting (or manually appending) to the document of some metadata (e.g. author, document type, keywords etc.) and using that metadata for the management purposes. The rest of the content is stored in a content repository so that its semantic is not available for the database system and cannot be used for e.g. workflow management.

SQL database systems need metadata in particular to facilitate search functionality. The search is based on the metadata. If user needs more ? he may get a full text search but this does not work particularly well in case of traditional SQL databases [17].

The NoSQL world provides another option ? Document- oriented databases that store the document as a whole (e.g. as xml). Examples are MongoDB [18], CouchBase [16], [19] and Clusterpoint DBMS[14].

Unlocking the potential of Big Data may bring the following benefits for ECM and Document Management in particular:   Fig. 2. Architecture of the DBMS Clusterpoint     ? Usage of new data sets like voice messages, text messages, videos, e-mails, social networks, etc. may result in improved business processes and more efficient way of content management, assuring that more information is available to make reasonable decisions about what workflow path to follow and what user to assign for the next action on the given document;  ? ECM systems may profit from benefits of cloud computing; this would allow to move from a paradigm of separate ECM databases of the organizations (interchanging the documents via e-mail, for example) to the cloud based merged databases;  ? usage of clustered cloud based platform addresses the scalability issues allowing to seamlessly add new nodes to the infrastructure in case of rapid growth of data to be processed;  ? clustered infrastructure may be used to host several replicas of the data and therefore insure acceptable level of data availability and uninterrupted functioning of the system in case of hardware or software crash;  ? ranked search may be used to provide acceptable response times when millions of documents must be processed to find the relevant ones for the customer request.



VI. PERFORMANCE TESTS Series of performance tests were executed inside our  project comparing the response times of Clusterpoint DBMS versus SQL based Namejs database. The performance of document loading into database, document indexing and search was measured for both platforms. The performance was measured on identical hardware configuration for both platforms for the main data corpus of 13 million documents (copy of Wikipedia english version [20]). SQL platform was tested in addition on 1 million, 100 000 and 10 000 document databases, while NoSQL database ? on 1 million document database.

A. Database scaling The results of tests show that performance of the NoSQL  solution does not degrade with the increase of the database amount. The same concerns performance tests for document loading and indexing in case of SQL platform ? the performance does not degrade significantly.

The different story is about the search. We learned that the performance of the SQL database on the main data corpus is unacceptable for the majority of the tests. The response time of full text ad-hoc search against randomly selected words degraded to as much as 40 minutes and more. The response time of the same search requests was less than a second in case of NoSQL database. The degradation of the performance of the SQL based solution (in comparison to the NoSQL) starts to show up as soon as the database reaches amount of about 100 000 documents.

B. Document loading The loading times (Fig. 3) of the NoSQL database are  better because it stores a document as a whole while SQL application has to split the data in several (5-10 for a typical case) data and index tables which results in more disk access operations.

C. Document indexing According to the performance tests document indexing on  NoSQL is about 8 times faster than on SQL. SQL reindexes about 66MB of documents per second while NoSQL ? 550MB.

D. Document search Fig. 4 shows the average search time of the word ?tree?.

The search time of the SQL solution for the 13 million document database is not shown - it is more than 40 minutes. It has to be stressed that we are talking about search of relatively small set (10-20) of highly relevant data. We are not considering there the search of large volumes of data (e.g. for report processing).

Fig. 3. Average document loading time (millisec)    Fig. 4. Average search time (millisec) for word ?tree?

VII. ARCHITECTURAL CONCEPTS We propose four level architecture of the ECM system.

? User interface layer (client software on PC, smartphone, tablet).

? Business function or middleware layer (ECM business functionality).

? NoSQL Document-oriented DBMS layer (implements data clustering, replication, indexing, search, retrieval).

? Infrastructure layer (operating system, visualization, network and data transfer, event journaling, e-mail, file and FTP services, utilities).

The DBMS layer in our architecture is the one that seamlessly implements clustering and parallel processing allowing developers of the business layer to concentrate on design and implementation of the business process functionality. The DBMS should implement the following important for Document management architectural concepts.

? Shared nothing architecture, this allows database to be split into shards and add new nodes to a cluster effortlessly.

? Several replicas of the database may be created and maintained. This ensures the data availability ? if one of the replicas goes down the other replica(s) may be used.

? Inverted index and ranking is used to determine document?s relevance against the search request. The rankings can be configured flexibly, particularly by editing the ranking policies in a data store ranking policy file.

Maximum flexibility should be supported for location of the shards and replicas on the cluster nodes. This is supported by Clusterpoint DBMS as illustrated in the Fig. 5 ? shards of Articles are located on nodes x and y, shards of the replica of Articles ? on nodes y and z [14]. If node y goes down we still have all the data available.

A. Search in a shared nothing data store The search request is forwarded for parallel execution to all  shards of the data store (if some of the primary shards are down, a replica is involved instead). Results of the search are transferred back to the originating shard which joins them and presents to the user. In the case of the ECM system that means that with the increase in data amount new shards may be added to the database to avoid the performance degradation. This means as well that the business layer of the application must not be concerned about how to split the documents between shards, which shard to address in a search request or how to merge the results ? DBMS is providing means to configure this and takes responsibility of the process.

B. Document ranking and search There are three basic information ranking mechanisms in  the Clusterpoint DBMS [15]:  ? By value of document?s metadata field <rate>, assigned to each document before storing it;  ? By value ranges assigned to the document?s metadata fields (controls the relevant importance of one metadata field against another ?  hence document that has the searched term in, for example, ?title? field is considered to be more relevant that one with the searched term in ?comment? field);  ? By frequency and position of search terms within textual content of the document or metadata fields ? higher ranks may receive, for example, document containing more occurrences of the searched term; document with search term occurrence closer to the start of document or closer to other searched terms.

The ranking policy is defined when creating the data storage. It influences the sort order of the returned result set.

This means that when creating the ECM for a particular domain the ranking policy may be defined to assure the most relevant results are returned in the first page.

C. Adding new documents A new document is added instantly to one replica of one of  the shards. The DBMS decides what shard must take care of the current document; later on it replicates the document to other replicas. In case of ECM this means that the new document will be stored in database even if some of the replicas are not available. Replicas may be out of sync for short periods of time but the DBMS makes sure they are in sync again.

D. Indexing Indexing is performed when the new document is added to  the database or the document is updated. In relation to ECM we should consider two kinds of functionality ? creating of an index record and creating of metadata. Both are used when searching for relevant data. A structure of the metadata must be decided upon creation of the database structure. The metadata of the document must be provided to DBMS from the business function layer (extracted from the document automatically or with assistance of the user). The index data is extracted from the document by DBMS. To ensure acceptable performance the items that are searched must be indexed. In case of ECM the  Fig. 5. Sharding and replication     searchable items are words hence the index consists of words that are supplemented with links to documents containing that word.

E. Clustering Obvious advantage of the shared-nothing document-  oriented database (like Clusterpoint DBMS) is that it scales easily and is convenient for clustered computing. The reason is that every data item (e.g. document) here is stored as a whole (which makes the easy task to add new cluster nodes to the system and split the items through the nodes), in contrary to SQL database where the item data is split in several tables.

Thus the normalization of data which is the very fundament of relational databases turns out to make the platform not suited for the clustering.



VIII. CONCLUSION NoSQL document-oriented ready for clustering DBMS  (like Clusterpoint) seems a reasonable platform for ECM in the Big Data world. Our performance tests show that starting from the 100 000 document database the selected NoSQL platform outperforms the SQL platform for the tasks typical for Document management. With the increase of amount the performance of SQL solution degrades quickly and the system definitely cannot cope with a 13 million document database.

The performance of NoSQL solution, in contrary, stays at the reasonable level even without the use of clustering.

For the further increase of data amount Document-oriented storage and shared nothing architecture provides easy scaling through adding of new cluster nodes. The clustered processing, usage of inverted indexes and ranked search ensures that the response times stay at an acceptable level even for very large amounts of data.

The main direction of the future work is the further elaboration of the ECM architecture discussed in this paper.

