Social Issues of Big Data and Cloud:  Privacy, Confidentiality, and Public Utility

Abstract? Business people and academia are now excited about Big Data and Cloud Computing as the new and most innovative means for enhancing productivity and customer satisfaction. Simultaneously, there are strong concerns about privacy not only among privacy advocates but among consumers in general, and how to strike a right balance is the main theme in every field of science. However, it is quite strange that very little attention has been paid to the concept of confidentiality, which must be the core element of privacy.

This paper first tries to analyze the following two dichotomies as a basis for possible policy considerations: (1) privacy approach in the United States versus confidentiality approach in the United Kingdom, though they share the same common law tradition, and (2) clear demarcation between Information Service and Telecommunications in the United States, dating back to the Computer Inquiry in the 1970s.

This paper also analyzes the features of the Cloud and discusses the possibility of treating it as a new type of Public Utility, namely Information Utility. This hypothesis should be rejected, because there are crucial differences in market structures, regardless of clear similarities in service features.

Instead, this paper emphasizes the necessity of protecting confidentiality as an industrial norm.

Taking into account the long tradition of free market for computing industries, self-regulation is basically preferable to government regulation. But from a different viewpoint of ?nudge?, a hybrid combination of libertarianism and paternalism, this paper concludes by proposing five short recommendations including fair contract terms as well as unbundling confidentiality from privacy.

Keywords- Big data; privacy; confidentiality; cloud; public utility; nudge

I. BIG DATA FEVER Business people are now excited about ?Big Data?  (BD) as the new and most innovative means for enhancing productivity and customer satisfaction, and the term BD has become one of the buzz words not only in business but in society as a whole.

Actually, as computing power advances quite astonishingly thanks to Moore?s law, the amount of data in our world has been exploding, and analyzing large data sets (BD) with 4Vs (Velocity, Volume, Veracity and Variety) seems to be a key basis of competition. BD is expected to generate new productivity growth and innovation?that is, new levels of business value.

It is natural that business always seeks a new trend, but BD may be a kind of fever. As the world economy is fluctuating everywhere since the Lehman shock, there is a strong expectation toward new businesses as well as new jobs. Reportedly, BD now appears in 0.1% of all job listings and it is expected to double before the end of 2012, and to pass ?Hadoop? as a popular term for this field of emerging technology [1].

Professors such as Brynjolfsson of MIT, a distinguished researcher in Information Technology (IT) and productivity with his colleague Andrew McAfee, seem to be enthusiastic about BD. They published an e- book titled ?Race against Machine,? and tell us as follows in their blog [2] [3].

?Today businesses can measure their activities and  customer relationships with unprecedented precision. As a result, they are awash with data. This is particularly evident in the digital economy, where clickstream data give precisely targeted and real-time insights into consumer behavior.? They also say ?breakthroughs in innovation often rely on breakthroughs in measurement.? But they take a hard look at the impact of acceleration of technology on jobs. ?Our technologies are racing ahead but many of our skills and organizations are lagging behind. So it?s urgent that we understand these phenomena, discuss their implications and come up with strategies that allow human workers to race with machines instead of racing against them.?  They describe themselves as ?digital optimists,? and admit that IT tools are ?greatly improving our world and our lives, and will continue to do so.? They put forth ideas for using technologies to accelerate organizational innovation and enhance human capital.



II. BIG DATA AS MEANS FOR RESILIENCE Before addressing privacy issues, I will introduce some experiences about how BD can contribute to resilience in case of emergency, taking the 3.11 tragedy as an extreme example.

The term 3.11 is an acronym of the triple disasters that hit Japan two years ago, including the earthquake, the tsunami, and the nuclear plant accidents. It started around 14:46 on March 11, 2011 with the M9.0 earthquake that covered most of the eastern half of mainland Japan, and was followed by a tsunami so huge as to occur only once every 100 years. These two were natural disasters, although there was criticism of earthquake prediction and tsunami warning ability.

DOI 10.1109/ARES.2013.66     In contrast, the nuclear accident at Fukushima No. 1 power plant operated by Tokyo Electric Power Co. was a mixture of natural and man-made disasters, since precautionary actions have protected other plants such as the Onagawa plant (more closely located to the epicenter of the earthquake) from a catastrophe. And the potential risk of radioactive contamination still continues.

During the first 48 hours after the disaster, which is believed to be the crucial time for rescuing victims, all roads were extremely congested, since some were destroyed, and some were overloaded with cars rushing toward the stricken areas. Loss of information worsened the situation.

In the midst of such chaos, some could enjoy navigation by Honda and Pioneer Traffic Tracing Systems, each of which provided congestion information to her subscribers respectively. One example of data provided on that occasion is shown in Fig. 1. While the subscribers receive traffic information, they also send their own routing data to the system, which constitutes BD, and shows a reliable and less-congested routing.

As usefulness of the data became apparent, information was not confined to the subscribers, but opened to the public via Google in cooperation with Toyota and Nissan, which helped those who went to the damaged areas by car, or some might have changed to other transportation means.

Google provided another type of aid, called Person Finder. In an emergency, it is sometimes difficult to make even a telephone call, which prevented the confirmation of safety even among family members. Google set up Person Finder as early as the evening of 3.11, and helped people reconnect with friends and loved ones in the aftermath of natural and man-made disasters.

The above two examples were success stories. But there were more failure stories than success. Japan has been maintaining a family registry, and it is the basic public record for all interactions between government and citizens. Tsunami flooded into several town offices and washed away or invalidated these records made of paper.? But some cities could survive, because three months earlier copies of all records including paper documents were stored in another place, where tsunami did not reach.

There is now a strong tendency toward digitizing these data, and storing in a Cloud, remote from the town hall.

Figure 1. Example of Big Data Application

III. PRIVACY CONCERNS Indeed, BD will be promising, but it is usually  accompanied by privacy concerns on the other side of the same coin as symbolized by ?Big Brother? [4]. Privacy advocates such as EPIC (Electronic Privacy Information Center) issue many privacy alerts including BD-related potential violations, and the research community is making every effort to develop privacy-preserving data mining (PPDM), privacy enhancing technology (PET), etc.

in order to have a right balance between opportunities and concerns about BD.

Academia are also trying to solve the problem; for example, Tene and Polinetsky [5] put BD between Big Benefit and Big Concerns, and call for ?Big Decisions,? while Machanvajjhala and Reiter [6] expect ?Big Privacy.? However, discussions tend to go on without a clear definition of privacy, and quite frequently, privacy is confused with confidentiality of private information.

Privacy laws are usually considered in the context of an individual's privacy right or reasonable expectation of privacy, both of which are subjective rather than objective.

Therefore, there are ever-lasting debates among legal scholars regarding what elements constitute privacy.

Warren and Brandeis? paper [7] was the first attempt, in which they defined privacy as ?an inviolate personality? symbolized as ?the right to be let alone.?  Seventy years later, Professor Prosser classified privacy tort into four categories: unreasonable intrusion, disclosure of private facts, false light publicity, and appropriation of the other?s name or likeness [8]. We must add two more elements to this, since self-determination such as sexual orientation or contraception is admitted as one of the privacy elements by the supreme court (Roe v.

Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973)), and a new right called the right of publicity has been developed by the lower court decisions (for example, Haelan Laboratories v. Topps Chewing Gum (2nd Cir. 202 F.2d 866 (1953)).

Therefore, privacy is now considered to contain at least six sub-sets of rights as follows [9]: ?  self- determination, ?  unreasonable intrusion, ?  public disclosure of private facts, ?  false light publicity, appropriation of the other?s name or likeness, and right of publicity. Thus, it is fairly difficult to maintain a fruitful discussion among people without prior specification of the speaker?s notion of privacy.

In the case of BD, privacy concerns are mostly related to types 3 and 4., which are generally called ?data privacy?, but still some ambiguity and confusion must be inevitable. The worst example of such confusion is illustrated in the document titled ?Top Ten Big Data Security and Privacy Challenges? issued by Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) in November 2012 [10], where the following ten challenges are listed: ?  Secure computations in distributed programming  frameworks, ? Security best practices for non-relational data stores, ? Secure data storage and transaction logs, ? End-point input validation/filtering, 	  Real-time security/compliance monitoring, Scalable and composable privacy-preserving data mining and analytics, ? Cryptographically enforced access control and secure     communication, ? Granular access control,  Granular audit, and ? Data provenance.

In this analysis, if access to private data is protected by cryptography, we will have privacy in BD, because the parties are not considered as vulnerable or malicious. The threat model of PET for privacy is different; because it considers communication partners as malicious or non- trustworthy.

Moreover, it is very difficult to identify which item is closely related to privacy. Taken as broadly as possible, almost all items are related, and only items 6 and 7 are included when you take it as narrowly as possible. That is partly because the term privacy itself is so ambiguous, as mentioned above, but the main reason lies in the attitude and knowledge of the author who uses the term ?privacy? without specifying the accurate meaning. In this regard, even lawyers are not exceptions, not to mention laymen who may be innocent and exempted from any liability, but still confusion remains.

In order to have a fruitful discussion, I have proposed a clear unbundling of terms between privacy and data protection [11], where the former means a semantic effect on personality and the latter a mere syntactical method.

The former dispute must be settled by the courts not on the property rule but on the liability rule [12], whereas the latter may be solved by technology.

My idea is very close to the legal system existing in the United States, but it is not universal. Rather, the European system covering the member countries of the European Union seems to be more prevailing due to the massive adopters. These two systems are contrastive in the following six points as shown in Table-I, among which the alienability concept is most important, because it is directly linked with separation of personal data and privacy.



IV. DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  The demarcation between personal data and privacy must be the first step to understand privacy as a whole.

But a more important distinction will be the one between privacy and confidentiality, though usually these two terms are used interchangeably.

For example, when people talk about security management, confidentiality is one of the top priority elements of CIA (confidentiality, integrity, and availability), and privacy protection is believed to be secured through confidentiality, regardless of subtle differences between CSA and PET mentioned above.

However, from a legal viewpoint a quite different scene may arise. On one hand there is a general consensus that legal method or institution to secure privacy is gradually harmonized toward a single global standard. On the other hand, there exists a view that insists that the differences of systems and cultures still constitute an important factor.

As the latter example, the conflicts between the European Union and the United States are frequently referred to as mentioned above. But it is quite strange that the United States and the United Kingdom show a contrastive attitude toward protection of confidentiality,  TABLE I. DIFFERENT APPROACHES BETWEEN USA AND EU  Item USA EU Nature of right Personal (Human)  right Human right  Separation of personal data and  privacy (=Alienability of  personal data)  Alienable?(=Tradable) Inalienable (not separable from privacy)  Legal tradition Common law Statute  Official norm Sectoral statutes ECHR + Omnibus directive  Public/private dichotomy  Separate treatment Combined principles + separate laws  Dispute resolution  Litigation Data protection commissioner  though they share the common law tradition as well as Prince Albert v. Strange in 1849 (1 McN. & G. 25), which was picked up as the starting case law by Warren and Brandeis [7].

As Richards and Solove [13] point out, English court has not changed their attitude toward privacy since Strange, while American legal society has been thoroughly influenced by Warren and Brandeis. Therefore, it is quite contrastive that English court keeps its tradition to preserve confidentiality between the confider and the confidant to protect privacy, whereas American courts try to protect privacy per se apart from confidentiality. And in this regard, Japan belongs to the American school.

The differences between the two systems appear in the following four different layers as summarized in Table-II.

First, privacy is quite personal and subjective, as the symbolic phrase ?to be let alone? implies. On the contrary, confidentiality depends upon the relationship between the confider and the confidant, thus making the private nature of contract more visible and objective through the relationship.

Second, privacy is usually as absolute as one of the human rights inalienable to others, though there are slight differences between European Union countries and the United States, as was shown on the occasion of the EU Directive safe harbor disputes [14]. Regardless of these slight differences, it is quite different from confidentiality, which fundamentally constitutes a kind of contract, taking for granted personal information as alienable.

The third difference is what kind of right the victim may have against the injurer: in the case of privacy, the plaintiff may sue the injurer against the violation of his/her privacy as a cause of action, whereas in the case of breach of confidentiality, both parties of the contract may go to court in search of damages against the breach of contract.

Injunction may be awarded according to the situation, but generally speaking it is more feasible in case of privacy, since violation affects moral rights.

Last but not least, the third party effect is most important, but there is little difference, though the readers may suppose privacy is more guaranteed in terms of third party effect, because it is akin to property right. But actually, the English system of confidentiality provides a similar level of protection against the third party who breaks the confidentiality depending on whether it is intentionally or carelessly [15].

One important note before closing this section is that the English system may have advantages and     TABLE II. PRIVACY VERSUS CONFIDENTIALITY  Item Privacy Confidentiality  Attribution Quite personal and individualistic Relationship between confider and confidant  Nature of right Personal (human) right  Contract between confider and confidant  Legal claim against breach  Entitled to the person who suffers from violation, with injunctive relief implied  Entitled to either party or both parties of the contract, with injunctive relief conditionally  Third party effect  Litigation can include the third party, who knowingly or without appropriate care violate privacy  Litigation can include the third party, who knowingly or without appropriate care break confidentiality  disadvantages as is the case with other social systems. On the pro side, it seems very suited to the nature of privacy, especially in terms of subjective as well as relational nature. On the con side, it has long been supported by the ethics of ?gentleman?, which has no guarantee of efficacy in the civilized society [16].



V. DEMARCATION BETWEEN INFORMATION SERVICE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS  Now we will move to the next issue: who will be the major players in the BD business, and how to treat them in order to enhance benefits as well as reduce concerns.

In previous days, the database business was constructed mainly by data creators or data gatherers. For example, the Chemical Abstract was created, operated and maintained by the American Chemical Society, which is an association of big users of this database. The same thing can be said of airline reservation systems, where alliances of airliners are eager to gain competitive advantages against other alliances.

But the situation has been fairly changed in the environment of ubiquitous computing and reliable outsourcing. Today, many firms engaging in IT-related business are collecting and accumulating BD through the daily process of their business. Meanwhile, corporations other than IT-related areas are focusing on their core competences and entrusting IT-related businesses to third parties. Thus, main players in BD will be IT-related companies such as Google, Amazon, ISPs, and telecommunications carriers.

Indeed, there is a green field of information services, where various kinds of existing industries as well as ones quite different from the traditional industry category compete. However, legal treatment cannot keep pace with these rapid changes effectively, but instead stick to the traditional categorization. Here, the most important and still influential market demarcation is one between telecommunications and information services.

In the early 1970s, recognizing the convergence of computers and telecommunications, the FCC (Federal Communications Commission) started the Computer Inquiry?. It was a duty for the FCC to decide whether she has jurisdiction over information services according to the prescriptions by the Constitution (FCC?s role is limited to interstate communications). But more important background was that she tried to establish a right balance in terms of regulation between the two promising computer-related industries.

After struggling to draw a clear line between the two by new concepts such as hybrid processing and hybrid communications, the task was forwarded to the next inquiry. In 1980, the FCC adopted a new policy by Computer Inquiry?: the basic principle is the distinction between Basic and Enhanced services, where the former is subject to regulations by the FCC, while the latter is free from any governmental regulations.

This dichotomy is essentially maintained by the Communications Act of 1996 (Amendment to Communications Act of 1934) with the slight change of the names?Telecommunications and Information services.

Thus, it is confirmed again that information service is free from governmental intervention. In other words, computer industries both in manufacturing and in services are and have been ?free markets?.

VI. CLOUD AS PUBLIC UTILITY?

The above-mentioned situation is almost the same at  least in the developed economies, and now the typical provision of computer-network power is called ?Cloud?.

Cloud is another kind of buzz word, but its concept is shared among computer professionals. NIST (National Institute for Standards and Technology) defines cloud as follows with a short reservation that these definitions, attributes, and characteristics will evolve and change over time:  ?Cloud computing is a model for enabling convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.? [17]  While the NIST definition is generally accepted, few people recognize that cloud service resembles the public utility in terms of security features entrusted to the provider, dubbed as CIA. Section 3542 of 44 USC (Public printing and documents) prescribes ?information security? and CIA as follows:  ?the term ?information security? means protecting information and information systems from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction in order to provide?(A) integrity, which means guarding against improper information modification or destruction, and includes ensuring information non-repudiation and authenticity; (B) confidentiality, which means preserving authorized restrictions on access and disclosure, including means for protecting personal privacy and proprietary information; and (C) availability, which means ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information.?  These descriptions are technology-oriented but if you look at them carefully, you can realize some similarities with my previous explanations about confidentiality in a legal sense. If company A entrusts a Cloud company B with all transactions regarding A?s main product C, they usually contract about detailed terms and conditions about information regarding product, transactions and other related ones such as customer data, personal data and so on. In this regard, A will be a confider and B will be a confidant regarding the information concerned.

However, the novelty of Cloud Computing is offering on-demand access to unlimited, shared computing resources as software services with standardized interfaces, which may lead to disappearing security domains.

Therefore, enforcement of CIA on control and data flow is a challenge within and between external services.

Regarding privacy, aggregation of personal data at cloud services makes secondary usage of personal data for statistics interesting due to sufficient (in statistics and in real-time monitoring) available amount of data.

Here are two important facts implied: First, Cloud is now a necessary and convenient tool for corporations to do business. Second, the longer A uses B?s service, the more difficult for A to quit and change to the other Cloud, by the effect of lock-in or high switching cost, though transferability is propagated as one of the most appealing points. These characteristics are shared among so-called ?Public Utility?, ranging from energy supply (electricity and gas), transportation (railway, bus and truck), and communications (postal service, telecommunications) networks, which are subject to governmental regulation.

The leading case for public utility was an early decision by the US Supreme Court in Munn v. Illinois (94 U.S. 113 (1877)), dealing with corporate rates and agriculture. The Munn case allowed states to regulate certain businesses including railroads (mostly rate regulation) within their borders, and is commonly regarded as a milestone in the growth of federal government regulation. This decision was reexamined by Wabash Case (Wabash, St. Louis & Pacific Railway Company v. Illinois, 118 U.S. 557 (1886)), which severely limited the rights of states to control interstate commerce.

It led to the creation of the Interstate Commerce Commission, the ancestor of the FCC.

As early as the late 1960s, at the dawn of real-time computing, Sprague [18] proposed to regard information service as a new type of public utility. His point was that some regulations are necessary regarding non- discriminatory treatment to customers including non- discriminatory tariffs. And there are many authors who describe Cloud as having similar features, though most of them are indifferent to regulation.

Although significant similarity between public utility and Cloud lies in their service features, as decided by the Munn case such as ?public convenience and necessity? essential to daily operation, the market structure is quite different as summarized in Table-III (comparison is limited to common carrier type utility). In the case of public utility, the market inevitably becomes a natural monopoly at least in the local areas due to huge lump sum investment with increasing returns. Therefore, government intervention is justified to protect consumers from abuse of monopolist?s power. But in the case of Cloud, such a monopoly is not an inevitable outcome, but a result of fierce competition as indicated in the investigations by the? DOJ in the Microsoft case.

Thus public utility hypothesis for Cloud should be rejected, but there is a strong concern about confidentiality as mentioned above. I think this concern should be regulated by a neutral instrument such as the independent administrative commission or the commissioner, regardless whether or not Cloud is a public utility. The secrecy of communications is the severest case.

TABLE III. COMPARISON BETWEEN PUBLIC UTILITY AND CLOUD  Item Public Utility  (Common Carrier type)  Cloud Remarks  Service features  Public convenience and necessity  Same as left column  Infrastructure deployment  Lump sum investment with sunk cost  Existing facilities available  Dependence on the infrastructure  Strong dependence  Alternatives available  Monopoly or oligopoly  Natural monopoly  Tendency toward oligopoly after market competition  Oligopoly  is not natural but a result of competition.

Non- discrimination Requisite  Not necessary, if competition exists  Confidentiality of content Must be secured  Same as left column  Secrecy of communicati ons as the severest case

VII. NUDGE RATHER THAN REGULATION Before closing, I will list some short policy  recommendations on what the legal structure should be regarding Cloud, which deals with Big Data on a daily basis.

First, self-regulation is preferable to government regulation, especially when we take into account that computer industries have successfully grown without any governmental intervention. But as the harmonization of the legal system is a requisite in the global economy, I will promote a new way of self-regulation called ?nudge?, proposed by Thaler and Sunstein [19]. As it is a mixture of libertarianism and paternalism, it requires a subtle balance between the two elements, but still seems promising.

Second, if a minimum enactment is necessary under the ?nudge? principle, it would be how to deal with unfair contract terms. Of course there exist some protections for consumers, but in the case of BD and Cloud, would-be victims are not only consumers but corporations including small and start-up businesses. An English act named Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 may be a good example, and the Japanese government is now making effort to insert a similar clause into the 100 year-old civil code.

Third, we should investigate carefully what types of protection is fit for information goods. While we are familiar with property-type protection such as intellectual property, how to protect confidential information is still under-investigated. Most countries criminalize the stealing of tangible goods, but how to deal with intangibles is not yet fixed. No country criminalizes stealing of information regardless of content, but only a few criminalize stealing of personal data under limited conditions. And there are large differences in how to preserve secrecy of communications even among developed economies.

Fourth, as the first step of the above-mentioned investigation we should focus our effort on the relationship between privacy and confidentiality, which seems to me a main cause of confusion. In this regard, my     proposal is to unbundle data protection from privacy. The English concept of confidentiality, treated as relation rather than substance, is informative here.

Finally, in relation to secrecy of communications, it would be another topic of interest how to establish a level playing field for all IT-related industries, especially between information service and telecommunications. We may need Computer Inquiry ? in the very near future.

