12-14 September 2013, Berlin, Germany

Abstract?A set of advanced analytics methods is investigated aiming at easier and higher quality e-/m- learning or blended tutoring. Security systems (SS) have been considered as an example of difficult-to-learn area.

The topic of the presented investigation are contemporary education threats that will lead to big problems in the nearest future. It is shown that today the prevention of such threats is almost impossible without applications of intelligent technologies. Even more, the contemporary education system should possess some features of intelligent technologies or smart systems and advanced analytics elements. Original results are presented on how to build more effective classical applications by using novel puzzle methods. It is shown that all the demonstrated advantages may be successfully combined with other known methods from e-learning, m-learning or other education fields. Also it is shown how the considered applications enhance the quality of teaching, improve the emotional connection between the teacher and students and hence serve their sustainable learning and development. It has been discussed that qualitative forms of education may not require the usage of expensive hardware  Keywords?education; advanced analytics; synthetic methods; mode; intelligent system; security system; blended methods

I. INTRODUCTION1  Contemporary recession times turn govermnets pay more attention at the education problems accumilated since decades. It is easy to follow that the sustainable development of regions depends on sustainable careers of local people. Bulgarian goverment reports around 30% of young people with university diplomas and its goal is to make this number 40%. The tendency at the national level is using more and more sophisticated education tools and standards. However, the hardware and student accumulation isn?t the right decision to the quoted problems. Advanced hardware (and standards) mean enlarged maintnance teams and help stuff. All professors or teachers also should improve their special software knowledge, etc. This is a long time- and money-   1 The paper is published with financial support by the European Union under Bulgaria-Serbia IPA cross-border programme, project IPA MORESYN EDU, CCI number 2007CB16IPO006-2011-2-14  consuming process. Otherwise there is a risk of ineffective use of expensive resources.

In this paper an advanced analytics method is considered aiming to improve the quality of the deep learning. Intelligent software: agents, etc. play more and more important role in contemporary (e-)learning systems and in blended education [1]?[8]. The quoted tools are especially effective in rapidly changing environments like SS. Suggested innovations serve the more effective application of advanced analytics, (deep) data/web mining and/or collective evolutionary components. Contemporary training of intelligent agents reaches such a high level that some elements of machine learning became practicable also in education. It is time to transfer the effective strategies from machine learning to school/university education. The research is based on a series of puzzle methods for intelligent knowledge/data processing elaborated within ULSIT-Sofia. The versatility of the proposed approaches is demonstrated also by their successful application for training soft agents or holons in the area of SS. The presented series of experimental results revealed accumulated problems that require the application of sophisticated modern intelligent methods for educational purposes: tendency to memorize rather than thinking, also named shallow learning, which starts from small classes of school education, the lack of attention due to the use of computer games and the too active use of Web forums and resources for communication, the desire to receive high marks without a deep understanding of the presented subject, etc. These accumulated problems can?t be solved using only traditional teaching methods. In the ongoing recession in the country we cannot allow the use of expensive technological solutions such as using smartphones to connect directly with the course data and video images of lecture material, G4 methods for m-learning, etc. [9].

Under these conditions we developed a relatively inexpensive technology for modern teaching based on a minimum of technological solutions that do not require high costs of purchasing and support [10].



II. PUZZLE METHODS The below considered methods had been designed for  applications in different research systems. It is shown that     almost the same method applied in other way gives new results suitable for applications in SS and other sophisticated training. On the other hand, teaching SS stands out from other undergraduate and graduate programs that it operates in rapidly changing models, requirements, concepts, tools, instruments and policies where the problem for qualitative education is particularly difficult. Teaching highlights in the brightest way the advantages of the proposed new methods and applications in intelligent security systems (ISS).

One of the most instructive facts about the audience for training is that current neural-based machines in the form of software agents or holons repeat the actions of the teacher on a much higher level, even related to an excellent student. Therefore, rote learning, simple memorization of lectures makes no sense: sooner or later machines will displace us from similar low-tech activities; instead creative learning should be deeply rationalized through comparisons with other research accessible through the Internet, by experimenting with numerous courses and with open source products which become more pervasive in our practice together with contemporary Web-applications. The above example illustrates how to achieve simultaneously two goals: explain essential principles of artificial neural networks functioning and modern principles of quality training through effective and deep understanding. Similarly, using the neural networks examples explains best practices for control of knowledge, for more tests for lagging students, etc. The application of the below described methods makes the lecture process more easy, understandable and transparent. Hence sustainable education results are obtained. Advanced data analytics methods are not easy to explain. However, their correct applications doesn?t make the education complicated, because they are purposed to find more easy and effective ways of presentation.

On the other hand, monitoring the quality of education processes most often uses different statistical methods.

We used same methods in a general advanced analytics module together with logic applications described in this paper. The unification of logical and statistical parts come together using evolutionary ways. Those cardinally different results can?t be used just in one simple bunch of data or knowledge.

Diring the evolutionary process of joining statistical and logical data/knowledge, the accumulation of knowledge makes logical applications more and more effective and more universal than the probabilistic ones/ fuzzy estimates/similar applications. In the common case during data analytics processing, there is no convergence of the results but this does not hamper practical applications of these systems. In other words, bad and good designers will arrange the display window in quite different ways and there is no guarantee that every user understands the technology and that his access to the system will have positive results. In general, the use of synthetic methods is one of the most important and  demanding elements of the efficiency of intelligent applications. But the winning combination of the proposed methods in the educational field depends on the lecturer's experience, which makes the performance much simpler than just in the automatic case. At this level, the operation of the advanced analytics module is limited to implementation-voluntary advices to the lecturer.

Suggested innovations serve the more effective application of education practice altogether with data analytics applications, collective evolutionary components, etc. For more information sf. the book [10].

The research on traditional, syntactic puzzle methods reveals that their algorithmic complexity is rather high and this doesn?t allow automatic processing of large enough sudokus, crosswords or puzzles. In the case  an accent should be made on the fact that the investigated machine- based procedure took the words from a predefined set using a random principle where only the lenght of the word is of importance. On the contrary to the quoted syntactical realizations, below a puzzle method is considered which is based on the logical analysis of the existing data or knowledge interconnections. Three types of relations have been used aiming at narrow the set of possible solutions of the problem.

Briefly, every puzzle method aims to discover new or hidden knowledge by connecting the unknown, the sought solutions with previous experience accumulated in knowledge bases. Let the constraints of the considered problem form a curve in the space as depicted in Fig. 1.

The main goal of the puzzle method is to reduce the multidimensional search space for the solution. For this purpose we used several limitations, in [10] the study is focused at the case of using ontologies instead of a set of nonlinear constraints, etc.

Figure 1. Binding and other constraints  Furthermore, the research of process dynamics aimed at reducing the field in certain cases allows us to derive new knowledge in the form of rules as discussed in the     next section. This inference process and the usage of different constraints gives way to significant simplification of formal and evidence material in lectures, attracts the attention to details and simultaneously increases the activity of learners. Showing the process of connecting known to unknown improves understanding and retention of the presented material.

For example, if a bachelor who has graduated ULSIT lives in Sofia and he/she does not want to work anywhere else, then the line (curve) restricts the search space and in this way a lot of unnecessary [re]search is avoided. It is also possible to inspect a case when the constraint is defined in the form of surface but as a result a more general solution is obtained where a special interest is provoked by the boundary case of the crossing two or more surfaces. When the common case is inspected in details then in the majority of cases the problem is reduced to exploring the lines instead of curves with complicated forms obtained as a result of crossing surfaces. Therefore, below we investigate the usage in systems of constraints by lines of first or higher orders.

The Vi constraints of linear/nonlinear form are the classic case borrowed from constraint satisfaction methods. The B-D binding constraints doesn?t intersept the unknown goal but are located close to it, they reveal a ?neighboor? area around the target. The A-C-E constraints are named the crossword constraints because their interseption with G1 gives a part of the searched goal where Ci form larger interconnected areas in G1. The usage of the considered set of Ci-s is much more effective than of the classical set of  Vi-s.

The following example shows how the search process can be reduced using ontologies. Let?s admit that the search space is presented on Fig. 2 where statistical data about SS are generalized about the regions depending on their price and quality. The goal: it is necessary to select an acceptable SS to our project. Let the right vertical, blue-coloured, subset of feasible solutions is chosen: ?excluding ISS designed outside Europe?. Then the space of feasible solutions is to the left of the separating surface which is depicted on the figure in the rightmost corner.

In Fig. 2 another horisontal surface, depicted in the high corner in green, is shown delimiting the search space of the solutions. In our case it means ?systems with unknown principles of operation?. It is accepted that in the data bases there is no clear distinction related to the presented criteria so the search of the feasible solutions is nonlinear, of high dimensionality, and practically it cannot be solved using traditional methods. Nevertheless, by applying ontologies the problem is solvable via the proposed puzzle method. There are two red dots depicted in the left corner on the same Fig. 2. Each of them also represents a kind of constraint but of another type which we name a binding constraint and it is introduced and researched by us. Its semantics is the following: it is not a solution but it resides close to the searched solution.

Figure 2. SS application example  By introducing new constraints or, sometimes, ontologies our goal is to show that it is possible to use causal links different from implications and that they help us search the goals in a more effective manner.

In the tutoring case, using the crossword constraints from Fig. 1 also helps us reveal the dynamics of the problem solving process where the resolution process is sometimes more important than the proof itself. The usage of Vi constraints one by one doesn?t always form the necessary closed area. Revealing Vi and other constraints one by one helps represent the resolution process in its dynamics and hence make deep inference to the problem.

Even in the worst case, when the accumulated knowledge is incomplete for the problem resolution, the dynamics of what is represented analogicaly to Fig. 1 will show up what should be the resolution. The binding/crossword constraints are the form of non-implicative rule-based relations. Their application effects are discussed in the next section.



III. VISUALIZATION ELEMENTS Essentially the puzzle methods  include a form of  visualization, which leads to a creative work in various forms of training. We would like to remind that the high quality learning inevitably leads to independent research.

In the present study it is shown that in some cases the graph itself from Fig. 1 may be sufficient for decision- making by the user or the expert.

Different versions of the modeled knowledge contained in Fig. 2 provide a base to describe things that are difficult to express in words. Not surprisingly, a Chinese aphorism states ?A picture replaces thousand words.? It should be added: ?... and is understood and memorized better.? Below are given different linguistic equivalents of combinations of interpretations, similar to that of Fig. 1 and obtained by puzzle method:     Things are moving way that ?  ... neither ... nor ... but it is too close to ...

Looked at from another angle ... Other findings ...

An object can be represented as intersection of two dynamic areas ...

In the future, these two concepts should be used jointly ...,  etc.

These natural-language fragments can be presented in  plain text for learners, but further it is shown that by the puzzle method this is executed much more naturally and better. For example, Fig. 3 show another example of puzzle method application revealing certain processes and relationships between objects. Concentrating the attention in the closed area of Fig. 3 and narrowing the set of analyzed elements supports the revealing of new implicative relation M-N referred to in Fig. 4. Informal causal relations are elaborated that are associated with the implication ?from M it follows that N?.

V1                                    M  V2   N V3  Figure 3. M, N are unrelated, belong to confined area  In Fig. 4 the system of three different constraint sets helps detect a causal relationship between M and N, with no evident correlation between them in Fig. 3. The connection occurs in imposing additional constraints in Fig. 3. The process is dynamic in nature and it is almost impossible to be properly explained only with words. Here the set of the pictures has a role of the replacement of the intuition process.

The process of finding new rules using puzzle methods gives the trained people necessary deep knowledge. This form of knowledge can be sometimes respresented in the form of ontologies.

The image (or media) from Fig. 3-Fig. 4 is convenient and efficient to visualize, transform and use different dynamic processes through sense-based explanations.

Examples and figures can lead to the conclusion that ontologies are introduced, used and dynamically changed  applying the puzzle methods. Hence they can be improved using puzzle methods.

A  V1                                    M             B  V2   D N C                    V3  Figure 4. Detection of the rule connection M?N  Unlike the traditional oral presentation, the material visualized by the puzzle method gives more directions for [future] own research and for detecting and correcting gaps in knowledge. For example, ?it is neither ... nor ...? and many other natural-language interpretations incorporate a lot of fuzziness that can sometimes be misunderstood. Careful study of graphs similar to Fig. 4 excludes presentation incomleteness and furthermore ? a misunderstanding of the material. On the other hand, the whole learning process is concentrated in one place, it is not necessary to look for other Web sources to clarify the question e.g. ?why?, ?what?, ?how? to get results, etc. The quoted relations also have been used for pointing the lecture main points. Intelligent training tools not only accelerate but also intensify the training. Hence its high quality.

A wide range of tools for modeling and presentation of material is used in this section where the modeling must be used not for ISS software agents but for people.

Respectively it is easier to introduce audio or multimedia presentations, for example, ontologies for transmitting the meaning of things. Sometimes to present the meaning of things it is enough to show one or several key points of the subject altogether with corresponding explanations in visual, graph or sound form. Sometimes one key picture with concize explanations is better than an entire movie.

Of most importance are the descriptions to a picture that describe the essentials, important details, and the sense of the presentation. The picture explains many details clear to people, but intelligent agents will learn nothing from this picture, especially if the agents are designed only for SS purposes. Hence many agent-based methods are much more effective in people tutoring systems.

Information presentation by meaning is a key element of modern higher and university education. The proposed puzzle methods altogether with the other tested methods greatly expand opportunities for qualitative teaching in the field of SS, one of dynamic interdisciplinary specialties     with increased complexity and also of various types of strict and high requirements for the learners.



IV. EXPLORATION OF EMOTIONS CONTROL The control of student emotions is a perspective and  rapidly growing field of contemporary learning and education. It can help us resolve many of the negative issues quoted in the introduction. Really, without the curiosity element all the high-level education strategies will be ruined. We are far from modeling the curiosity elements in software systems [11] or from automatic deciphering of different human emotions. Instead we concentrate attention on research of emotional elements in different puzzle method applications in blended learning which undoubtedly bring comfort learning conditions.

It is revealed that puzzle methods lead to dynamic results obtained during the education process. Of course, these results bring much more positive emotional elements comparing to presentations of ready formulas, theoretic schemes, etc. Hence any results obtained via puzzles have a practical element well understandable by students.

The considered practical application scheme consists of three elements accompanying every lecture material: game elements incorporated in the lecture itself,  curiosity reinforcement and self-learning (homework). Using Game Theory elements or, for example, ?olympic? competitions help us to reveal most active students, give them bonuses and other reinforcement awards. Actually the active study at the classroom activates not only the group of best learners but also many others who can compare their results to others. Puzzle methods attract attention to important elements of the considered process, they ease the natural process of ontology (sense) formation in student?s heads. The system of class competitions and reinforcement of people studied additional material at home completes the quality, deep education process necessary in case of SS and other contemporary theoretic/technological fields. E-learning is very welcome at the homework stage. Years ago there was a field named ?cognitive graphics?  aiming at revealing hidden mathematical relations via color-based graphics ?movies?.

Its driving force was to wake the student?s curiosity to informal and beautiful things like repeating patterns, parts of the image leading to new formal proofs, etc. In the present research we use some analogical elements altogether with advanced analytics and brainstorming sessions with purpose to get rid of inactive rote learning and only repetitions of teacher?s words at the exams. The student group positive emotions are one of the important parts of this process and it was found out that deep knowledge brought by puzzles can help us in the case. The considered experiments and the perspective research can?t be completed soon.

What is done till now for the sake of comfort learning conditions:  The presentations are multicolored where different colors correspond to different meanings explained in  advance. A strong system of meaning explanations makes learning simpler and easier, tow main parts of positive emotional contact.

First of all, the accent is on essential, basic things and on mutual relations between them, even during most intensive courses. Difficult-to-understand technical details may be studied in addition, later, at home, for example via e-learning system, and then tested via competitions at class, and so on.

Such a modular course structure leads to the formation in the minds of essential definitions/strategies/know-how base. It makes the links between universities and high schools/colleges stronger and more natural. It is obvious that the most introductory part of some university lectures can be presented at schools aiming at finding most interested and active pupils ready to develop some research at early stages of the education process.

All of the considered tactics, principles and methodologies are purposed for structuration of knowledge what is important, what is perspective and what should be learned in a particular order because it is essential, etc. The intensive presentation should be emotional and may use different game styles to escape the boredom because of the lack of attention. Puzzle methods help us in case.

Today the lack of attention, love to computer games and other shortcomings explored in the introduction may be compensated using game-based learning strategies and application of some emotional elements. Hence the affective learning should be strictly controlled by a system of education methods and good practice. Otherwise the speaker may lose the control over the intensive or deep and high quality learning.



V. CONCLUSIONS The main conclusion is that to overcome the  contemporary education shortcomings, methods and applications are considered concerning the logical parts of advanced analytics. The role of the above methods for different education purposes is discussed.

Analysis is represented for technologies used for discovery of sense, sending information by sense, and for understanding the semantics of the presented material.

Common advantages and disadvantages for different groups of contemporary applications have been revealed.

Same methods in different combinations are effectively used to enhance security stuff possibilities or in contemporary e-learning systems in the field of Information/National Security [12]. Since a long time, applications in/outside the field of information security have been made in education and tutoring systems, concerning the most difficult education cases.

It is shown how, by applying the principles of advanced analytics technology for lecturing pupils/ students, there is a substantial rise in the quality of lecturing even for the most difficult disciplines, and there is sustainability in the implementation of the studied     material, which obviously leads to sustainable development of the regions. Deep understanding of the presented material is necessary in case. It can be obtained only by a combination of applied blended education methods, like puzzle methods, with enough practical experience made by each of the trained people at home, office or other place outside the education hall. The deep understanding of the material is impossible without the self-training, and the above mentioned advanced analytics methods are purposed to attract the interest to the field by showing up hidden and deep interconnected relations.

