Towards an OSGi based Pervasive Cloud Infrastructure

Abstract  Pervasive computing is converging with cloud comput- ing as with the development of smart cities. There arise the complexities from this convergence, like unprecedented large number of computing devices, flexibilities and adapta- tion of services for fitting personalization requirements from end users, expectations of powerful computing and storage capabilities of handhold devices, and so on. Therefore, a supporting infrastructure that can handle big data arisen from large number of devices, and can flexibly switch ser- vices at run time, is needed. Henceforth, in this paper, we propose an OSGi based pervasive cloud (OSGi-PC) in- frastructure which can make use both of the cloud comput- ing capabilities and component flexibilities from OSGi. We have evaluated the OSGi-PC in terms of performance and power consumption to show its usability.

1 Introduction  There is a growing trend for the convergence of differ- ent computing paradigms, such as cloud computing, per- vasive and mobile computing, service oriented computing, due to the needs of global availability and sharing of infor- mation. The applications of large Internet of Things (IoT), Internet of Services (IoS), Internet of People (IoP) are gain- ing increasing attention. We are confronted with increas- ing complexities in the converged computing world. These complexities mainly come from: the scale of an applica- tion becomes unprecedented large, the management of an application is much more difficult due to large number of involved devices, events and contexts, due to the hetero- geneity of networking, hardware and software, and so on.

Very often, pervasive devices limited in their processing  power and storing capability, which in turn requires col- laborations/interactions with more powerful nodes from the supporting computing infrastructure.

In the convergence of different computing paradigms, there arises a computing paradigm called mobile cloud computing (MCC) [5]. The central idea of mobile cloud computing is to use backend powerful computing nodes from traditional cloud services to enhance capabilities of small devices. There are a number of MCC solutions pro- posed so far, such as Misco [6] and Hyrax [12]. But none of these proposed solutions focus on providing a compo- nent based solutions following a component standard, and therefore lack capabilities of flexible management of ser- vices and components, especially when services come and go between different nodes.

Considering all these challenges and existing solutions, in this paper we propose an OSGi based pervasive cloud (OSGi-PC) solution which can be deployed to different IAASs. OSGi-PC can make use of the component and ser- vice management capabilities from OSGi, such as dynamic install/uninstall components and services, dynamic updates to components and services. We have done some prelimi- nary evaluations of the OSGi-PC in terms of its performance and latency, and shows the usability of it.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: We show an overview of the OSGi-PC in Section 2. Section 3 dis- cusses the prototype implementation of the OSGi-PC. We evaluated the prototype OSGi-PC in Section 4. Related work is described in 5. Conclusions and future work end the paper.

Physical and Social Computing  DOI 10.1109/GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom.2013.88     2 Architecture of the OSGi-PC  2.1 Brief introduction to OSGi and R- OSGi  OSGi (Open Service Gateway Initiative)1 is a defacto standard Java module and service platform that implements a complete and dynamic component model. Its compo- nents( called bundles) can be remotely installed, started, stopped, updated, and uninstalled without requiring a re- boot which is advantageous for dynamic environment. The OSGi service registry allows bundles to detect the joining and leaving, and facilitates adaptation accordingly.

In order to access services remotely from another OSGi service registry in a transparent manner, R-OSGi(Remote Services for OSGi)2 was proposed which runs as an OSGi bundle and facilitates distribution for arbitrary OSGi frame- work implementations. A service provider framework only needs to register a service for remote access. For every re- mote service, a local proxy bundle is generated that registers the same service. Local service clients can then access the remote services in the same way as local services.

2.2 overview of OSGi-PC  The general idea behind OSGi-PC is to promote a stan- dard way of building, managing services between different nodes in a pervasive cloud environment. In this environ- ment, different OSGi service frameworks can be dynami- cally added or removed, and services can be dynamically deployed and undeployed following the OSGi standard, as specified by the Remote Services in the OSGi compendium specification in chapter 1223.

The OSGi-PC infrastructure is constituted by many dis- tributed OSGi based frameworks, which can be considered as two elements, namely client OSGi cloud service on small devices and server OSGi services on powerful cloud nodes.

All these OSGi services should follow the same OSGi stan- dard in order to interoperate with each other, to support dy- namic deployment and replacement of OSGi services, and to scale well when new services are added. To support the dynamics of the OSGi-PC, there is a service discovery com- ponent dynamically discover what OSGi frameworks join the cloud ecosystem and what OSGi framework is dropped and removed from the system. An overview of the OSGi-PC is shown in Figure 1. Under the coordination of the discov- ery component, remote cloud service frameworks and local client service frameworks can be accessed indiscriminately.

1http://www.osgi.org 2http://r-osgi.sourceforge.net/index.html 3http://www.osgi.org/Download/File?url=/download/r4v43/osgi.cmpn-  4.3.0.pdf  Figure 1. Overview of the OSGi-PC  The OSGi-PC works following the Broker architectural pattern [1]. When an OSGi Framework (Framework1) started, it will set up a communication channel with the specified remote Discovery Component. If this is success- ful, then this OSGi framework will register itself to the discovery component with necessary information. Frame- work1 will also find other frameworks registered to the Dis- covery Component. At the same time, Framework1 will find provided services from those registered frameworks, generate local stubs of these remote services, and register these services with local OSGi service registry in Frame- work1. The process is shown in Figure 2. In this way, the accessing of remote services is more or less identical to the access of local services in the local OSGi Framework.

When an OSGi Framework is forced to close because of ab- normal situations or network reasons, the Discovery Com- ponent can automatically remove it from the registry.

3 Implementation of the OSGi-PC  To implement the OSGi-PC infrastructure, we choose Apache Felix OSGi framework 4 for the cloud OSGi ser- vices because Felix is following OSGi standard to the best from our former experiences on EU LinkSmart project [18][19]. For small devices, we are using R-OSGi [14] to achieve distributed OSGi integration in order to realize a dy- namic cloud service infrastructure. R-OSGi is suitable for lightweight distributed communication among OSGi com- ponents in different Java Virtual Machines (JVMs).

Considering the requirements on the management of OSGi frameworks distributed among different nodes, the specific implementation class diagram of OSGi-PC core  4http://felix.apache.org     Figure 2. Overview of the OSGi-PC  classes are shown in Figure 3. The OSGiFramework interface defines some variables related to an OSGi framework and services in the framework, mostly sta- tus variables such as TEMPORARY_UNAVAILABLE, QUOTA_EXCEEDED, and so on. The Factory method de- sign pattern [8] is used to instantiate an OSGi framework in- stance, in order to improve flexibility for instantiation. Ser- viceProvisioner is designed to realize the dynamic deploy- ment of services and OSGi frameworks. When it detects new instances of OSGi frameworks, it will check whether it is needed to deploy new services to the new coming frame- work, and if so, it will then conduct the deployment of bun- dles (and services).

3.1 Implementation of remote OSGi cloud framework  The remote OSGi cloud framework is composed of mul- tiple OSGi frameworks running remotely, and coordinated by the discovery component, as show in Figure 4. As the discovery component is critical for the functioning of the OSGi-PC, it is running in a master-slave hot back up mode. Whenever something wrong with the primary dis- covery component, the back up component can assume duty immediately.

In our implementation, we reuse code from Distributed OSGi (DOSGi) 5 , who is using ZooKeeper 6 as the discov- ery component, and hence ZooKeeper is used also by the  5http://cxf.apache.org/distributed-osgi.html 6http://zookeeper.apache.org/  Figure 3. Core classes of the OSGi-PC  Figure 4. remote OSGi cloud framework of the OSGi-PC     OSGi-PC. For such a discovery mechanism as specified by DOSGi, standard meta-data information of OSGi compo- nents and services are used to disclose service information.

These meta-data are also available to remote ZooKeeper Server (discovery component), therefore they can be ac- cessed in a standard way by any OSGi frameworks. Fig- ure 5 describes a module named Distribution Provider as in DOSGi that makes OSGi services available across container boundaries, i.e, different OSGi frameworks. It use special service properties to mark services that are to be exported remotely, following the same meta-data style as in standard OSGi components. The Distribution provider will create Endpoints for these services that are available outside the container. On the consumer side the Distribution Provider can create local OSGi services that act as proxies for the re- mote services and allow service consumers to use them to call the remote service, as in the Broker architecture pattern.

As we said in Section 2, in order to instantiate an OSGi framework managed by the discovery component, it needs to implement OSGiFramework interface and then register the framework in the discovery component, for example this.registry=context.registerService(OSGiFramework.class .getName(), fwkImpl, properties), where fwkImpl is the actual OSGi framework instance with properties define its status and settings. After the registration, ServiceTracker or Declarative Services can then be used to manage services, as in standard OSGi environment, as shown in the following code list.

Filter filter = context.createFilter( "(&(service.exported.interfaces=*) (service.exported.configs=  org.pervasivecloud.configtype.cloud))"); cloudServiceTracker = new ServiceTracker(context, filter, null) { @Override public Object addingService( ServiceReference reference) { registerRemotedService(reference); return super.addingService(reference); } @Override public void removedService( ServiceReference reference, Object service) { unRegisterRemotedService(reference); super.removedService(reference,service); }  };  3.2 OSGi on small devices  Due to the popularity of Android devices, we choose Android as our starting point to run OSGi on small de-  vices. R-OSGi [14] is an attempt to resolve the limitation of running services across different OSGi frameworks, as a lightweight and efficient communication mechanism be- tween distributed OSGi frameworks. The principle behind R-OSGi is shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6. Accessing distributed OSGi frame- work using R-OSGi  First, services register themselves to an OSGi container through the R-OSGi framework, then R-OSGi will open a service port (by default it is 9278) for listening to socket connections. The client bundle starts to create a socket con- nection to a specific server with designated port, and create a proxy bundle for a remote service. This proxy bundle has the same signature as the remote service, and is registered to the local OSGi container. Therefore, the invocation of remote services is the same as local services. This hides the complexities of underlying network connections, but what is more important is that this makes the accessing and man- agement of OSGi services in OSGi-PC handled in a unified and consistent way, and it does not matter a service is local or remote.

In our implementation, we choose Felix as the R-OSGi container as Felix can run on Android 7. But R-OSGi can not run directly on Android as R-OSGi clients will generate proxies for remote services at run time 8, and the proxies are normal Java byte code instead of the Dalvik virtual machine readable byte code.

At first, R-OSGi uses the ASM library9 for bytecode parsing and creating proxy objects. So, in order to R-OSGi- enable an Android client, we need to translate ASM to An- droid and add a method to convert the created proxy object from Java to Dalvik byte code. As the proxy object created by ASM is in Java bytecode, an OSGi dexification service is needed to transform a class in Java format to Dalvik format.

The dex.jar contained in the Android SDK can be used with a minor modification by adding a dexification class to cre-  7http://felix.apache.org/site/apache-felix-framework-and-google- android.html  8http://linkality.org/software/remote-osgi-android/ 9http://asm.ow2.org/     Figure 5. service discovery using Zookeeper in the OSGi-PC  ate DexService. The last step is to integrate the DexService into the R-OSGi client creation process. For this purpose, we need to patch R-OSGi so it invokes our DexService after the client proxy class has been created by ASM, as outlined by the following code:  File f=File.createTempFile("temjar", ".jar", new File("//data//local//tmp")); f.createNewFile(); FileOutputStream fos =  new FileOutputStream(f); fos.write(bytesfromjar); fos.flush(); fos.close(); DexService.class.getName(), null); DexService dexService =  new DexServiceImpl(); byte[] dexJar = dexService.

createDexedJarFromFile(  f.getAbsolutePath()); File fileout = new  File("/sdcard/temp.jar"); if (fileout.exists()) { fileout.delete();  } fileout.createNewFile(); FileOutputStream fos2 = new FileOutputStream(fileout); fos2.write(dexJar); fos2.flush(); fos2.close(); return new ByteArrayInputStream(dexJar);  4 Evaluation of the OSGi-PC  For the initial evaluation of OSGi-PC, we developed a simple cloud based diary application which supports the uploading diaries to the backend cloud nodes, download- ing from backend cloud nodes, editing and deleting a diary.

We mainly tested the latency (performance for the listed di- ary actions) , and also power consumption while conduct- ing these diary actions. For the measurement of power con- sumption, we show that for LCD screen and CPU, and Pow- erTutor10 is used for this measurement. The measurement of power consumption is on Hisense HS-U950. Currently the backend deployment of OSGi-PC is on Openshift11. We show the time taken for conducting the listed diary actions in Table 1.

From this table, we can see that the average power con- sumption (mainly CPU plus LCD screen) while using the diary application deployed on OSGi-PC is around 4J, which is quite OK. For the time taken to upload a simple diary, it takes around 1 second, which is acceptable. For the down- loading of a diary, it takes around 3 seconds, much slower than the uploading. This is consistent with our experience of using Openshift: it is much faster for uploading (e.g. Git push) than downloading (e.g. Git clone)12. But this is just our superfacial experiences and we need to investigate more on this issue to see why it is such a case.

The usage of OSGi-PC supports seamlessly switching of service providing OSGi framework at run time, without the need of human intervention. We have tested the per- formance of stoping one OSGi framework, and switching the diary management service to another framework at run  10http://ziyang.eecs.umich.edu/projects/powertutor/ 11https://www.openshift.com/ 12Git is a software configuration management tool, see http://git-  scm.com     Table 1. Performance and power consumption measurement of OSGi-PC 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 average  upload LCD (J) 4.3 5.9 4.8 5.9 5.3 4.3 4.3 3.2 5.9 3.2 4.71 CPU (J) 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.5 0.34  time (ms) 718 820 616 821 3214 824 820 721 1023 1640 1121.7  download LCD (J) 3.7 3.2 4.3 2.6 3.8 2.1 3.2 4.3 2.1 4.3 3.36 CPU (J) 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.14  time (ms) 1901 2491 4073 1442 2839 965 3004 4814 1151 4395 2707.5  delete LCD (J) 4.8 4.7 3.2 2.7 6.9 3.7 2.6 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.82 CPU (J) 0.1 0.6 0.5 0.1 0.8 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.47  time (ms) 1214 524 411 441 414 440 308 320 1025 412 550.9  time. These two OSGi frameworks are deployed on two different Openshift cloud nodes. Table 2 is a list of figures we obtained from the switching of OSGi framworks at the backend of OSGi-PC.

Table 2. Performance of switching OSGi frameworks  stop time start time start-stop (s)  22:52:05 22:52:24 19 22:57:29 22:57:42 13 23:27:13 23:27:32 19 23:44:08 23:44:24 16 23:47:00 23:47:13 13 23:50:42 23:50:54 12 23:59:03 23:59:16 13 0:50:17 00:50:38 21 0:52:47 00:52:57 10 0:59:12 00:59:27 15 average 15.1  As we can see from Table 2, it takes around 15 sec- onds to finish the round of stoping an OSGi framework, and then start a replacing framework to provide seamless ser- vice. This performance is OK. We need to test more on this when move the OSGi-PC backend to other cloud platforms.

5 Related work  There are quite a few work on mobile cloud computing [5] targeting enhancing the capabilities of small devices.

For example Misco [6], Hyrax [12], which focus on mak- ing map-reduce [3] working on smart phones, in order to improve the performance of handhold devices. while OSGi- PC is an attempt to build a software component based perva- sive cloud infrastructure which can be deployed anywhere.

The OSGi-PC does not exclude such ideas and Map Re-  duce framework can be added to the OSGi service registry if needed.

eXcloud [10][11] is a MCC middleware that supports fine granularity tasks migration. For OSGi-PC, currently the services and component dynamics are supported by the OSGi standard. We will work on adding a more powerful component to OSGi-PC for the management of service migration considering various context-awareness requirements[18][19] [21].

CloneCloud [4] can clone the computation and data from mobile devices to backend heavy weight cloud nodes, and then return the computation results to the small devices which offload the tasks. The working of CloneCloud needs a modified Java Virtual Machine, which makes it unrealistic in practice [23].

CloudLet [15] is another research onMCC, which makes use of virtual machine technology to instantiate services in- stances in nearby CloudLet, which can hopefully resolve the latency of wide area network, and limitation of network bandwidth. To make the CloudLet idea useful and practical, it has to have some sort of decision making on how to dis- tribute and manage the computation, data among different nodes in a flexible manner. Our work on OSGi-PC can pro- vide an interesting platform for CloudLet to manage such issues.

Another relevant work on using R-OSGi as the underly- ing component technology for mobile clouds is discussed in [2], and proposed a service oriented architecture to re- solve the missing of Service Registry globally in R-OSGi.

Similarly, the work on MCC-OSGi [9] uses OSGi Bundles as basic mobile Cloud service components, which can be transferred and run on different platforms without compat- ibility issues. In our work on OSGi-PC, we are targeting to follow the OSGi standard as much as possible, therefore we are making use of the Remote Service specification for achieving the registration of services across different cloud nodes.

In [16], the authors presented a middleware called OSGi4C (OSGi for the Cloud), which allows seamless de-     ployment of locally non-existent OSGi bundles and services on demand without requiring any changes to the OSGi plat- form. Because it is based on JXTA, an open and generic P2P platform, so it overcomes the issues of server-based solu- tions, and realize remote bundles discovery service. OSGi- PC is not only using R-OSGi for small devices but also mak- ing use of the Remote Service specification for its heavy weight backends. We will also include the P2P feature in the future based on the previous work [13].

As discussed in [7], Mobile cloud computing aims to provide users seamless and rich functionality. Mobile cloud computing has overlapped with other areas such as peer-to- peer computing, application computing and context-aware computing, but it has its own challenges when embedded computers become more powerful. At that time, the infras- tructure, platform or application available as services will be of new forms. OSGi-PC is one efforts on addressing the infrastructure issue of MCC.

6 Conclusions and future work  The convergence of cloud computing, pervasive and mo- bile computing can help to enhance capabilities of small de- vices, as what is focused on by the research of mobile cloud computing and pervasive cloud computing [21]. There are emerging research prototypes on middleware and frame- works to realize the idea of mobile cloud computing. But few of the existing ones are focusing on component based cloud infrastructure in order to facilitate interoperability and ease the management of services and component migra- tions, following certain well-accepted standard. In this pa- per, we propose an OSGi based pervasive cloud infrastruc- ture (OSGi-PC) based on the OSGi remote service specifi- cation, using the Broker pattern as the main software archi- tecture style to implement the OSGi-PC. The evaluations shows that the OSGi-PC infrastructure has acceptable per- formance and power consumption characteristics.

OSGi-PC infrastructure is currently deployed to Open- shift. We are working on moving to other cloud platforms such as Hadoop13, Amazon EC214. We will also deploy some services on OSGi-PC, for example context manage- ment [18], more powerful service and task migrations sup- port [5] based on our previous work on goal management [20][17][22] to make it really useful to develop applications in smart cities.

Acknowledgements  The server side of the OSGi-PC is inspired by the OSGi Eco-system idea from David Bosschaert  13http://hadoop.apache.org/ 14http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/  (http://pervasivecloud.blogspot.com/). For running R-OSGi on android, we also refered to Julian Schutte?s blog (http://linkality.org/software/remote-osgi-android/). The research in this paper is jointly supported by "Start up Funds of Top Professors in China University of Petroleum", "2011 and 2012 the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities in China", "2012 National Torch Plan Project in China (2012GH571817)", "2012 Shanxi Province Key Sci- entific and Technological Project (2012K11-08, 2012K06- 18)" and "XJTU Post-Graduate Education Reform Project".

