Frequent Itemset based Event Detection in Uncertain Sensor Networks?

Abstract? More and more sensor networks are deployed for the detection of events. Yet due to the resource-constraint nature of nodes, the readings are inherently inaccurate, imprecise and are distributed among the nodes, so it is a challenging task to detect events in such a kind of networks. In this paper, we study the problem of uncertain event detection in sensor networks, and propose an efficient detection algorithm Fibed. We use a possible world semantics to interpret the uncertain data, and events are defined based on computing the frequent itemsets. A polynomial is constructed to calculate the probability of each frequent item, and the coefficient vector of the polynomial is merged and updated when it is routed towards the base station.

Early decisions could be made for the events, and lots of items could be pruned to save unnecessary transmissions as their probability do not meet the probability threshold. Experimental studies show that Fibed is efficient in detecting the uncertain events and cutting down the incurred transmissions.

Keywords-uncertain frequent itemset; event detection; sensor network

I. INTRODUCTION  Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are often used to sense and monitor remote physical environments. A typical sensor network is composed of battery-powered sensing nodes and a base station that collects events (or readings) from a collec- tion of sensor nodes deployed over a spatial area[1]. Event detection or event monitoring is a key application for the environmental surveillance in sensor networks [2], [3]. For example, the sensor network should report a ?on fire? event to the base station to alarm the fire and trigger quick response; or an ?unknown animal appear? event should be reported if the nodes ?see? a new kind of animal entering the zone in an animal habitat studying application. These applications all belong to the event detection application in sensor networks.

However, detecting the events is not an easy and trivial task in sensor networks. Firstly, the events are actually high-level knowledge extracted from the sensing data, which are raw and distributed over the reshouces-cosntaint nodes. The event detection algorithm should gather and aggregate data to deduce  *supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (No.61202012), Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (No.2011J05156, No.

21145023), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No.2012121030); Open Project Foundation of the Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, MOE(No. KF2011002); the Re- search Project Serving the West Coast launched by Longyan University.

the event through messages transmissions and cooperations among the nodes[2], [3]. Secondly, due to the dynamics of physical environments and the possible faults of the seining nodes, the readings collected and reported by sensor nodes are inherently inaccurate and imprecise, they could only reflect ap- proximate measurements of the environments. In other words, these readings are considered to be uncertain, and so are the events. Many state-of-the-art systems assume that the data are available in a centralized database and the data is precise and certain[4], and the event processing is centralized and deterministic. Yet it is very energy consuming to have all the nodes send their reading to the base station, and more effective methods are needed to distributively process the uncertain data and events. To the best of our knowledge, the problem of in- network detection for uncertain events is new and has not yet been fully explored.

In this paper, we study the problem of uncertain event detection in sensor networks and propose an efficient event detection algorithm Fibed(Frequent Itemset Based efficient Event Detection). We use a possible world semantics to interpret the uncertain data, where events are defined based on computing the probability of frequent itemsets. In Fibed, nodes are firstly clustered based on their readings, then a polynomial is constructed to calculate the probability for each item value.

Given the polynomial, the coefficient vector of each item is merged and updated when it is routed to the base station. If the probability of frequent item does not meet the threshold, early decision of the event could be made and the items could be pruned to save unnecessary transmissions. Experimental studies show that Fibed is effective to detect the uncertain events, and more than 30 percent of transmissions are saved for the detection of uncertain events.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: section 2 describes the related works; section 3 introduces some preliminaries and defines the problem of uncertain event detection; section 4 presents the detailed mechanism of the Fibed algorithm, including the node clustering, calculation of frequent items and distributive identification of events; section 5 describes the environmental setup and analyzes the simulation results; finally, section 6 concludes the paper.

Physical and Social Computing  DOI 10.1109/GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom.2013.176

II. RELATED WORK  1) Uncertain Data Processing.: Research on uncertain data management mainly focuses on the query processing and mining. The queries include the aggregate queries [5], [6], nearest neighbor queries[7], ranking and top-k queries[8], [9], skyline queries[10], and etc. These queries use the similar query semantics with their deterministic versions, yet they take the probability of the data into account. For example, a concept of ?possible worlds? [11] was introduced to facilitate the understanding and processing of uncertain data. With the possible world semantic, an uncertain database is viewed as multiple deterministic database instances; and the probability of the query results are based on computing of the sum of the probability of the world instances.

For the research of mining on uncertain dataset, reference [12], [13] proposed an algorithm to compute the expected support of itemsets by summing all itemset probabilities. It used a probabilistic filter to prune candidates as soon as their most optimistic values fall below the threshold. Reference [14] proposed the UF-growth algorithm to compute frequent itemsets by means of the expected support, and the FP- tree[15] was adopted to avoid expensive candidate generation.

The itemsets are considered frequent if the expected support exceeds minSup in reference[12], [14]. Yet in [16] an itemset X is called frequent if the probability that X occurs in at least minSup transactions is above a given threshold ? .

The authors proposed a dynamic programming method for computing the probability that an itemset is frequent, as well as the entire probability distribution function of the support of an itemset. In [17], the authors proposed a polynomial algorithm for calculating the probabilities of the items in an uncertain database. The algorithm also computes the upper bound of each round to filter the tuples that would not be included in the set of the top-k frequent items.

2) Distributive Event Detection.: Early prototype systems in WSN, such as Cougar[18] and TinyDB [19], employed a threshold-based strategy to detect the events. Data satisfying the thresholds are aggregated within the network and sent to the base station. Then more complex types of events were also defined and studied in the research area of sensor networks.

