Keynote I

Abstract Existing risk-based authentication systems rely on basic web communication information such as the source IP address or the velocity of transactions performed by a specific account, or originating from a certain IP address. Such information can easily be spoofed, and as such, put in question the robustness and reliability of the proposed systems.

Risk-based authentication can be applied from two different perspectives: proactively and reactively.

When applied proactively, risk-based authentication can be integrated with the login process and used to block from the beginning access to users flagged as risky. In contrast, reactive risk-based authentication can be used to identify and revert ongoing or completed transactions considered as risky.

Although proactive risk-based authentication may be considered as more desirable than reactive risk- based authentication, the cost of a misclassification error is far greater in the former than in the latter. In other words, more stringent accuracy requirements underlie proactive approaches compared to reactive ones. Actually, each category is adequate for specific scenarios. While proactive risk based authentication is important in situations where confidentiality is essential such as in military or intelligence transactions, reactive risk-based authentication may be enough in situations where integrity is the primary concern. For instance, in online banking transactions, malicious transactions (e.g. illegal transfer between accounts) can be reverted (immediately) by the end of the session if the user is classified as risky.

In this talk, we propose a new online biometric risk-based authentication system that provides more robust user identity information by combining mouse dynamics and keystroke dynamics biometrics in a multimodal framework. Experimental evaluation of our proposed model with 24 participants yields an Equal Error Rate of 8.21%, which is promising considering that we are dealing with free text and free mouse movements, and the fact that many web sessions tend to be very short. Moreover, we believe this performance is adequate for reactive risk-based authentication, where the goal is not to prevent the user from using the system, but rather to identify malicious sessions and trigger appropriate risk mitigation measures.

Bio Mohammad S. Obaidat (IEEE Fellow and SCS Fellow) is an internationally well-known academic/researcher/ scientist. He received his Ph.D. and M. S. degrees in Computer Engineering with a minor in Computer Science from The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. Dr. Obaidat is currently a full Professor of Computer Science at Monmouth University, NJ, USA. Among his previous positions are Advisor to the President of Philadelphia University for Research, Development and IT, President of SCS, Chair of the Department of Computer Science and Director of the Graduate Program at Monmouth University and a faculty member at the City University of New York. He has received extensive research funding and has published over Fifteen (15) books and over Five Hundred and Sixty (560)   lxxiii    and currently working on three more books. Professor Obaidat has served as a consultant for several corporations and organizations worldwide.

Mohammad is the Editor-in-Chief of 3 scholarly journals and is also an editor, advisory editor of numerous international journals and transactions including IEEE journals/transactions. He has chaired and Cybernetics, SMC, IEEE Wireless Communications, IEEE Systems Journal, SIMULATION: Transactions of SCS, Elsevier Computer Communications Journal, Journal of C & EE, Wiley Security and Communication Networks, Journal of Networks, and International Journal of Communication Systems, among others. Obaidat has served as the steering committee chair, advisory Committee Chair and  Computer, Information and Telecommunication Systems (CITS) and the International Symposium on Performance Evaluation of Computer and Telecommunication Systems (SPECTS). He is also the co-  Between 1994-1997, Obaidat has served as distinguished speaker/visitor of IEEE Computer Society.

Since 1995 he has been serving as an ACM distinguished Lecturer. He is also an SCS distinguished Lecturer. Between 1996-1999, Dr. Obaidat served as an IEEE/ACM program evaluator of the Computing Sciences Accreditation Board/Commission, CSAB/CSAC. He has served as the Scientific Advisor for the World Bank/UN Digital Inclusion Workshop- The Role of Information and Communication Technology in Development. Between 1995-2002, he has served as a member of the board of directors of the Society for Computer Simulation International. Between 2002-2004, he has served as Vice President of Conferences of the Society for Modeling and Simulation International SCS. Between 2004-2006, Prof.

Obaidat has served as Vice President of Membership of the Society for Modeling and Simulation International SCS. Between 2006-2009, he has served as the Senior Vice President of SCS. Between 2009-2011, he served as the President of SCS.

Prof. Obaidat received several best papers awards for his papers selected as best papers in IEEE Fellowship and the distinguished Fulbright Scholar Award. He received the SCS Outstanding Service Award for his excellent leadership, services and technical contributions. Dr. Obaidat received very recently the Society for Modeling and Simulation Intentional (SCS) prestigious McLeod Founder's Award in recognition of his outstanding technical and professional contributions to modeling and simulation. He received in Dec 2010, the IEEE ComSoc- GLOBECOM 2010 Outstanding Leadership Award for his outstanding leadership of Communication Software Services and Multimedia Applications Symposium, CSSMA 2010. He received very recently the Society for Modeling and Simulation International's (SCS) prestigious Presidential Service Award for his outstanding unique, long-term technical contributions and services to the profession and society.

He has been invited to lecture and give keynote speeches worldwide. His research interests are: wireless communications and networks, security of communication networks, information and computer systems, security of e-based systems, telecommunications and Networking systems, performance evaluation of computer systems, algorithms and networks, green ICT, high performance and parallel computing/computers, applied neural networks and pattern recognition, adaptive learning and speech processing. During the 2004/2005, he was on sabbatical leave as Fulbright Distinguished Professor and Advisor to the President of Philadelphia University in Jordan, Dr. Adnan Badran. The latter became the Prime Minister of Jordan in April 2005 and served earlier as Deputy Director General of UNESCO. Prof.

Obaidat is a Fellow of the Society for Modeling and Simulation International SCS, and a Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). For more information: http://bluehawk.monmouth.edu/mobaidat/.

lxxiv    Keynote II  GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom 2013    IoT/CPS: M2M Communication, Actuation and Coordination Challenges   Professor Ivan Stojmenovic  IEEE Fellow University of Ottawa, Canada E-mail: ivan@site.uottawa.ca  http://www.site.uottawa.ca/~ivan    Abstract Existing machine-to-machine (M2M) communications incorporate a central point for gathering information, making decision, and acting. Large scale cyber-physical systems (CPS) beyond M2M concept are envisioned with the distributed actuation and in-network processing. Machine-to-machine communication aspects include data dissemination, data aggregation, reporting mechanisms for monitoring, cooperative access. Other related issues that would be explored are modeling, inter- dependency and topology control, and security and privacy. This lecture emphasizes actuation as one of important tools in the future applications of Internet of Things and Cyber Physical Systems architectures.

Various existing models for wireless sensor and actuator networks are elaborated. It then concentrates on the network layer issues in wireless sensor and sensor-actuator networks. Coordination between sensors and robots, and robot to robot coordination are then covered with some concrete problem formulations.

These include robot dispersion, communication aspects of robot coordination, robot task allocation, and sensor placement and relocation to improve sensing area coverage.

Bio Ivan Stojmenovic received his Ph.D. degree in mathematics. He is Full Professor at the University of Ottawa, Canada. He held regular and visiting positions in Serbia, Japan, USA, Canada, France, Mexico, Spain, UK (as Chair in Applied Computing at the University of Birmingham), Hong Kong, Brazil, Taiwan, China and Australia. He published over 300 different papers, and edited seven books on wireless, ad hoc, sensor and actuator networks and applied algorithms with Wiley. He is editor-in-chief of IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems (2010-3), and founder and editor-in-chief of three journals. He is Associate Editor-in-Chief of Tsinghua Journal of Science and Technology, steering some other journals. Stojmenovic is on Thomson Reuters list of Highly Cited Researchers (from 2013; <300 computer scientist), has h-index 59, top h-index in Canada for mathematics and statistics, and >13000 citations. He received five best paper awards and the Fast Breaking Paper for October 2003, by Thomson ISI ESI. He received the Royal Society Research Merit Award, UK (2006), and Humboldt Research Award, Germany (2012). He is Tsinghua 1000 Plan Distinguished Professor (2012-5). He is Fellow of the IEEE (Communications Society, class 2008), and Canadian Academy of Engineering (since 2012), and Member of the Academia Europaea (The Academy of Europe), from 2012 (section: Informatics). He was IEEE CS Distinguished Visitor 2010-11 and received 2012 Distinguished Service award from IEEE ComSoc Communications Software TC. He received Excellence in Research Award of the University of Ottawa 2009. Stojmenovic chaired and/or organized >60 workshops and conferences, and served in >200 program committees. He was program co-chair at IEEE PIMRC 2008, IEEE AINA-07, IEEE MASS-04&07, founded several workshop series, and is/was Workshop Chair at IEEE ICDCS 2013, IEEE INFOCOM 2011, IEEE MASS-09, ACM Mobihoc-07&08.

lxxv      Keynote III  GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom 2013    Primate-inspired Heterogeneous Mobile and Static Sensor Networks    Professor Yang Xiao Department of Computer Science,  The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0290 USA  E-mail: yangxiao@cs.ua.edu    Abstract Although previous bio-inspired models have concentrated on invertebrates (such as ants), mammals such as primates with higher cognitive function are valuable for modeling the increasingly complex problems in engineering. Understanding primates? social and communication systems, and applying what is learned from them to engineering domains is likely to inspire solutions to a number of problems.

This talks introduce studying and modeling modes of group behavior and communication of coppery titi monkeys, rhesus macaques, and other primate models, and applying what the investigators learn to the distributed control of heterogeneous mobile and static sensor networks including assessment of the effectiveness of small and large group formations in heterogeneous mobile and static sensor networks, development of bio-inspired message-based communications, and development of bio-inspired behavior- based communications.

Bio Yang Xiao worked in industry as a MAC (Medium Access Control) architect involving the IEEE 802.11 standard enhancement work before he joined academia. He currently is a full professor of Department of Computer Science at The University of Alabama. He was a voting member of IEEE 802.11 Working Group from 2001 to 2004. His research areas are security and communications/networks. He has published more than 200 refereed journal papers (including 50 IEEE/ACM transactions papers) and over 200 refereed conference papers and book chapters related to these research areas. He currently serves as Editor-in-Chief for International Journal of Sensor Networks (IJSNet) (SCI-index with impact factor 1.386 for 2011) and International Journal of Security and Networks (IJSN).

lxxvi    Keynote IV  GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom 2013    The Internet of Things (IoT) Big Data Analytics   Mahmoud Daneshmand, PhD Professor  Business Intelligence & Analytics Howe School of Technology Management    Computer Science School of Engineering & Science Stevens Institute of Technology  Hoboken, NJ, USA mahmoud.daneshmand@stevens.edu    Emeritus Distinguished Member of Technical Staff Assistant Chief Scientist  AT&T Shannon Labs ? Research Florham Park, NJ, USA     Abstract The Big Data of the future is generated by billions of ?things? connected to the Internet. The term Internet of Things (IoT), born 2009, may be simplified as ?Sensors/RFID devices + Communications?. It is estimated that by 2020, 50 billion sensors/RFID devices will be generating data on all aspects of the human life: health, environment, transportations, security, shopping, home, etc. The Biggest Challenge of the Big Data is management and mining of ever-increasing streams of data generated by these devices.

This talk will focus on management and mining of IoT Big Data. Emphasize will be on data accuracy, data mining techniques, and future research direction of real time large scale stream data mining.

Bio Mahmoud Daneshmand is Professor of Business Intelligence & Analytics at Howe School of Technology Management as well as Computer Science at School of Engineering and Sciences, Stevens Institute of Technology. He has more than 35 years of teaching, research & publications, consultation, and management experience in academia & industry including: Bell Laboratories, AT&T Shannon Labs ? Research, University of California at Berkeley, University of Texas at Austin, Sharif University of Technology, University of Tehran, New York University, and Stevens Institute of Technology.

He has served as Distinguished Member of Technical Staff (DMTS) at Bell Labs as well as AT&T Shannon Labs - Research; Assistant Chief Scientist of AT&T Labs; Founder and Executive Director of the AT&T Labs university collaborations program. He is an Industry Professor at Howe School of Technology Management and department of Computer Science, Co-Founder of the Business Intelligence & Analytics MS program at Stevens Institute of Technology. He is an expert in Big Data Analytics, Internet of Things (IoT)/Sensor & RFID Data Streams, Data Mining Algorithms, Machine Learning, Probability & Stochastic Processes, and Statistics.

He has been active with IEEE Journals editorships & publications including Guest Editor as well as IEEE conferences: Guest Editor of several IEEE journals; Chair of Steering Committee of New IEEE Internet of Things Journal; keynote speaker of many IEEE conferences; Executive Committee of Globecom as well as ICC; Chair of Steering Committee of IEEE ISCC; and General Chair and Technical Chair of many IEEE conferences.

lxxvii    Keynote V  GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom 2013    Intelligent Transportation Systems with Infrastructure and Vehicle Sensors    Professor Xindong Wu Department of Computer Science,  University of Vermont, USA.

E-mail: xwu@uvm.edu   Abstract This talk will discuss the great opportunities provided by the rich real-time and historical data collected by both infrastructure sensors (such as in-road reflectors) and vehicle sensors in intelligent transportation systems. With the data from infrastructure sensors, traffic prediction can reduce travel delays by facilitating better utilization of available traffic capacity. With the data from vehicle sensors, a driver's driving habit can be modeled, the driver can be identified from the sensor data collected during driving, and personalized driving advice may be provided.

Bio Xindong Wu is a Professor of Computer Science at the University of Vermont (USA), a Yangtze River Scholar in the School of Computer Science and Information Engineering at the Hefei University of Technology (China), and a Fellow of the IEEE and the AAAS. He holds a PhD in Artificial Intelligence from the University of Edinburgh, Britain. His research interests include data mining, knowledge-based systems, and Web information exploration. He has published over 280 refereed papers in these areas in various journals and conferences, including IEEE TPAMI, TKDE, ACM TOIS, DMKD, KAIS, IJCAI, AAAI, ICML, KDD, ICDM, and WWW, as well as 33 books and conference proceedings. His research has been supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF), the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC), and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China, as well as industrial companies including Microsoft Research, U.S. West Advanced Technologies and Empact Solutions.

Data Mining (ICDM), the founder and current Editor-in-Chief of Knowledge and Information Systems (KAIS, by Springer), the Founding Chair (2002-2006) of the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Intelligent Informatics (TCII), and a Series Editor of the Springer Book Series on Advanced Information and Data Engineering (TKDE, by the IEEE Computer Society) between 1 January 2005 and 31 December 2008. He served as Program Committee Chair/Co-Chair for ICDM '03 (the 2003 IEEE Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining), and CIKM 2010 (the 19th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management).

Professor Wu is the 2004 ACM SIGKDD Service Award winner, the 2006 IEEE ICDM Outstanding Service Award winner, and a 2012 IEEE Computer Society Technical Achievement Award recipient "for pioneering contributions to data mining and applications". He won the Best Paper Award from the 2005 PAKDD 2007, IEEE EDOC 2006, IEEE ICTAI 2004, IEEE/WIC/ACM WI-2004/IAT-2004, SEKE 2002, and PADD 1997.

lxxviii    Keynote VI  GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom 2013    Rethink Shannon Towards Green   Dr. Chih-Lin I Department of Electrical Engineering,  Stanford University, Chief Scientist, Wireless Technologies  China Mobile Research Institute Email: icl@chinamobile.com     Abstract The rapid adoption of Smart Phones has triggered an explosive growth of mobile Internet applications.

China Mobile has observed 81 times traffic growth over past 5 years, and it has been the common consensus that there will be another 1000x traffic load increase by year 2020. Unfortunately, the ARPU growth curve is believed to be much flatter. As the world largest mobile service provider, China Mobile is facing a big challenge to figure out a technical road map to increase its network capacity dramatically while keep the TCO at a reasonable level to maintain its viability. To this end, we envision increasing importance of making our network green. The extension of classic Shannon theory from scalar domain to vector domain 20 years ago gave the birth of MIMO system, and has been supporting the sustainable development of wireless system all long. How will Shannon theory perform in new green era? Is it out-of- date or reborn as a new ?the one?? This presentation will share our vision and staged R&D effort marching toward green.

Bio Chih-Lin I, Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Stanford University, has almost 30 years experience in wireless communication area. She has worked in various world-class companies and research institutes, including wireless communication fundamental research department of AT&T Bell Labs; Headquarter of AT&T, as Director of Wireless Communications Infrastructure and Access Technology; ITRI of Taiwan, as Director of Wireless Communication Technology Department; Hong Kong ASTRI, as VP and GD of Communications Technology Domain. She was an elected Board Member of IEEE ComSoc, and the Founding Chair of IEEE WCNC Steering Committee. She is currently an Executive Board Member of GreenTouch, a winner of CCCP ?National 1000 talent? program, China Mobile Chief Scientist of Wireless Technologies, Head of Green Communication Research Center (GCRC) of China Mobile Research Institute (CMRI), in charge of advanced wireless communication R&D effort of CMRI.

lxxix    Keynote VII  GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom 2013    Smart City: Large-Scale Cyber-Physical Systems in Action    Dr. Zhen Liu IEEE Fellow  Director, ATC, Microsoft ARD    Abstract The world has experienced unprecedented urban growth in recent decades. In 2008, for the first time in history, the world's population was evenly split between urban and rural areas. And, according to the United Nations, nearly 70% of the population will live in cities by the year 2050. This urban immigration generates tremendous opportunities for cities by increasing production, commerce, and human capital. It also generates the challenges in transportation systems, environment, water and energy consumption and more. While these issues are not new, their scale and intensity are unprecedented. For cities to continue to be viable centers of civilization, commerce and culture, we must find ways to overcome these challenges.

In this talk we shall discusshow IT could help overcome such problems. More specifically, how IT can help build smart cities which are supposed to be much more efficient in energy consumption and in productivity. Smart cities are, in essence, cyber-physical systems with extremely large scale. Building such systems will be nontrivial. We shall discuss various technological challenges and present some initial thoughts and solutions.

Bio Zhen Liu joined Microsoft Asia R&D Center in 2012 as the Head of China Innovation Group, based in Beijing. Before joining Microsoft, Zhen was with Nokia as the Head of Nokia Research Center (NRC) Beijing, and then became the Head of NRC Growth Economies Lab, which has research teams in Beijing, Shenzhen, Bangalore and Nairobi. Prior to this experience, Zhen was with IBM T. J. Watson Research Center and served as the manager of System Analysis and Optimization group, and the senior manager of the Next Generation Distributed Systems department. Zhen also worked in Orange Labs (France Telecom R&D) as a Research Associate, and in INRIA (the French national research center on information and automation), first as a Researcher, then became a Research Director.

Zhen has been passionate about both scientific explorations and innovations with industrial impact. He has obtained over 80 patents granted and published over 200 scientific papers in prestigious journals and conferences and got the best paper award at the 37th ICPP. He was master inventor at IBM.

Under Zhen?s leadership, his teams transferred a number of technologies to product groups in IBM and in Nokia with significant business impact. The Nokia Research Center lab he led was awarded the Best Research Lab in 2010 in China by World Entrepreneur, and was ranked a few times by ITBrand the Number One of Corporate Research Labs in Asia.

Zhen is a fellow of IEEE. He has served NSF Panels a number of times. He was member of over 60 conference program committees. Zhen Liu was the general chair of the ACM Sigmetrics 2008 Conference, co-chair of ACM HotMetrics 2008, program co-chair of the Joint Conference of ACM Sigmetrics and IFIP Performance 2004, technical program co-chair of Sensorcomm 2009, and area technical  program  committee  chair  for  INFOCOM  2008  and  INFOCOM 2009. Zhen is on the editorial   lxxx    Performance Evaluation.

Zhen has given keynotes and distinguished lectures in various conferences and universities. He was an adjunct professor at University of Science and Technology of China and Beijing University of Post and Telecommunications. While he was in France, Zhen was also an adjunct professor of the University of Paris VI (University of Pierre & Marie Curie) and the University of Nice - Sophia Antipolis, France.

His areas of expertise include mobile computing, mobile services, cloud computing, stream processing, real-time analytics, performance modeling, stochastic optimization, service oriented architecture and semantic Web.

lxxxi    Keynote VIII  GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom 2013    Towards Carrier Cloud   Dr. Tarik Taleb Senior Researcher and 3GPP Standards Expert  NEC Europe Ltd, Heidelberg, Germany Email: tarik.taleb@nw.neclab.eu     Abstract Mobile operators are in need of means to cope with the ever-increasing mobile data traffic, introducing minimal additional capital expenditures on existing infrastructures, principally due to the modest Average Revenues per User (ARPU). Network virtualization and cloud computing techniques, along with the principles of the latter in terms of service elasticity, on-demand, and pay-per-use could be important enablers for various mobile network enhancements and cost reduction. This talk discusses the recent trends the mobile telecommunications market is experiencing, showcasing some of the emerging consumer products and services that are facilitating such trends. The talk also discusses the challenges these trends are representing to mobile network operators. The talk also demonstrates the possibility of extending cloud computing beyond data centers towards the mobile end-user, providing end-to-end mobile connectivity as a cloud service. The talk introduces a set of technologies and methods for the on- demand provision of a decentralized and elastic mobile network as a cloud service over a distributed network of cloud-computing data centers; federated cloud. The concept of Follow-Me-Cloud whereby not only data but also mobile services are intelligently following their respective users is also introduced. The novel business opportunities behind the envisioned carrier cloud architecture and service are also discussed, considering various multi-stakeholder scenarios.

Bio Tarik Taleb is currently working as Senior Researcher and 3GPP Standards Expert at NEC Europe Ltd, Heidelberg, Germany. Prior to his current position and till Mar. 2009, he worked as assistant professor at the Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Japan, in a lab fully funded by KDDI, the second largest network operator in Japan. From Oct. 2005 till Mar. 2006, he was working as research fellow with the Intelligent Cosmos Research Institute, Sendai, Japan. He received his B.E. degree in Information Engineering with distinction, M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in Information Sciences from GSIS, Tohoku Univ., in 2001, 2003, and 2005, respectively.

Dr. Taleb?s research interests lie in the field of architectural enhancements to mobile core networks (particularly 3GPP?s), mobile cloud networking, mobile multimedia streaming, congestion control protocols, handoff and mobility management, inter-vehicular communications, and social media networking. Dr. Taleb has been also directly engaged in the development and standardization of the Evolved Packet System as a member of 3GPP?s System Architecture working group. Dr. Taleb is a board member of the IEEE Communications Society Standardization Program Development Board. As an attempt to bridge the gap between academia and industry, Dr. Taleb has founded and has been the general chair of the ?IEEE Workshop on Telecommunications Standards: from Research to Standards?, a successful event that got awarded ?best workshop award? by IEEE Communication Society (ComSoC).

Dr. Taleb is/was on the editorial board of the IEEE Wireless Communications Magazine, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, and a number of Wiley journals. He is serving as vice-chair of the Wireless Communications Technical Committee, the largest in IEEE ComSoC. He also served as Secretary and then as Vice Chair of the Satellite and Space Communications Technical Committee of IEEE ComSoc (2006 - 2010). He has been on the technical   lxxxii    program committee of different IEEE conferences, including Globecom, ICC, and WCNC, and chaired some of their symposia.

Dr. Taleb is the recipient of the 2009 IEEE ComSoc Asia-Pacific Best Young Researcher award (Jun.

2009), the 2008 TELECOM System Technology Award from the Telecommunications Advancement Foundation (Mar. 2008), the 2007 Funai Foundation Science Promotion Award (Apr. 2007), the 2006 IEEE Computer Society Japan Chapter Young Author Award (Dec. 2006), the NiwaYasujirou Memorial Award (Feb. 2005), and the Young Researcher's Encouragement Award from the Japan chapter of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society (VTS) (Oct. 2003). Some of Dr. Taleb?s research work has been also awarded best paper awards at prestigious conferences. Dr. Taleb is a senior IEEE member.

lxxxiii    Keynote IX  GreenCom-iThings-CPSCom 2013    How Densely Should the Data Base Stations Be Deployed in Hyper-Cellular Networks?

Professor Zhisheng Niu Tsinghua National Lab for Information Science and Technology  Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China E-mail: niuzhs@tsinghua.edu.cn     Abstract One of the key approaches to make the mobile communication networks more GREEN (Globally Resource-optimized and Energy-Efficient Networks) is to have the cellular architecture and radio resource allocation more adaptive to the environment and traffic variations, including making some lightly-loaded base stations (BSs) go to sleep. This is the concept of so-called TANGO (Traffic-Aware Network planning and Green Operation) and CHORUS (Collaborative and Harmonized Open Radio Ubiquitous Systems) published by the author earlier. To realize this, a new cellular framework, named hyper-cellular networks (HCN), has been proposed, in which the coverage of control signals is decoupled from the coverage of data signals so that the data coverage can be more elastic in accordance with the dynamics of traffic characteristics and QoS requirements. Specifically, the data base stations (DBSs) in HCN can be densely deployed during peak traffic time in order to satisfy the capacity requirement, while a portion of DBSs can be switched off or go to sleep mode if the traffic load is lower than a threshold in order to save energy. A fundamental question then arises: how densely should the DBSs be deployed in order to balance the QoS requirements and the energy consumption in hyper cellular networks?

In this talk, we characterize the optimal DBS density for both homogeneous and heterogeneous hyper cellular networks to minimize network cost with stochastic geometry theory. For homogeneous cases, both upper and lower bounds of the optimal DBS density are derived. For heterogeneous cases, our analysis reveals the best type of DBSs to be deployed for capacity extension or to be switched off for energy saving. Specifically, if the ratio between the micro DBS cost and the macro DBS cost is lower than a threshold, which is a function of path loss and their transmit power, then the optimal strategy is to deploy micro DBSs for capacity extension or to switch off macro DBSs (if possible) for energy saving with higher priority. Otherwise, the optimal strategy is the opposite. Based on the parameters from EARTH, numerical results show that in the dense urban scenario, compared to the traditional macro-only homogeneous cellular network with no DBS sleeping, deploying micro DBSs can reduce about 40% of the total energy cost, and further reduce about 20% with DBS sleeping capability.

Bio Zhisheng Niu graduated from Northern Jiaotong University (currently Beijing Jiaotong University), Beijing, China, in 1985, and got his M.E. and D.E. degrees from Toyohashi University of Technology, Toyohashi, Japan, in 1989 and 1992, respectively. After spending two years at Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd., Kawasaki, Japan, he joined with Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1994, where he is now a professor at the Department of Electronic Engineering and the deputy dean of the School of Information Science and Technology. His major research interests include queueing theory, traffic engineering, mobile Internet, radio resource management of wireless networks, and green communication and networks.

Dr. Niu has been an active volunteer for various academic societies, including council member of Chinese Institute of Electronics (2006-10), vice chair of the Information and Communication Network Committee of Chinese Institute of Communications (2008-12), Councilor of IEICE-Japan (2009-11), and membership development coordinator of IEEE Region 10 (2009-10). In particular, in IEEE Communication  lxxxiv    Society, he has been serving as an editor of IEEE Wireless Communication Magazine (2009-12), director of Asia-Pacific Region (2008-09), director for Conference Publications (2010-11), chair of Beijing Chapter (2001-08), and members of Award Committee (2011-13), Emerging Technologies Committee (2010-12), On-line Content Committee (2010-12), and Strategy Planning Committee. He has also been serving as general co-chairs of APCC?09/WiCOM?09, TPC co-chairs of APCC?04/ICC?08/WOCC?10/ICCC?12, panel co-chair of WCNC?10, tutorial co-chairs of VTC?10-fall/Globecom?12, and publicity co-chairs of PIMRC?10/WCNC?02.

Prof. Niu is a co-recipient of the Best Paper Awards from the 13th and 15th Asia-Pacific Conference on Communication (APCC) in 2007 and 2009, respectively, and received Outstanding Young Researcher Award from Natural Science Foundation of China in 2009. He is now the Chief Scientist of the National Fundamental Research Program (so called ?973 Project?) of China "Fundamental Research on the Energy and Resource Optimized Hyper-Cellular Mobile Communication System" (2012-2016), which is the first national project green communications in China. He is the fellow of IEEE and IEICE, and a distinguished lecturer of IEEE Communication Society (2012-2013).

