ADraw: A novel social network visualization tool with attribute-based layout and coloring

Abstract?Visualization is an important tool for social network analysis. Traditional visualization tools only take account into the links in the networks when displaying them. However, social networks are inherently attached to abundant attribute information. In order to display their attribute information, a novel visualization tool with attribute-based layout and coloring is developed in this paper. The core of this tool are two algorithms: one for node layout and the other for node coloring. These two algorithms are designed based on the principle of making the nodes with same attribute values closer in the diagram. The experiments on synthetic networks and real-world networks show that this tool can return more reasonable visualization.

Keywords-Network visualization; Social network; Layout; Col- oring;

I. INTRODUCTION  Social networks are constructed from relational data and can represent the relationships between social actors such as individuals or organizations. In the past few decades, they have been attracted considerable interest in many research fields, from sociology and behavior sciences to physics and computer sciences. Much of the interest focuses on analyzing the patterns of the relationships represented in social networks and revealing the latent information behind them. Visualization is an important tool to gain an insight into social networks and can be helpful for social network analysis. From the beginning of the study, it is recognized that it is hard to understand a social network by looking at statistics tables. To this end, many visualization methods have been proposed, including matrix- based representations and node-link diagrams [1]. Because it is easy for a ordinary user to understand a node-link diagram, where nodes represent the actors and links the relationships between them, it becomes the de facto standard of social networks visualization [2].

Besides the relationships between social actors, social net- works usually have abundant attribute attributes about actors, such as their communities and profile attributes [1]. A good visualization of social networks should represent as much attribute information as possible in a node-link diagram. Many previous visualization tools visualize the attributes of nodes using graphics properties such as color, size and shape [2].

As we know, the diagrams, in which similar things are put together, will greatly facilitate observation and analyzing.

Therefore, in many cases, only such geometric properties are  not sufficient for observation and analysis. To overcome it, many layout algorithms are designed to calculate the layout of nodes using node attributes, such as the class-based layout in GOlorize [3]. Although these existing algorithms can highlight node attributes by making the nodes with the same attributes closer, they cannot provide satisfying layout and coloring for the nodes which have multiple attribute values. In the previous algorithms, the nodes with multi-valued attributes do not lie in between the nodes with corresponding single-valued attributes and the coloring cannot represent the multiple values of their attributes. To aid them, a new visualization tool, which is called ADraw, is developed in this paper.

Besides grouping the nodes of the same attribute values and using pie charts to represent the nodes with multi-valued attributes, the node-link diagrams produced by ADraw should be captured by two additional criteria: the nodes with multi- valued attributes ought to lie in between the node groups with corresponding single-valued attributes, and the arcs of the sectors in the pie charts should be orientated toward the node groups with corresponding single-valued attributes as exactly as possible. In order to satisfy these criteria, two new algorithms are proposed in this paper, one for node layout and the other for node coloring. The experiments show that ADraw can return more reasonable visualization on the networks with multi-valued attributes.



II. RELATED WORK  The techniques that are related to this paper include two parts: node layout algorithms and node attribute visualization.

A. Related work on node layout algorithms  Layout algorithms are used to calculate the positions of nodes, which make the final graphs satisfy some criteria such as aesthetical pleasure. Force-directed algorithms are the main approach to this end. The first force directed algorithm proposed by Eades maps a graph to a mechanical system where vertices are steel rings and edges the springs [4]. The force be- tween adjacent vertices is produced by the logarithmic strength spring while nonadjacent vertices have the repulsive force of inverse square law. According to these forces, vertices will be moved. When the mechanical system achieves a minimal energy state, the final positions of vertices are established.

FR algorithm [5] improved the layout algorithm of Eades      by redefining attractive and repulsive forces according to the strength between atomic particles. KK algorithm [6] improved the spring model of Eades by defining the forces between any pair of vertices using the linear strength springs. Because it is easy to realize these algorithms and they can produce aesthetically pleasing graphs, force-directed algorithms are widely used in many visualization tools such as Vizster [7] and SocialAction [8].

Although force-directed algorithms work well for node layout, they only exploit the edges between nodes to calculate the positions of nodes and cannot group the nodes with the same attribute values. Therefore, ADraw needs to use both edges and node attributes to produce diagrams. Fortunately, many existing layout algorithms can provide some examples in which node attributes are used to calculate node layout.

Yingxin Wu and Masahiro Takatsuk extend the KK algorithm by combining graph distances with attribute similarities to make nodes with similar attributes closer [9]. Noack utilizes node-repulsion LinLog energy model and edge-repulsion Lin- Log energy model to compute node layout, in which the more densely connected nodes are closer to each other [10]. To make nodes of similar attributes closer, Peng Wu improves the KK algorithm by redefine the idea length between two nodes based on the shortest path, attribute similarity, and group distance [11]. Vizster [7] computes the node layout using the extended FR algorithm, in which the extra-community edges have weaker spring forces. These algorithms use node attributes to calculate node layout and make similar nodes closer in the diagrams, but they do not consider the nodes with multi-valued attributes.

Besides single-valued attributes such as marriage status and age, there are some multi-valued attributes whose values can be the combination of several candidate values, such as communities and interests of an actor. For example, in Table I, the interest of the node N3 has multiple attribute values. To our best knowledge, GOlorize [3], which is a graph layout plug-in of Cytoscape [12] which is a software platform for analyzing complex networks, is the only software that can handle the nodes with multi-valued attributes. GOlorize extends the FR algorithm by adding virtual nodes and edges based on the attributes of nodes. However, the graphs produced by GOlorize do not satisfy the criteria: the nodes with multi- valued attributes ought to lie in between the node groups with corresponding single-valued attributes. In this paper, a new node layout algorithm is developed to meet this criteria while make the nodes of the same attribute value closer.

B. Related work on node attribute visualization  The coloring is one of the most common methods which are used to represent the node attributes in network visualization.

