A Cloud Service for the Evaluation of Company's Financial Health   Using XBRL-based Financial Statements

Abstract?Financial statements of all listed and over the counter (OTC) companies collected by stock exchange represent valuable big open data. Therefore, automatic processing and analyzing such big data would create tremendous added value economically. In this paper, we design and implement a cloud service for evaluating company's financial health using XBRL-based financial statements collected by Taiwan Stock Exchange Corporation (TWSE).

The XBRL-based financial statements are parsed and stored as key-value pairs into MongoDB, which is a kind of NoSQL database. The proposed system is designed using three-tier architecture for flexibility and maintainability. It also provides user-friendly interface with various charts. The proposed system indeed demonstrates powerful benefits of implementing interactive data using XBRL for financial disclosure documents in big data era.

Keywords-XBRL, Financial statements, Financial health evaluation, MongoDB, NoSQL

I.  INTRODUCTION The convergence of cloud computing and big data is  changing the world and will have far-reaching implications on technological area. When large amounts of data are collected in the cloud data center for processing, a standard machine-readable format for data representation is one of the critical requirements. As a result, XML (eXtensible Markup Language) is widely accepted as a standard for exchange of information over the Internet, and it has grown into a big family of specifications. For instance, XBRL (eXtensible Business Reporting Language), which is a global standard for exchanging business information, is an XML-based language. Since the hierarchical structure of XML and the relational data models are not fully compatible, the NoSQL database, which provides a mechanism for storage and retrieval of "unstructured data", are developed to address that issue. NoSQL is often used for storing big data and designing real-time web applications. There are many NoSQL databases, such as MongoDB [1], CouchDB [2], RethinkDB [3], Cassandra [4], and so on.

As data grows at an astonishing rate, data analytics need to be developed to produce valuable insights of business data.

Before the introduction of XBRL, most of the financial statements are reported in the formats of HTML, PDF, Word, or EXCEL that are not suitable for automatic processing.

Therefore, XBRL was developed in 1998 as a business reporting language. Since then, a growing list of government agencies and other entities have also begun to incorporate XBRL into their disclosure systems, including US SEC, Australia, Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS), United Kingdom, Japan, Taiwan, etc.

The development of the proposed system is a result of 2013 XBRL Software Design Competition hosted by TWSE in which our team won the national championship. The characteristics of the proposed systems can be described as follows:  It is a Web-based service system which allows users to use services through browser without installing any other application. It can also be deployed as SaaS service supporting different kinds of user devices including smart phones.

Taking into account of big data problem, a NoSQL database, MongoDB, is used for data storage.

It adopts three-tier system architecture with newly developed API for flexibility and maintainability.

The results of financial health evaluation are presented using five different light bulbs for easy understanding.

It provides user-friendly interface with various charts, such as bar, radar, and trends, for users to interact in a natural and intuitive way.



II. RELATED WORK In this section, we will describe the development of  XBRL and the concept of NoSQL, including MongoDB.

A. The development of XBRL XBRL was first developed by a consortium created by  AICPA (American Institute of CPAs) in 1998, and in recent years, it is accepted as a standard business reporting language worldwide. The first recommendation, version 1.0 , was published in 2000. The version 2.0 was published in 2001. The current recommended specification is version 2.1 [5]. The well-defined format of XBRL provides machine- readable tags to exchange and transfer business information across individual computation platforms [6]. The XBRL taxonomies are the reporting-area specific hierarchical dictionaries used by the XBRL community [7]. Different taxonomies or taxonomy extensions will be required for different business reporting purposes. For example, some     national jurisdictions define their taxonomies to reflect local accounting and other reporting regulations. With the development of XBRL, it has increased the financial report transparency across companies and achieves the important financial disclosures. Currently, XBRL is being used across a wide range of sectors, including securities regulation, banking, insurance, data aggregators and taxation, as well as for non-financial reporting such as carbon disclosure, sustainability efforts and risk reporting. [5]  Although the development of best practices in the use of XBRL is still in the early stages, there are many researches that have been published to analyze the concept, benefits, and applications of XBRL from different perspectives [8-14].

For example, Callaghan et al. [11] presents a framework for augmenting the XBRL documents through the use of UML constructs to increase utilization of XBRL documents in financial analysis and decision-making.  Murthy and Groomer [12] present a continuous auditing web services (CAWS) model that uses the emerging XML Web services framework to support a "pull model" of continuous auditing in a world of XML-enabled accounting systems, such as XBRL GL and business process execution language for web services (BPEL4WS). Stivason et al. [13] propose a User Defined Account Model (UDAM), which allows users to determine which measure they would like to employ by accessing the primary measures and compiling financial statements in any format they desire. O'Riain et al. [14] argue that linked data technology can accommodate XBRL data and make it easier to combine it with open datasets.

They proposed a system that provides a middleware for offering useful queries by converting XBRL to RDF (Resource Description Framework), which is then integrated with the other linked open data.

Some business application systems for XBRL have also been developed. Fujitsu has leveraged XBRL in its own financial reporting and built the XBRL's Global Ledger (XBRL-GL) framework [15] with a standardized view of the ERP system data. Altova has extended the reach of its XML development tools with support for XBRL [16]. SAP delivers the BusinessObjects XBRL Publishing [17] to enable easier communication of financial and business data.

Taiwan Stock Exchange Corporation (TWSE) adopted XBRL in 2008 by announcing a demonstration platform [18] at the end of that year, and then requested all listed companies to report their financial statements in XBRL format starting from 2010.

B. NoSQL and MongoDB "Big Data" relates to data creation, storage, retrieval and  analysis that are impractical or impossible to manage with traditional software tools. New technologies like NoSQL, referred to as "Not only SQL", databases are frequently used to store big data. They are suitable for dynamic data structures and are highly scalable without categorizing and parsing the data into a fixed schema [19]. The NoSQL database aims to address the shortcomings of relational databases and the demands of modern software development.

One of the leading NoSQL database is MongoDB [1], which is a document database. A database of MongoDB  contains collections, which hold a set of documents. A document is represented as a BSON (Binary JSON) structure, i.e., a list of key-value pairs. The value can be of three types: a primitive value, an array of documents or again a list of key-value pairs. It is why the MongoDB can work with dynamic schemas. MongoDB provides four basic database operations (i.e. Core MongoDB Operations, CRUD), which stands for create, read, update, and delete, for application development. To query these documents, the client can set filters on the collections expressed as a list of key-value pairs.

The queries are also JSON structured and it is possible for query nested fields.



III. METHODOLOGY OF PROPOSED SYSTEM  A. System Architecture The workflow of the proposed system is shown in Figure  1. We designed a Web crawler to collect the original XBRL documents from the Market Observation Post System in Taiwan (http://mops.twse.com.tw/server-java/t147sb02).

Then, the XBRL documents are parsed and stored in MongoDB. The financial health evaluation system is deployed in Microsoft Azure and provides the service as a SaaS.

Figure 1. Workflow of the proposed system.

B. Data processing An example of XBRL document is shown in Figure 2.

An XBRL taxonomy is an industry-specific categorization scheme. We use XBRL Java API [20] to parse XBRL documents. In order to speed up query processing and support scalability, we choose MongoDB to manage the financial data. Since the value of a key-value pair can be another list of key-value pairs, it is compatible with the hierarchical structure of the xml-based document. A snapshot of XBRL in MogoDB is shown in Figure 3.

C. System Development Since the financial data are constantly increased and the  functional modules are also potentially changeable, a three- tier architecture is adopted as our system?s fundamental architecture. As shown in Figure 4, the system provides abstraction among the presentation layer, logic layer, and the data layer, which makes our system more flexible and maintainable in the lifetime of the system.

Figure 2. An instance of an XBRL.

Figure 3. A snapshot of XBRL in MongoDB.

Figure 4. Three-tier system architecture.

D. Financial Health Lights and Indicators The financial health of a company is comprised of six  dimensions: capital structure, repayment ability, ability to benefit, operation efficiency, ability to growth, and cash-flow.

Each dimension involves several financial ratios, which are listed in Table I. The financial ratios can help to make sense of the overwhelming amount of information that can be found in a company's financial statements, and the formulas of all financial ratios can be found in most of the finance books. The performance of financial ratio and the six dimensions of financial health are finally represented by five different light bulbs. The derivation steps are performed as follows.

1) Calculate the scale of performance for each financial ratio: The scale of a ratio depends on the industry average over the same period and the value of year-over-year. The scale of the financial ratio rp is calculated by Equation (1),  where ry,i denotes the value of a financial ratio r over i-th quarter of the year y, and I(r)y,i indicates the the industry average of r over i-th quarter of the year y.

rp =[(ry,i ? ry-1,i)/ ry-1,i +( ry,i ? I(r)y,i )/ I(r)y,i ]/2  2) Translate the scales to financial health light bulbs: Five different light bulbs are used to represent the "financial health", i.e., red, yellow-red, green, yellow-blue, and blue.

We grades five indicators from one to five points, and each light bulb has its grade-point scale. Table II lists the mapping between scale and grade, as well as the meanings of light bulbs.

3) Aggregate financial ratios to six dimensions: According to the classification in Table I, we can express the financial health in each dimension by averaging the scales of the corresponding financial ratios. The results are also represented by light bulbs as shown in Table II.

TABLE I. SIX DIMENSIONS AND THE CORRSPONING FINANCIAL RATIOS  Dimension Financial Ratio  Capital Structure  Equity ratio  Debt-to-asset ratio  Debt-to-equity ratio  Capitalization ratio  Current liabilities to total liability ratio  Fixed assets to permanent capital ratio  Repayment Ability  Current ratio  Quick ratio  Interest protection multiples  Ability to Benefit  Return on assets  Return on equity  Gross profit margin ratio  Net profit margin ratio  Operation Efficiency  Total assets turnover ratio  Fixed assets turnover rate  Accounts receivable turnover ratio  Inventory turnover ratio  Ability to Growth  Sales growth ratio  Net profit growth ratio  Total equity growth ratio  Equity growth ratio  Cash Flow Cash flow ratio  Cash re-investment ratio     TABLE II. DESCRIPTION OF FINANCIAL HEALTH LIGHT BULBS  Monitoring Indicators Light Bulb Red Yellow-red Green Yellow-blue Blue  Scale (%) > 50 50 ~ 15 15 ~ -15 -15 ~ -50 < -50  Grade 5 4 3 2 1  Meaning Very Good Good Fair Bad Very Bad

IV. SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION For system implementation, we adopt three-tier system  architecture to simplify the application development process.

A web crawler is developed to collect the XBRL instance documents, including the financial statements of all listed and OTC companies from the first quarter of 2010 to the fourth quarter of 2012, from the Market Observation Post System in Taiwan. The XBRL instance documents are parsed and stored in MongoDB. All the development tools are listed in Figure 5, including some newly developed APIs for flexibility and maintainability. This system had been deployed in Microsoft Windows Azure cloud platform for testing. It is now maintained at http://xbrl.dmlab.cs.nchu.edu.tw.

Figure 5. Development tools for three-tier architecture.

Because the system is intended to be used by Taiwanese users, the user interface uses Chinese characters. Figure 6 is one snapshot of the proposed system. The area numbered "1" shows three ways to display financial information: for single company, for multi-company comparison, and for user- defined filters, from top to down. For example, when we chose to view the financial health of a company and pressed the top button in area "1", all we need to do is setting required entries in area "2", i.e., the target industry, company, year, and quarter. Then press the "submit" button.  The results will be shown in area "3". The evaluation of company?s financial health is represented in terms of six dimensions and one overall performance. Each one is presented using five different light bulbs based on the calculation described in Section III-D, steps 2-3). The grades and the meanings of light bulbs are also listed on the left side of the web page to assist users? understanding. The button numbered "4" can be clicked to show the corresponding  radar chart. The buttons in area "5" provides detailed information for each dimension.

As an example, Figure 7 shows the evaluation results of the "Capital Structure" dimension. The detailed information of six financial ratios is in the area "6". The calculation of the scale of performance for each financial ratio is described in Section III-D, step 1). The system also provides bar chart and trend chart for each ratio as in numbered "7" and "8", respectively.



V. CONCLUSION In this paper, a cloud service for evaluation of company?s  financial health based on XBRL-tagged financial statements is designed and developed with emphasis on three-tier system architecture and NoSQL database. The proposed system provides user-friendly interface that makes complicated financial data easy to understand. It indeed demonstrates tremendous benefits of implementing interactive data using XBRL for financial information in big data era.

