Construction of Exact-BASIC Codes for Distributed Storage Systems at the MSR Point

Abstract?Regenerating codes (RGC) are a class of distributed storage codes that can provide efficient repair of failure nodes in distributed storage systems. In general, the reduction of repair bandwidth of RGC is at the expense of a small increase in storage cost and computational cost. The high computational complexity of data coding over a finite field of large size makes it unsuitable for practical distributed storage systems. BASIC codes, which stands for Binary Addition and Shift Implementable Convolutional codes, is introduced in [1] with the aim of reducing computational complexity, while retaining the benefits of RGC. In this paper, we present a construction of exact-repair BASIC codes at the minimum-storage point (MSR). A helper node needs no coding to repair a failure node for the minimum-storage BASIC codes. The results of simulation show minimum-storage BASIC codes outperform Cauchy Reed-Solomon codes in both repairing cost and coding cost.



I. INTRODUCTION  Distributed storage systems achieve high reliability by stor- ing the big data redundantly in a large collection of unreliable storage nodes. There are two ways of providing redundancy.

The simplest form of redundancy is replicate the data multiple times, which is widely used in many practical storage systems, e.g., Google file system [2] and Facebook data centers [3]. As a generation of replication, erasure code can provide much better storage efficiency than replication, and Reed-Solomon (RS) code is a typical erasure code. The original file can be recovered from any set of k storage nodes, and we term this property as MDS (Maximum Distance Separable) property. To repair a failed node, RS code will let the new node download k coded pieces from the surviving nodes, reconstruct the original file and compute the lost piece. Call this process as repairing process, and repair bandwidth is the total network bandwidth of a repairing process. The repair bandwidth of RS code is k times of size of the lost piece, which is a waste of network bandwidth,  This work was partially supported by National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, No.2012CB315904), National Natural Science Foun- dation of China (No.NSFC61179028), SZ JCYJ20130331144502026, Guang- dong Natural Science Foundation (GDNSF, No.S2011010000923) and a grant from University Grants Committee of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. AoE/E-02/08).

The performance of both redundancy-reliability and repair problem was formulated and studied in [4], which is called regenerating codes (RGC). Consider an (n, k, d, ?, ?) regen- erating code that the file of size B is stored in a distributed storage system with n storage nodes, where each node stores ? packets. All k? packets of k storage nodes are downloaded by a data collector (DC) to reconstruct the object, this process is termed as reconstructing process and the total data down- loaded of the process is the reconstructing bandwidth. If a storage node has failed, a new storage node can regenerate the ? packets by downloading ? packets each from any d surviving nodes. After that, a DC can still reconstruct the original object by downloading all the k? packets from any k storage nodes. In this repairing process, the repair bandwidth of RGC is ? = d?, and the number of nodes accesses d is reffered to as repair-degree.

RGC possess an optimal tradeoff curve between the amount of reconstructing bandwidth k? and the repair bandwidth d?.

Two kinds of optimal codes, the minimum-storage regenerat- ing (MSR) point and the minimum-bandwidth regenerating (MBR) point are proposed in [4], where MSR codes are corresponding to the point with k?MSR = B, ?MSR =  Bd k(d?k+1) , and MBR codes are corresponding to the point with ?MBR = 2Bd2kd?k2+k , ?MBR =  2Md 2kd?k2+k . The explicit  constructions of MSR codes and MBR codes are developed in [5]?[7]. Up to now, the best results are the constructions of MSR codes and MBR codes in [7], which achieve the optimal tradeoff at the MSR codes (n ? 2k) and MBR codes (all n and k) using the product-matrix construction.

With respect to the repairing process and coding process, there are arguably several performance merits possible in the design-space of codes for distributed networked storage:  1) Repair bandwidth. MBR codes are able to achieve the minimum repair bandwidth and PM (product-matrix) [7] is a typical construction, but take an order of magnitude more computation time than standard erasure codes for both encoding and decoding [8].

2) Repair-degree. Recently proposed SRC (self-repairing codes) [9], [10] achieve this optimal, by allowing one repair while contacting only two nodes, as long as less     than half of the nodes have failed. This is at the price of sacrificing the MDS property.

3) Input/output (I/O) cost, which measures the number of bits a storage node needs to read out from its memory in order to repair the failed node. In the extreme case where I/O cost is minimal, the number of bits read out from the memory is exactly equal to the number of bits to be sent out. Data combining is only required in the receiving end. RGC with minimal I/O cost is called a repair-by-transfer regenerating code. The construction of repair-by-transfer minimum-repair-bandwidth regenerat- ing codes can be found in DRESS codes [11].

4) Computation complexity. Traditionally, RS codes and RGC are constructed based on finite field GF(q), where q > 2. So we have to handle multiplication operations during coding and repairing process, results in more computation complexity.

RGC outperform RS codes in terms of repair bandwidth, but take an order of magnitude more computation time than standard erasure codes for both encoding and decoding [12].

More accurately, [12] gives a system perspective of regener- ating codes and clam that product-matrix codes [7] are good candidates among RGC for replacing RS codes but still with 7 times of the encoding costs when compared to systematic RS codes and more decoding time compared to RS codes.

BASIC (Binary Addition and Shift Implementable Convolu- tional) codes is proposed in [1] that can achieve all the benefit of RGC with only addition and shift operations involved in coding process. The computational complexity of BASIC code is much less that of RGC [1]. The source packets of BASIC codes can also be recovered using ZigZag decoding [13] if we choose the encoding coefficient which has the increasing difference property. In this paper, we give construction of exact minimum storage BASIC codes. A helper node needs no coding to repair a failure node, the proposed codes are repair-by-transfer minimum storage BASIC codes.

A similar regenerating codes is presented in [6]. The dif- ferences of the codes in this paper and in [6] are as follows.

First, the operations in mixing the data packets are different.

Multiplication and addition are involved in [6], while shift and addition are involved in this paper. Second, to reduce complexity, the encoding coefficient of [6] in different nodes are the same, but just shifted some positions. The encoding coefficient of the minimum storage BASIC codes in different nodes can be different and do not impact the complexity.

The paper is organized as follows. In section II, we will review some definitions and results of BASIC codes. The construction of minimum storage BASIC codes is proposed in section III. In section IV, we evaluate the complexity of BASIC codes. We implement the proposed minimum storage BASIC codes in section V, and the results of simulation show that the proposed minimum storage BASIC codes outperform Cauchy Reed-Solomon codes (which is widely used in practi- cal storage systems) in both repairing cost and decoding cost.

Finally, we conclude with the main contributions and results of our paper in Section VI.



II. BASIC CODES  A. Definitions of BASIC Codes  BASIC codes [1]: can achieve the full benefit of regenerat- ing codes with only shift and addition operations be involved in both encoding and decoding process. Many expensive multiplications of finite field can be avoided.

Similar to RGC [4], there exist an optimal tradeoff curve between ? and ?. We term codes that attain two extremal points of the best storage efficiency and the minimum re- pair bandwidth as minimum-storage (MS) BASIC codes and minimum-bandwidth (MB) BASIC codes, respectively.

Two main versions of repair have been considered in [4]: exact repair and functional repair. In exact repair, the failed data packets are exactly regenerated, thus restoring exactly the lost encoded packets with their exact replicas. In functional repair, the requirement is relaxed: the newly generated packets can contain different data from that of the failed node as long as the repaired system maintains the MDS property. We term BASIC codes with exact repair, functional repair as exact- BASIC codes and functional-BASIC codes respectively.

B. Design Framework  In the encoding process of BASIC codes, the source data file is divided into B data packets with size L bits. Similar to [1], we represent the bits of a packet by the coefficients of a formal power series [14](p.154). A formal power series over GF (2) is a formal sum  ?? j=0  cjz j = c0 + c1z + c2z  2 + c3z 3 + . . . ,  where z is an indeterminate and cj are elements in GF (2). By ?a node stores a power series?, we mean that the coefficients of the power series are stored. In practice, the number of bits stored in a node is finite, and the power series is a polynomial with finitely many non-zero coefficients.

There is no convergence issue in formal power series, because a formal power series can be regarded as an infinite sequence of bits (c0, c1, c2, c3, . . .), with the indeterminate z being the right shift operator. The addition of two infinite sequences (cj)?j=0 and (dj)  ? j=0 are performed componentwise,  and the multiplication is defined by ?convolution?,  (cj) ? j=0 ? (dj)?j=0 = (ej)?j=0  with  ej =  j? ?=0  c?dj??.

The set of all formal power series thus form a commutative ring with identity, and is denoted by GF (2)[[z]].

For i = 1, 2, ? ? ? , k, we denote the k data packets as si(z).

Define a coded packet as a linear combination of the data packets, with coefficients which is either 0 or a power of z.

The coded packet is obtained by shifting the power series to the right appropriately and adding the resulting power series.

For i = 1, 2, ? ? ? , n, a coded packet is denoted by pi(z) that can be written in the form  pi(z) = ci,1(z)s1(z) + ci,2(z)s2(z) + ? ? ?+ ci,k(z)sk(z),  where ci,j(z) belongs to a subset of GF (2)[[z]] that the element of the subset is either 0 or a power of z, and denote this subset as C. When ci,j(z) is nonzero, the exponent of ci,j(z) stand for the number of added bits at the head of the packet sj(z) for the coded packet pi(z). The encoding is completely specified by ci,j(z) for i = 1, 2, . . . , n and j = 1, 2, . . . , k. We define the encoding matrix E as the n?k matrix whose (i, j)-entry is equal to ci,j(z). If we put the coded packets together in a column vector, we have  ? ????  p1(z) p2(z)  ...

pn(z)  ? ???? = E ?  ? ????  s1(z) s2(z)  ...

sk(z).

? ????  We say that the MDS property is satisfied if we can recover the data packets s1(z), s2(z), ? ? ? , sk(z) from any k coded packets in  {p1(z), p2(z), ? ? ? , pn(z)}.

Example: Let k = 3, n = 6. There are three data packets s1(z), s2(z) and s3(z). The coded packets are defined as  p1(z) = s1(z), p2(z) = s2(z), p3(z) = s3(z)  p4(z) = zs1(z) + s2(z) + s3(z)  p5(z) = s1(z) + zs2(z) + s3(z)  p6(z) = s1(z) + s2(z) + zs3(z).

The corresponding encoding matrix of the coded packets is  E =  ? ???????  1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 z 1 1 1 z 1 1 1 z  ? ??????? . (1)  Proposition 1. [1] Suppose that s1(z) to sk(z) are data packets, and p1(z) to pn(z) are n coded packets with global encoding vectors v1 to vn, respectively. Let {i1, i2, ? ? ? , ik} be any subset of {1, 2, ? ? ? , n} and D be the sub-matrix of E ob- tained by retaining rows i1 to ik. Then we can compute s1(z) to sk(z) from the k coded packets pi1(z), pi2(z), ? ? ? , pik(z) if the determinant of D is nonzero.

Proof. We give a sketch of proof for the sake of completeness.

Write det(D) as ze(1 + f(z)), where e is a non-negative integer and f(z) is a polynomial with zero constant term. The inverse of 1+ f(z) is 1+ f(z) + f(z)2 + f(z)3 + ? ? ? , which is considered as a formal power series. Recall that the adjoint of D, denoted by adj(D), is defined as the transpose of the  matrix of cofactors of D [15](p.20). We get ? ????  s1(z) s2(z)  ...

sk(z)  ? ???? =  1 + f(z) + f(z)2 + ? ? ? ze  ? adj(D) ?  ? ????  pi1(z) pi2(z)  ...

pik(z).

? ????  Note that the power series in the numerator is the multiplica- tive inverse of 1 + f(z) in GF (2)[[z]], and is well-defined, because each coefficients can be obtained with finitely many arithmetic operations.

Conversely, if det(D) = 0, then the rank of D is strictly less than k. Hence we can not solve for s1(z) to sk(z).

For example, the determinant of all 3 ? 3 sub-matrices of the encoding matrix E in (1) are 1, z, z+1, z2+1, z3+z, and are all nonzero. Hence this matrix satisfies the MDS property.



III. CONSTRUCTION OF MS-BASIC CODES  It is shown in [7] that if we can construct an (n, k, d) optimal regenerating code with ? = 1, then we can construct an (n, k, d) optimal regenerating code with integer ? > 1. To simplify the system implementation, we can assume ? = 1.

Then,  ?MS = d? k + 1, (2) BMS = k(d? k + 1), (3)  A. Code Construction  An (n, k, d) MS-BASIC code is composed of n storage nodes, denoted by {N1, N2, ? ? ? , Nn}, and satisfying the fol- lowing two conditions:  ? d = k + 1.

? B = n.

Therefore, by equation (3), they will also satisfy that ?MS = 2 and B = n = 2k.

The encoding of MS-BASIC codes are as follows:  ? Fragment the file into B = n data packets s1(z), s2(z), ? ? ? , sn(z) equally, term these original pack- ets as data packets.

? Construct n parity-check packets p1(z), p2(z), ? ? ? , pn(z) by  pi(z) = k+i?  j=i+1  ci,j(z)sj(z), i = 1, 2, ? ? ? , n, (4)  ? Store (si(z), pi(z)) in the node Ni for i = 1, 2, ? ? ? , n.

Where the addition in (4) is mod n addition. In the above encoding process, ci,j(z) is chosen in the set C such that the encoding matrix of any k nodes satisfies MDS property. The coded packets mentioned in the section II include data packets and parity-check packets. In general, the parity-check packets are generated by (4),     B. Node Regeneration  A failed node can be repaired by the following two steps: 1) Download the data packets from the next k nodes in  the sequence. Note that the next node of Nn is N1.

From these data packets, the parity-check packet of the newcomer can be calculated.

2) Download the parity-check packet from the previous node in the sequence. Solving an easy system of equations, the data packet of the newcomer can be obtained.

It is clear that MS-BASIC codes achieve bandwidth optimality for parameter d = k+1 and B = n, by equations (2) and (3).

Moreover, note that the failed node have to be regenerated by a specific subset of d = k + 1 nodes, not any d nodes.

C. Data Reconstruction  We can check that a DC can reconstruct the original object by downloading two packets of any k storage nodes. For any k nodes, we can retrieve k data packets and k parity-check packets which a linear combination of k data packets. The other k data packets can be retrieved using the method of Proposition 1 from k parity-check packets. Of course, we can also retrieve the other k data packets using the ZigZag decoding method if the corresponding encoding coefficients satisfy the increasing difference property [13]. However, if the encoding coefficients do not satisfy the increasing difference property, the ZigZag decoding method does not work.

D. Example  In this subsection, we will describe the construction of a (6, 3, 4) MS-BASIC code.

First, the file is fragmented into B = n = 6 data packets s1(z), s2(z), ? ? ? , s6(z). Then, two packets si(z) and pi(z) are stored in node Ni, where pi(z) is computed using the following form:  pi(z) =  3+i? j=i+1  ci,j(z)sj(z), i = 1, 2, ? ? ? , 6,  and ci,j(z) is given as:  (c1,2(z), c1,3(z), c1,4(z))  = (c4,5(z), c4,6(z), c4,1(z)) = (z 0, z1, z2),  (c2,3(z), c2,4(z), c2,5(z))  = (c5,6(z), c5,1(z), c5,2(z)) = (z 0, z2, z1),  (c3,4(z), c3,5(z), c3,6(z))  = (c6,1(z), c6,2(z), c6,3(z)) = (z 0, z0, z0).

For (6, 3, 4) MS-BASIC code, we can repair one failure node by connecting to 4 nodes and downloading one packet from each of 4 helping nodes. The repairing process of node 1 is showed in Fig. 1. The new node download 4 packets s2(z), s3(z), s3(z), and s1(z) + s2(z) + s3(z) from nodes 2, 3, 4 and 6 respectively. The two stored packets of node 1  s1(z)  s2(z)+zs3(z) +z2s4(z)  N1 N2 N3 N4 N5 N6  s2(z) s3(z) s4(z) s5(z) s6(z)  s3(z)+z2s4(z )+zs5(z)  s4(z)+ s5(z)+ s6(z)  s5(z)+zs6(z) + z2s1(z)  s6(z)+z2s1(z )+ zs2(z)  s1(z)+ s2(z)+ s3(z)  z z2  s1(z) s2(z)+zs3(z)  +z2s4(z) New node  Fig. 1: The distribution of data packets and redundancy packets of (6, 3, 4) MS-BASIC code. The new node can download 4 packets s2(z), s3(z), s3(z), and s1(z)+s2(z)+s3(z) and add some shifted packets to repair node 1.

can be regenerated by some simple additions and right-shifts of 4 downloaded packets. The parity-check packet of node 1 s2(z) + zs3(z) + z  2s4(z) can be repaired by adding the data packet s2(z), one-shift data packet s3(z) and two-shift data packet s4(z). The data packet s1(z) can be repaired by the following equation:  s1(z) = (s1(z) + s2(z) + s3(z)) + s2(z) + s3(z).

We can check that a DC can reconstruct the original object by downloading two packets from any 3 storage nodes.

Suppose a DC connects to nodes 1, 2 and 3, and down- load 3 data packets s1(z), s2(z), s3(z) and 3 parity-check packets s2(z) + zs3(z) + z2s4(z), s3(z) + z2s4(z) + zs5(z), s4(z) + s5(z) + s6(z). One can retrieve z2s4(z) by adding s2(z), one right-shift of s3(z) and s2(z) + zs3(z) + z2s4(z), and we can get the data packet s4(z) by shifting two bits of z2s4(z). The other data packets s5(z) and s6(z) can also be decoded similarly.



IV. OVERHEAD RATIO AND COMPLEXITY  Due to bitwise shifting, the length of the coded packet is L plus the maximal degree of the global encoding coefficients.

The maximal degree r of the coefficients is thus the storage overhead. The size of each packet in (n, k, d) MS-BASIC codes is p = L + r bits, where r is the maximal degree.

This overhead is negligible when the packet size L is large.

In (n, k, d) MS-BASIC codes, each node stores one data packet and one parity-check packet. Each parity-check packet is a linear combination of k data packets, which requires k?1 additions of p bits. So, the encoding computational complexity of (n, k, d) MS-BASIC codes is O(nkp).

In the repairing process of (n, k, d) MS-BASIC codes, both the data packet and the parity-check packet can be regenerated by summing k packets. So, the repairing process needs 2k     additions of p bits. The repairing computational complexity of (n, k, d) MS-BASIC codes is O(kp).

If DC connects to k consecutive nodes, each parity-check packet can be retrieved by adding k packets and there are k parity-check packets. The complexity of decoding k con- secutive nodes is O(k2p). If the k nodes are not continuous, to reconstruct the original file, DC first need to compute the inverse matrix of the encoding matrix, then multiply the inverse matrix by the coded packets. Compared to the computing time of large amounts of data, the time of compute the inverse matrix is very small, and we do not consider it.

The multiplication of the inverse matrix and k parity-check packets takes O(k2) additions. Therefore, the complexity of (n, k, d) MS-BASIC codes is O(k2p).

Remarks: It is more convenient to perform byte-wise shift instead of bit-wise shift. Also, it is not necessary to physically shift the bits in the memory. By creating pointers to the data bits, the shifting operations are performed by simply incrementing the pointers.



V. EVALUATION  Cauchy Reed-Solomon (CRS) codes [16] were proposed by Blomer et al. in 1995 to improve the performance of encoding complexity using Cauchy distribution matrix. Since then, CRS codes are widely used in communication and storage systems.

To evaluate the practicality of the proposed MS-BASIC codes, in this section, we provide details on the experiments we performed to evaluate the performances of MS-BASIC codes and CRS codes. There are many versions of implementation of CRS codes, and Jerasure library [17] is considered to be one of the most practical version that can achieve the optimal encoding performance. We select this implementation version of CRS codes and select the word size of CRS codes to be 16 bits. The machine for testing has a 1GHz single-core processor, 1GB of RAM and 20GB of Hard Disk. It runs CentOS Linux, version 5.6 on VMware Workstation.

All the experiments have been done for two different files of 78.4MByte and 440MByte in size respectively, with the pa- rameters (n, k) to be (6, 12), (8, 16) and (10, 20) respectively.

In total, three experiments (encoding time, repairing time and decoding time) were performed on the above setup. Each data point in the graphs that follow is the average of five runs.

A. Encoding Time  In the encoding process of MS-BASIC codes, a data file of M bits is first divided into n data packets, each of Mn bits, we assume M is divisible by n. Then we generate n parity- check packets according to (4). Each of n nodes stores one data packet and one parity-check packet.

For CRS codes, the data file of M bits is divided into many pieces, each of kw bits. Then divide each piece into k data packets with the same size w bits. Each k data packets can be used to generate n ? k parity-check packets. Each node will store one packet for each piece. Note that the n ? k parity- check packets generated by CRS codes using a (n ? k) ? k Cauchy distribution matrix that is defined over the Galois Field  GF (2w) [17]. The (n ? k) ? k Cauchy distribution matrix over GF (2w) is next converted into a w(n? k)?wk binary distribution matrix using a projection defined by a primitive polynomial of GF (2w) [16]. Fig. 2 displays the encoding process of parity-check packets for CRS codes with n = 6, k = 4 and w = 3. With binary distribution matrix, one may create a parity-check packet as the XOR of all data packets whose corresponding columns of the binary distribution matrix have ones. Note that the expensive matrix multiplication is replaced by binary addition. So this is a great improvement over standard RS codes. For more information about the encoding and decoding process of CRS codes, we refer the reader to [17]. The encoding performance of CRS codes and  Fig. 2: The encoding process of parity-check packets of CRS codes with k = 4, n = 6 and w = 3.

MS-BASIC codes shows in Fig. 3. The results of Fig. 3 show that MS-BASIC codes outperform CRS codes in encoding performance for file size of both 78.4MB and 440MB. The encoding time of CRS is roughly two times of the encoding time of MS-BASIC codes for all the evaluated parameters and files.

(12, 6) (16, 8) (20, 10)0      Parameters (n, k)  En co  di ng  ti m  e  CRS, 78.4MB MS?BASIC, 78.4MB CRS, 440MB MS?BASIC, 440MB  Fig. 3: The encoding time of MS-BASIC codes and CRS codes for data file size 78.4MB and 440MB with different parameters. The encoding time of CRS codes is roughly two times of the encoding time of MS-BASIC codes.

B. Repairing Time  When there is a node fails, MS-BASIC codes only need to download the amount of k+12k M data to repair the failure node using some addition and shift operations. For CRS codes, the new node first download M data to reconstruct the stored data file and then re-encode the lost packets. The results of repairing performance of CRS codes and MS-BASIC codes show in Fig. 4.

(12, 6) (16, 8) (20, 10)0        Parameters (n, k)  R ep  ai rin  g tim  e  CRS codes, 78.4MB MS?BASIC, 78.4MB CRS codes, 440MB MS?BASIC, 440MB  Fig. 4: The repairing time of MS-BASIC codes and CRS codes for data file size 78.4MB and 440MB with different parameters. The repairing time of CRS codes is greatly larger than that of MS-BASIC codes for all the tested parameters.

The performance repairing of CRS codes is worse than that of MS-BASIC codes, as expected. The repairing time of (10, 20) CRS codes is about 20 times of that of MS-BASIC codes for file size 440MB.

C. Decoding Time  (12, 6) (16, 8) (20, 10)0        Parameters (n, k)  D ec  od in  g tim  e  CRS, 78.4MB MS?BASIC, 78.4MB CRS, 440MB MS?BASIC, 440MB  Fig. 5: The decoding time of MS-BASIC codes and CRS codes for data file size 78.4MB and 440MB with different parameters. The decoding time of CRS codes is greatly larger than that of MS-BASIC codes for all the tested parameters.

The decoding time of CRS codes and MS-BASIC codes shows in Fig. 5. The decoding time of CRS codes is also larger  than that of MS-BASIC codes for all the evaluated parameters and files. The decoding time of (6, 12) CRS codes is a little bigger than 10 times of the decoding time of MS-BASIC codes (6, 12) for file size 440MB.

From the evaluation, we see that MS-BASIC codes out- perform CRS codes in both coding time and repairing time.

It makes MS-BASIC codes really competitive in practical distributed storage systems.



VI. CONCLUSION  In this paper, we give the construction of BASIC codes at the minimum storage point. MS-BASIC codes need no coding with minimal I/O cost in the repairing process that is a repair-by-transfer code. With the performance evaluation of CRS codes and MS-BASIC codes, we show that MS-BASIC codes outperform CRS codes in both repairing cost and coding cost, which makes MS-BASIC codes are very attractive in the coding of distributed storage systems.

