Multidimensional Analysis of Fetal Growth Curves

Abstract? Fetal biometry is considered the keystone in fetal well-being assessment. In particular, fetal growth curves built by means of ultrasound images and reference charts (defining the normal and pathological sizes for each biometric parameter and for each gestational age) are extensively adopted to track fetal sizes from the early phases of pregnancy up to delivery. In literature a large variety of reference charts are reported to consider the differences among different ethnic groups, but they are up to five decades old and they do not consider environmental factors such as foods, lifestyle, smoke, familial aspects, physiological and pathological variables, temporal parameters etc., which cannot be disregarded in a correct diagnosis. Therefore, current reference charts are rapidly becoming inadequate to support the melting pot of ethnic groups and lifestyles of our society, while customized reference charts can provide an accurate fetal assessment for the different fetal anthropometrical variables. Starting from a detailed analysis of the limits of classical reference charts, the paper presents a new method, based on multidimensional analysis for creating personalized fetal growth curves. A simple implementation, based on Open Source software and simulated data, shows the need of Big Data techniques in order to scale up the problem.

Keywords?Cloud computing; fetal growth; personalized diagnosis; multidimensional analysis.



I.  INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND In obstetrics and gynecology, data coming for medical  tests are often used for diagnostic and documentation purposes, opening the stage for a systematic data analysis to improve patient care and to develop new health-assessment techniques.

For example, throughout pregnancy ultrasound scans of the maternal abdomen are routinely used to track fetal growth and to assess fetal health. This is pursued by collecting fetal parameters such as Biparietal Diameter (BPD), Head Circumference (HC), Abdominal Circumference (AC), Femur Length (FL), Crown to Rump Length (CRL). To detect whether growth parameters lay within normal ranges, measured values are compared to statistical data (i.e. reference charts with fetal growth curves, showing average values of such parameters as a function of the gestational age).

Abnormal fetal growth parameters often are indicators of potential fetal pathologies.

The importance of this test, proposed by Lubchenco [11], Usher and McLean [21] and Babson and Brenda [1] more than  five decade ago is supported by a huge amount of scientific literature and by the clinical evidence, but the same literature clearly shows its main constraints:  ? the number of patients considered in the studies (some thousandth) is low with respect to the total number of newborn per year (about 140 ML in 2012) in the World;  ? the patients considered in the studies are not representative of the variety of anthropometrical factors related to ethnicity, to familial aspects and to other relevant internal and external factors;  ? the commonly used growth curves are up to five decades years old, they are not updated for the current population and they are not suitable to investigate temporal trends and dynamic aspects in fetal growth curves.

Indeed, fetal growth is influenced by a variety of factors, racial, social and economic among others, as well as specific medic conditions that may pre-exist or that may develop during pregnancy. Hence, it?s not surprising that fetal biometric parameters show a degree of variation from country to country and from area to area within the same country.

Beyond ethnicity, others factors affect fetal growth including fetus gender, physiological and pathological variables, maternal height and weight, drug or tobacco exposure, genetic syndromes, congenital anomalies and placental failure ([8], [15], [16], [20]).

Some authors addressed these problems providing an increasing number of fetal growth charts for specific groups and subgroups of population, but their studies suffer from a considerable methodological heterogeneity making them difficult to extend them on the large scale.

Other authors, such as Gardosi [4] in 1992, proposed to adjust growth curves for most of the influential factors and introduced the idea of individualized fetal growth charts according to specific maternal and fetal characteristics. After about 20 years the interesting proposal, based on proprietary software and on a centralized application, did not produce results documented in the scientific literature.

From a theoretical point of view the creation of personalized reference charts for fetal growth curves can be formulated as a multidimensional analysis problem on the biometric dataset, routinely collected by doctors for fetal health assessment during pregnancy. Parameters (ethnicity,      maternal sizes, familial aspects etc.) impacting the fetal growth can be modeled as cubes dimensions and each homogeneous group of patients (with respect to a given set of dimensions) can be considered as a subcube of the above mentioned biometric dataset. In the multidimensional analysis the requirement of personalized chart can be also expressed in the form: ?which is the normal range associated to the X biometric parameter of a Y-weeks old fetus belonging to the subcube defined by the Z dimensional parameters??.

An important constraint, in order to design a system able to dynamically answer to these questions, comes from the problem size, which is a function of the number of newborns per year. In this case, considering the storage space needed for the biometric dataset and for the other related data (order of magnitude of some PB), the distributed nature of the system and the number of operations per newborn (order of magnitude of millions or more) we will demonstrate that Big Data techniques  must be adopted to satisfy its requirements.

The paper is organized as follows: after the presentation of the background and of the problem (Section II and III), we will show how a conventional open source data warehouse (DW) system can be effectively used to compute the personalized fetal growth curves (Section IV). Then, we will show why DW systems are insufficient to effectively manage the whole dataset needed to supply the ?Personalized Fetal Growth Curves? service on global scale, and how the problem can be overcome using Big Data techniques (Section V).

Section VI is for conclusions and future works.



II. BACKGROUND After the pioneering works of Lubchenco [11], Usher and  McLean [21] and Babson and Brenda [1], more than five decades ago, fetal growth assessment is a well established and mature research field in obstetrics and gynecology ([2], [3], [5], [6]).

The proliferation of studies on specific subgroups of patients ([23], [24], [25], [26], [27]) and the related proposals of an ever increasing number of reference charts was characterized by a considerable methodological heterogeneity making difficult to normalize them and generally reuse for diagnostic purposes. As a consequence in clinical practice generic reference charts are preferred to specific ones, or to more complex approaches based on suitable mathematic models [26], because of their simplicity.

To preserve the simplicity of the approach without loss of diagnostic power, some authors proposed the adoption of purposely developed software tools (Web Applications, Mobile Application, ?) to create customized growth charts ([4], [5], [9]) based on a regression model fitted to a very large group of newborns. GROW software [9] by Gardosi can be used as a web application or stand alone. Once inserted parameters such as weight, height, gender and ethnicity, it produces an ideal fetal growth curves using the GROW (Gestation Related Optimal Weight) method. Another widely used software is EcoPlus by Thesis Imaging1, an information system which allows comprehensive management of medical   1 http://www.tesi.mi.it:8080/TesiSito/products.php  records by typing fetal biometric parameters, which are directly compared with the reference values for gestational age, with the display of the growth curve percentile.

X-Report OstGyn2 processes ultrasound parameters in real time, displaying graphics of the acquired data, and comparing them with those of previous scans. The software offers the possibility of adopting different references for the growth curves.

Since the reference values are often based on tables and formulas not easy-to-interpret, patients are increasingly making use of web applications or even mobile applications (Apps) preferring the simplicity and immediacy of reading rather than the scientific and methodological correctness.

Among the best known applications there are iFetus3 uses the most recent and updated biometric tables of the Caucasian race (valid for both European and North American populations); Fetal Ultrasound Calculator24 and Percentile Growth Charts5 that let patient know the percentiles based on World Health Organization (WHO) standards and to design custom charts.

These applications address the problem of positioning data on chart used as reference standard for the construction of growth curves, but WHO standards are dated, they are still based on generic reference charts and don?t differentiate by ethnic origin, so they are unsuitable to assess the biometric parameters in several cases of practical interest.

Despite the widespread adoption of cloud-based solutions by most industries, cloud computing has been slowly embraced by healthcare and the biggest impeding factors are concerns about security and performance of cloud services causing their low rate usage (this is the official reason for the closure of Google Health and Revolution Health for example) and the skepticism of institutions. Despite all oppositions, several institutions have moved to cloud infrastructure to lower their storage costs and facilitate the exchange of images and medical record. Examples are Microsoft Health Vault [14], the Merge Healthcare?s Project Honeycomb [13] and the Accenture Medical Imaging Solution [22].

To our knowledge big data techniques for approaching the problem of personalized growth chart are still not explored, even if it is clear that potential benefits can come.

Some authors have already proved the benefits of some techniques in dealing with large volumes of data ([28]). In the following of the paper we will disclose these reasons.



III. THE USE OF MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODELLING FOR PRODUCING PERSONALIZED CHARTS  The detailed analysis of the fetal intrauterine growth monitoring is out of the scope of this paper but, in summary, the underlying idea is that:   2 http://www.gsquared.it/X-Report.html 3 http://appfinder.lisisoft.com/app/ifetus.html 4 http://appfinder.lisisoft.com/app/fetal-ultrasound-calculator2.html 5 https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id= com.endyanosimedia.ipercentiles&hl=it       - fetuses at the same gestational age, with similar genetic make-up (ethnicity, familial aspects, ...) and in similar environmental conditions (food, smoke, drugs, ...) are subject to similar growth curves. This kind of fetuses will be referred, in the following of the paper, as Homogeneous Fetal Groups (HFG);  - a fetus with growth parameters different from those of its HFG is potentially pathologic.

Figure 1: Fetal-Infant Growth Chart as presented by Fenton TR  in Pediatrics, 2003 Dec 16; 3(1)    Monitoring is performed by measuring the length or the circumference of specific parts of the fetal skeleton (the above cited BPD, HC, AC, FL and CRL) by means of maternal trans-abdominal ultrasound pictures (Figure 1). For the purposes of this paper, for each given HFG at each gestational age (in weeks) the probability to find a given length can be approximated by a Gaussian distribution. This is justified by the natural anthropometric variability we can observe in normal fetuses and by the errors associated to the measurement procedure.

For diagnostic purposes we assume that fetuses are healthy if their sizes are between the 10th and the 90th percentile of the cumulative distribution function. They are pathologic if their sizes are out of the interval 3rd ? 97th., otherwise they are borderline.

Figure 2: Gaussian curve generated with 100 samples, given a  predefined parameter (head circumference) and a fixed gestational age  The Gaussian curves are effective for diagnosis purposes if their variance is small and the Gaussian bell is strict around the average. It is evident that if the sample for calculating the curve is small it is not representative of the whole population, while if they sample is too large it can present considerable anthropometric variability, which will be represented with a wide variance, and the corresponding Gaussian curve will be little effective for diagnostic purposes.

Therefore the right statistic sample with the smallest possible variance is the HGF we can obtain with the largest sample of patients. Moreover, it?s easy to see that all HGFs can be dynamically extracted from the whole dataset by means of multidimensional queries where fetal sizes are the measures [7], while the dimensions are the parameters (ethnicity, maternal weight and height, familial aspects, foods etc.) impacting the fetal growth.

Figure 3: Dimensional fact model of an ultrasound monitoring  visit As shown in Figure 3, in collaboration with a research  group on obstetrics and gynecology we identified 9 main dimensions of analysis and 6 measures for the biometric fetal sizes. This lead to more than 10.000 Homogeneous Fetal Subgroups that the system must be able to identify and continuously update by adding the new fetal sizes when they  36 weeks (gestational age)  3 10 50 90 97  100 samples  Head Circumference  sample #  percentile  length (cm)  29.30 30.90 32.70 34.90 36.05  3 7 37  40 4040 404  borderline borderlinenormal  pathologic  borderlineborderline     arrive from the hospitals or from the patients (20 ML per year, about 2 every 3 seconds). It means that this problem largely exceeds the computation capabilities of a classic multidimensional analysis system, such as the one included in the Pentaho suite. In order to produce updated HFG in a reasonable time, specific techniques must be investigated. For example Pentaho community has developed a specific project for high-performance, scalable and distributed memory clustering cache, called Community Distributed Cache (CDC).

The project allows to clear the cache of only specific Mondrian cubes. This feature allows to update each single HFG without impacting on the other cubes. Another approach can explore advanced clustering techniques for multidimensional datasets based on MapReduce Framework, as in [28], which demonstrated the be very effective to solve the problem at a reasonable price by means of Big Data techniques running on cloud infrastructure.



IV. DATA LAYER DESIGN For the purposes of this paper, fetal biometric data and  maternal data are created by means of a simulator, but in a real scenario, for a fully functional system, we should consider that medical data comes from a number of heterogeneous sources (hospitals, EHR repositories, patients etc.) through different channels (web services, web applications, mobile applications etc.) in different format (HL7 or proprietary formats).

Figure 4: Data model of Data4GO  This aspect brings to design a data layer made up of a distributed data architecture (Figure 4) which hierarchically integrates transactional data coming from the sources and normalized against a shared reference model (DB4GO ? DataBase for Gynecology and Obstetrics). The distributed  DB4GO is transformed in the DW4GO, which is the repository for the multidimensional datamarts of HFG.

A. The DB4GO layer For modeling the maternal and fetal data we started from  the HL7 Reference Information Model [10] and from the Universal Data Model [18] which represents two good starting point in healthcare. Moreover, we analyzed the HL7 Common Data Model based on the Data Model Harmonization Process for the integration phase [10].

Two fragments of the adopted model, used to prepare data for the multidimensional analysis phase, are shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6. The fragment in Figure 5 represents a model more suitable for the initial phase in which doctors collect all the data by means of anamnesis interviews. The fragment in Figure 6 represents a part of the Entity-Relationship diagram used for the multidimensional analysis phase.

Figure 5: A fragment of the ER patient-oriented diagram    Figure 6: A fragment of the ER report-oriented diagram   B. DB4GO data partitioning The partitioning is due to the fact that each country is  regulated by specific laws on health data management (privacy, security, accountability etc.) so that the granularity of data sources cannot be greater than that of the countries involved in the experiment. In general we can expect e much lower granularity, from the hospital size to the single user (via web application or mobile) size. Moreover, in several countries data protection laws require knowledge of where data are stored. For example this limits the adoption of the cloud in countries like Spain, France or Italy until cloud providers allowed obligatory data storage in a specific geographic location [12].

This aspect is important because, for further developments, we can imagine to exploit the distributed query capabilities typical of several modern clouds to index the ultrasound images and the other data and metadata produced for the fetal growth test and to retrieve it, according to specific criteria.

DB4GO  DB4GO p  DW4GO  HFG DB  Data2  Data3  Data1  Data n  DB4GO  Data2  Data1  Data m  DB4GO  Data2  Data1  Data 3  Data 4  Data n  HFG DB  HFG DB  HFG DB  HFG DB  HFG DB  Staging areaSources Multidimensionalized  datamarts     This has the potential to improve the diagnostic process included in the fetal growth test and to support the inductive statistic approach which is typical of Big Data research.

C. Problem  size Each year 140 millions of newborn come to the World (4.4  from US and 5.5 from Europe). Considering a Fetal Growth Tracking (FGT) online-service able to follow 50% of newborns from Europe and US, a record size of 10 KB for each pregnant woman plus 2 KB for each fetus and a running window of 6 year to track mothers with 2 or more children, the global storage space sum up to about 360 GB of online multidimensional data (and about 1.5 PB including also ultrasound images).

From the computational point of view, to generate the custom growth charts, the FGT system should run about 20 millions (5 millions pregnant women x 4 tests) multidimensional queries per year, i.e. about 2 queries each 3 seconds, which largely exceed the capabilities of a standard business intelligence suite (normally adopted for multidimensional analysis) such as Pentaho.

Existing Big Data solutions focus on addressing the Volume aspect of the 3-V?s of Big Data [29]. Specialized technologies including distributed databases [30], Hadoop [31] and NoSQL ([32], [19]) have been developed to support scalable data storage and on-demand querying over large volumes of data. These systems usually provide high read performance for data that has been persisted and properly indexed.



V. TEST ARCHITECTURE To have a first indication about the resources consumed by  the FGT service and about how they scale with the problem size we created two dataset representative of the Italian demographic population (60 million inhabitants, 21 main ethnic groups). The two datasets, including respectively, 100.000 and 1.000.000 records, were produced by using the inverse Gaussian distribution function, generating respectively 500 and 5.000 Homogeneous Fetal Groups.

The 2 dataset were loaded on a Pentium 5 machine running at 2.5 GHz with 8 GB of RAM and 2 TB of storage space (SATA Disks). Then, they were processed with Pentaho 4.8 Community Edition, running 500 random queries to generate 500 different Personalized Fetal Growth Charts. The average elapsed times are shown in Fig. 3. They clearly demonstrate that even with a small fraction (about 3%) of the records to be processed in the fully working system, a single machine is far from satisfying the temporal constraints of processing 2 queries each 3 seconds defined in the previous section.

As a second option we considered a recent evolution of the commercial version of Pentaho, called ?Pentaho Business Analytics for Big Data?, which interfaces with Hadoop and other NoSQL and Analytic databases, permitting to create MapReduce functions and to visualize the results in Pentaho.

Figure 7: Processing time with respect to the patients?number  The detailed comparison between the results are shown in Figure 7 and they show a significant performance improvement, sufficient to meet the previously defined temporal constraint at a reasonable price.

Two more options are under evaluations:  - the adoption of a different processing strategy, based on the clustering of multidimensional dataset with Hadoop, as described in [28];  - the adoption of tensor-based computation, which is a very effective way to manage multidimensional datasets on distributed and parallel machines.



VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS The fetal growth assessment is a relevant problem since it  concerns about 140 ML of newborns per year. Due to the population and ?ethnicity reshufflement?, it?s by nature a global phenomena which can benefit from the adoption of Big data techniques and cloud infrastructures. The goal is to obtain personalized Fetal Growth Curves? computation within a given timeframe (< 1.5 s) over a given dataset (about 360 GB) of multidimensional data.

In order to have some preliminary figures about the resources consumed by FGT service we performed 2 different experiment based on Pentaho and Hadoop.

The first results show that the problem can be solved at a reasonable cost and in an acceptable time. More promising results came from the adoption of 2 advanced approaches based parallel clustering algorithm and on tensor-based computation.

In the future we plan to deeper explore these solutions comparing them with the Pentaho-Hadoop approach.

