Research of 25 Hz Phase Sensitive Track Circuit  Signal Based on CORDIC Algorithm

Abstract ? This paper presents that the CORDIC algorithm can produce 25Hz phase sensitive track circuit signal by theoretical analysis, simulation and implementation to solve big volume, noisy and poor precision of the inverter. It theoretically proves that the CORDIC algorithm simulation based on Matlab which applies to produce 25Hz phase sensitive track circuit signal is feasible. By designing experimental platform based on the ARM processor, we produce two different phases of 25Hz sine wave signals outputting from the experiment which phases differ by 90 degrees. It provides the improvement of CORDIC algorithm by analyzing and comparing the arithmetic speeds of floating-point number and fixed-point number. Combining theoretical analysis and calculation, it shows that the improved CORDIC algorithm can achieve the maximum frequency of output signal. Experimental waveforms and experimental data show that the voltage of 25Hz phase sensitive track circuit based on the CORDIC algorithm has the ability of driving binary two track relay. In the end, this paper proves that the improvement of CORDIC algorithm is feasible to produce 25Hz sine signal.

Keywords?25 Hz Phase Sensitive Track Circuit; CORDIC; ARM; Floating- Point Calculation

I. INTRODUCTION At present, most of the electrified sections of our country  usually use 25Hz phase sensitive track circuit to detect occupancy of train. The core equipment of 25Hz phase sensitive track circuit is binary two relay, the working principle of which is to add two lines of 110V25Hz and 25V25Hz alternating current (AC) in its local coil and rail coil, making sure the local voltage phase angle ahead of the rail?s voltage phase angle 90?[1].

With development of China's railway in the direction of high speed and overloaded, it puts forward a higher request to railway transport equipment. Now, most 25Hz power supply have adopted the 220V mains frequency. Frequency inverter has disadvantages of big bulk, noisy, poor accuracy, and its parameters fixed immutable. Meanwhile, these inverters adopt manual operation, time of which is long. When the failure occurs, it cannot be transferred to second power supply panel and make the power supply abnormal [2]. These shortcomings have brought great inconvenience to the research and the development of signal microcomputer monitoring equipment calibration [3]. Therefore, this paper, combined with Cortex-M3  core-based ARM processor STM32F103RET6, designs a set of signal generator equipment to solve these problems.

CORDIC, called the Coordinate Rotation Digital Computer, is a kind of algorithm used to calculate trigonometric functions.

Its basic idea is to use the vector rotation method to the trigonometric functions with iterative calculation, saving the storage space of data table, greatly improving the utilization of the ROM. In the process of iterative calculation only involves addition and shift calculation. This method is not only high precision and large throughput, but also has the advantages of flexible and variable system[4].

Using this algorithm to output sine signal can solve existing shortcomings of frequency inverter.



II. SUMMARY OF CORDIC ALGORITHM The core idea of the CORDIC is vector rotation. First of all,  it assumes that a vector R , Ti iX Y  in the rectangular coordinate system, which angle is i . When the angle of vector R changes .There is  cos sin sin cos  i i  i i  X X Y Y  (1)  To make the rotating angle of tangent value only for integer power of 2, that is tan 2 j .Therefore, the tangent algorithm of formula (1) can be converted to the shift operations. Plug tan 2 j into the formula (1) can receive an iterative matrix.

1 2 2 1  k k kk  k k kk  X X Y Y  (2)  1 arctan 2 k  k k kZ Z    (3)  Among them, 1k  represents the direction of rotation, counterclockwise rotation vector is 1k  and clockwise rotation vector is  1k  . arctan 2  k  is the angle for each iteration step value. This value is known, so in the algorithm, it can be stored as a constant in ROM. kZ is the rest angle.

When 0kZ , the iteration process ends.

At the same time, the formula (1) and formula (2) differ by a correction factor. There is   1cos(arctan 2 ) 1 2  k k k  Q   (4),  and the defined correction factor is   0 0  ( ) 1/ 1/ 1 2 n n  k k  k k  K n Q   (5)  Make the initial value is 0 0 0, ,X Y Z ,  0 0 0  0 0 0  cos sin ( )  sin cos n  n  X Z Z X K n  Y Z Z Y (6)  After n times iteration, n and ( ) 0.6073K n .Make the 0 ( )x K n , 0 0y , 0z , according to the formula (2) and formula (3), after n times iterations there will be  cosnx , sinny . Therefore, as long as you choose a specific initial value, using the CORDIC algorithm for multiple iterations, the functions sine/cosine can be calculated directly [5] [6].



III. ALGORITHM VALIDATION BASED ON THE MATLAB  A. Improvement of CORDIC algorithm The sum of the basic rotation angle of CORDIC algorithm  is  max 1 1  1arctan 99.88 2k kk k  .

So in theory, it can only cover 99.88 99.8899 88 [7].

Through the formula  sin sin sin sin 2  to transform trigonometric function symmetrically in the four quadrants. This method can simplify the calculation in [0, /2], and in this way the algorithm can be covered in the entire cycle.

B. Algorithm simulation According to the formula (2) and (3), given the iterative  block diagram of the algorithm, as shown in figure 1.

*2 kk  *2 kk  1kY  1kXkX  kY    Fig. 1. Iterative block diagram of CORDIC algorithm.

In the Matrix Laboratory 7.1 compile environment, using Matlab language to make the algorithm implement in , , and get two pictures of the original algorithm and improved algorithm at the same time.

Fig. 2. Simulation waveform of CORDIC algorithm.

Fig. 3. Simulation waveform of improved CORDIC algorithm.

Comparing figure 2 and figure 3 can be found that the COR-DIC algorithm before improved only calculates the sine value within 99.88 99.88  p 99 88 , beyond the scope of  calculation is no longer correct. But the improved algorithm can correctly calculate the sine value within the scope, the same as the actual calculation. For this reason, the use of sinusoidal signal generated CORDIC algorithm is theoretically feasible.



IV. IMPLEMENT OF 25HZ PHASE SENSITIVE TRACK CIRCUIT SIGNAL BASED ON CORDIC ALGORITHM  STM32 series (maximum working frequency is 72MHz), is the requirement which is specifically designed for ARM Cortex-M3 core, which has the characters of high-performance, low-cost, low-power embedded applications. It has the highest    performance among similar products. This paper chooses STM32F103RET6 chip which has two built-in DAC modules.

With the design of embedded test system based on the chip, it produces two 25Hz sinusoidal signal whose phases differed by 90 degree.

Combined with the simulation of CORDIC algorithm in Matlab, the basic flow diagram in C language environment has shown in figure 4.

Start  Configuration of the system clock  Initialization of Timer4 and DAC  Trigger the interrupt  While(1)  Phase=0    Fig. 4. Flow chart of CORDIC algorithm in C language .

In the practical application, using the timer to determine the signal frequency, while release the CPU processing resources.

The cycle of 25Hz sinusoidal signal is 40ms, and one cycle has 360 sampling points, so the interval of each sampling point is 40 / 360 1/ 9000ms s . Adjusting the regular time to make sure the frequency of the output sine wave is 25Hz.

When 360Phase , when at the end of the cycle, make  0Phase , restart the next cycle. Meanwhile, variable ?Phase? is the phase of angle, and make Phase value of second sine wave be 90 which can change the phase of two signals.

Since the chosen chip has no floating-point arithmetic unit (FPU), when iterations is 5 times, 24Hz of signal has become limit. Through RIGOL DS1102D type waveform oscilloscope observation found that signal serrated obviously, as shown in figure 5. Therefore Floating-point CORDIC algorithm cannot produce 25Hz sine wave, and the ability of floating point calculation becomes the main contradiction.

Although STM32F103RET6 floating point capability is limited, compared to fixed-point operation speed is much faster[8]. To increase the overall parameters of algorithm to  610  times, make the parameter is 607300K , the initial value is 0x K , 0 0y , 0 0z ,  6*10nz Angle . Deal the sine value with corresponding processing, and then assign it to the data registers of DAC, waveform as shown in figure 6.

Fig. 5. Waveform of floating-point CORDIC algorithm.

Fig. 6. Double sine waves designed by fixed-point CORDIC algorithm .

Make two signals go through power amplifier respectively which can get alternating voltages of 25V25Hz and 110V25Hz.

LM386 of National Semiconductor is chosen as the first level amplifier and LM3886 is chosen as second level power amplifier.

By computing, the maximum output power is 50W.

Compared with the data of Table 1, the voltage can meet the parameters of JRJC1-70/240 binary two relay.

TABLE I.  THE PARAMETERS OF JRJC1-70/240  Type Local coil Track coil Phase difference  voltage current voltage current degree  copy 110V 100mA 15V 40 90?8

V. CONCLUSIONS Compared with two kinds of algorithm, the ARM chip  which is chosen in this paper needs 19.11 s to calculate a time of CORDIC floating-point iteration, while a fixed-point iteration calculation only need 1.18 s . The floating-point iterative CORDIC algorithm is limited by 5 times and only    single DAC can output, while the fixed-point CORDIC algorithm not only can iterate 20 times, but also can output double sine wave at the same time. In terms of the program capacity in same compo, HEX file of look-up table method is 9 KB, HEX file of floating-point CORDIC algorithm is 13 KB and HEX file fixed-point CORDIC algorithm is 7 KB in Keil uVision4 compile environment.

Analysis of the data shows that floating-point algorithm can be applied to non-FPU chip completely by transforming parameters, which performance is better than using floating- point algorithm. The data on the oscilloscope indicates that the system can be used as the signal source applied in the microcomputer monitoring system.

