Observation of Matthew Effects in Sina Weibo Microblogger

Abstract?This paper researches on Matthew Effect in Sina Weibo microblogger. We choose the microblogs in the ranking list of Hot Microblog App in Sina Weibo microblogger as target of our study. The differences of repost number of microblogs in the ranking list between before and after the time when it enter the ranking list of Hot Microblog app are analyzed. And we compare the spread features of the microblogs in the ranking list with those hot microblogs not in the list and those ordinary microblogs of users who have some microblog in the ranking list before. Our study proves the existence of Matthew Effect in social network.



I. INTRODUCTION  Microblog is a new media that appears and develops rapidly in recent years. A user can create posts no more than 140 words, which contain links, videos or pictures, to share inter- esting things with his or her fans. Sina Weibo is one of the largest microblog websites in China. Now it has more than 400 million registered users, 300 thousand of which are verified users. 9% of its users are active users and about 100 million posts are created one day.

Matthew Effect is an positive feedback phenomenon in which ?the richer gets richer and the poorer gets poorer?[1].

In social network, Matthew Effect is a common phenomenon.

Nowadays, many content clustering systems try to cluster the hot topics in current social network and recommend them to users, which makes them more possible for users to know and repost so that they become hotter. For example, when searching some keywords in Sina Weibo1, you can find a list of recent hot words just on your right-hand side. When visiting someone?s homepages, you would see a list of hot microblogs from the Hot Microblog App 2 . And as mentioned earlier, Sina Weibo microblogger has provided an App called ?Hot Microblog? which has a ranking list of microblogs accord- ing to its hot degree of recent 24 hours. Users can repost, comment on and enjoy hot microblogs of different fields and different time. The existence of those content clustering and recommendation systems give more chances for hot topics or microblogs to be exposed which would in return gives them larger increase in repost amount.

*Corresponding author.

1http://s.weibo.com 2http://hot.weibo.com  Recent researches imply that information spread in social network depends on the influence of the creator[2] and its novelty[3]. Some work is done on influence maximization in social network[4]. Previous work has proves that decaying visibility among the timeline on one?s homepage[5]. We prove the existence of Matthew Effect in social network and its role on influencing the information spread.

We firstly compare the spread of those hot microblogs from the ranking list before they enter the ranking list with that after they enter. Secondly, their spread features are compared with spread of those microblogs which have not been in the list. And our research proves the existence of Matthew Effect in social network.



II. EMPIRICAL STUDY  Sina Weibo provides many apps such as Hot Microblog, Hot Topic and so on. The user can repost them to show their opinions. We mainly treat microblogs in the ranking list of Hot Microblog as our target, and study the difference of spread between before and after the time when they enter the ranking list and the difference of spread of hot microblogs which have been in the ranking list from those microblogs which have not been in the ranking list.

A. Data collection  Our dataset mainly has 3 parts: hot microblogs in the ranking list, hot microblogs not in the ranking list and ordinary microblogs whose owner has one or more microblogs in the ranking list.

? Hot microblogs in the ranking list. We everyday fetch the first 100 microblog from the ranking list of the recent 24 hours in Hot Microblog. It lasts from 29th March to 7th April for about 10 days. In all we fetched 1669 microblogs, from which we choose those that rank top 30 as this part. There are 461 microblogs in all. We denote this part as ONLIST461.

? Hot microblogs which are not in the ranking list. There are some celebrities in Sina Weibo, who are restricted or not recommended for some reason or another. However, their microblogs can also have large amount of reposts.

We choose from microblogs of those users with large      Fig. 1: Distribution of reposts number over 24 hours  repost number as this part. We get 100 microblogs in all, denoted as OFFLIST100.

? Ordinary microblogs whose owner has one or more microblogs in the ranking list. For those users who have one or more microblogs in the ranking list ,we choose their 100 recent microblogs. Filter out those microblogs that have been in the ranking list and those with reposts number larger than 7000 and smaller than 5000. At last we have 471 microblogs as this part and it is denoted as OFFLIST471.

The second and third parts are separately the hot and ordinary microblogs which are not in the ranking list. So they can be used as the representative of the microblogs that are not in the ranking list. At last, for all the microblogs, we use Sina Weibo Open API to fetch all of their reposts. And we get more than 12 million reposts.

B. Data analysis  1) Distribution of reposts over 24 hour: We calculate the distribution of reposts over 24 hours in one day for the three parts of our dataset. Then they are normalized by being divided with the total number of reposts of relevant part.

Figure 1 shows that for those microblogs in OFFLIST100 and OFFLIST471, they have two peaks around 9:00 and 22:00 separately. However, those in ONLIST461 have their reposts number more averagely distributed. The microblogs in OFFLIST100 and OFFLIST471 are ordinary microblogs and reposted mainly through the friends network. So their frequency can be on half of the distribution of one ordinary microblogs. It shows the influence of time in one day on the repost action. One obvious result is that more reposts appear in the daytime than at night. In more detail, at 9:00, it is the time that people begin one day?s work. They tend to check their microblogs. And at 22:00, it is the time before bedtime.

People check their microblogs to relax. So in these moments, it is more possible for an repost to appear. However, those microblogs in ONLIST461 are more exposed since they are in the ranking list. At other time, people have more ways to have access to it and so they have larger parts of reposts than those microblogs in OFFLIST100 and OFFLIST471.

Regarding this frequency as the correction factor, we can reduce the influence of time in one day on the distribution and  TABLE I: The correction factor ? for 24 hours  hour 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  ? 1.53 2.91 5.15 7.61 9.27 8.66 4.81 2.48  hour 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15  ? 1.59 1.21 1.32 1.50 1.47 1.42 1.67 1.73  hour 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23  ? 1.81 1.64 1.59 1.53 1.30 1.10 1.00 1.18  Fig. 2: Distribution of corrected repost number (onlist461hx means xh ? T < (x+ 2)h)  get closer to the nature of the Matthew Effect. Specifically, we correct the repost number using the following method.

Let RCi{i = 0, 1, 2...23} be the repost number of those microblogs in OFFLIST100 and OFFLIST471 in hour i. Then the correction factor ?i = max(RCi)/RCi. And the corrected repost number of microblog with original repost number RC is RC ? ?i. The correction factors are shown in Table I.

2) Distribution of corrected repost number of hot mi- croblogs: For every microblog in ONLIST461, we calculate the interval T between the time when this microblog enters the ranking list and its create time. Divide those microblogs into 12 categories every two hours of T from 0h to 24h (since the ranking list is of the recent 24 hours, there is no microblogs with T > 24 hours). Consider the corrected repost number of the microblogs in different categories.

Figure 2 shows that after a few miniutes the time when entering the ranking list, the microblogs have an obvious increase in the corrected repost number per 10 minutes, which means that the event of entering ranking list would bring more reposts to them to make them hotter. When a new microblog enters the ranking list, since many people have not seen it yet, it is likely to have the largest repost number per 10 minutes.

These microblogs enter the ranking list because they have large amounts of reposts. And in return, being in the ranking list gives them larger repost number per unit time.

Another point is that repost number per 10 minutes of these hot microblogs all decline sharply at about 24 hours after they enter the list. This is because the list is dynamically updated to ensure the microblogs in the list is the hot microblogs of recent 24 hours. And after 24 hours, the microblogs are pushed off the list and deprived of the privilege of being more exposed.

So being in the list brings more reposts than not.

Fig. 3: Distribution of corrected repost number of the three parts  Fig. 4: The percentage of the first-level reposts  3) Distribution of corrected repost number of the three parts: The correction by the factors in the subsection II-B1 would help us see the Matthew Effect clearly without the influence of the normal period of people?s life. In order to discover the influence of being on the ranking list, we compare the corrected repost number of the three parts of our dataset.

Figure 3 shows that about 24 hours after their create time, those microblogs in ONLIST461 have sharp declining in their repost number per 10 minutes. However, this phenomenon is not so obvious for those microblogs in OFFLIST100 and especially OFFLIST471. The reason of this phenomenon is that those microblogs are all from the 24-hour ranking list and after about 24 hours, they are pushed off the ranking list and lose their privileges over other ordinary microblogs. This proves the great effect of entering the ranking list.

4) The percentage of the first-level reposts: The first-level reposts of a source microblog m are the reposts which repost microblog m directly, not those reposts which are the reposts of others. Those people who check the ranking list usually discover the source microblogs directly. The reposts brought by appearing in the ranking list are mostly first-level reposts.

So analysis of first-level repost is indispensable. We define the percentage pfl as the percentage of the first-level reposts of one microblog m over all its reposts. In this part, we would compare the percentage of the first-level reposts pfl to see the influence of entering the ranking list.

Figure 4 shows that for those microblogs in OFFLIST471 and OFFLIST100, their pfl generally decline averagely. How-  ever, for those microblogs in ONLIST461, their pfl have an obvious increase when they enter the ranking list and an sharp decline when they are pushed off the ranking list. This is because users always directly repost this microblog when they see it in the ranking list and so this part of reposts is mainly first-level reposts. Those users who do not see the microblog in the ranking list mostly repost the reposts of their followees.

Again this proves that appearing in the ranking list would bring more reposts to make hot microblogs hotter and that is the proof of existence of Matthew Effect.



III. CONCLUSION This paper mainly studies hot microblogs in the ranking  list of Hot Microblog App in Sina Weibo microblogger. After removing the influence of normal period of people?s life, we find that microblogs would have an increase in reposts number per unit time when they enter the ranking list and an decline when they are pushed off the list. When seeing the microblog in the ranking list of Hot Microblog App, users tend to repost it directly. And that is the cause of the same variation tendency of ratio of first-level reposts as the reposts number per unit time. We prove the existence of Matthew Effect from different aspects. In social network, hot topics or microblogs are always recommended to users which in return makes it hotter. And that is Matthew Effect.



IV. FUTURE WORK We studies on Matthew Effect in Sina Weibo microblogger.

For those microblogs that have been in the ranking list, how many percentage of reposts number is brought by Matthew Effect? This is problem worth studying. We will model the spread of microblogs before they enter the ranking list and after that time. On the other hand, the dataset now is not so enough and future work will be done on more data.

