A framework of Spatial Co-location Mining on MapReduce

Abstract?Spatial association rule mining is a useful tool for discovering interesting relationships among spatial objects. Co- locations, or sets of spatial events which are frequently observed together in close proximity, are particularly useful for discovering their spatial dependencies. The computation of co-location mining is prohibitively expensive with increase in data size and spatial neighborhood. In this work, we propose to parallelize spatial co- location mining on distributed machines. A framework of parallel co-location mining based on MapReduce is presented.



I. INTRODUCTION  The evolution of location sensing, mobile computing, and scientific simulation is generating huge quantities of rich spatial data. Examples of such data include geographic search logs, GPS logs, environmental/climate measurement data and disease occurrence records. Spatial association mining has been popularly studied for discovering certain association re- lationships among a set of spatial attributes and possibly some non-spatial attributes [3]. A co-located event set represents a set of events which are frequently observed together in nearby area [4]. Because of complex spatial data types, neighbor relationships on continuous space and spatial autocorrelation, co-location mining presents challenges with increase of data size. The major computational task is finding co-located in- stances having various spatial neighbor relationships from a given spatial dataset. Although many co-location mining algorithms have been developed, the computation involving in filtering co-located instances is inherently demanding in both processing time and space requirements. In this work, we propose to parallelize co-location pattern mining so as to deal with large-scale spatial data. Modern frameworks facilitating the parallel and distributed execution of massive tasks are becoming increasingly popular since the introduction of MapReduce programming model, Hadoop run-time environ- ment and distributed file systems [1]. In this work, we present a framework of parallel co-location mining over MapReduce.



II. A FRAMEWORK OF PARALLEL CO-LOCATION MINING  Given a spatial dataset, a neighbor relationship, and a minimum prevalence threshold, the proposed algorithm discov- ers prevalent co-located event sets through three MapReduce phases. MapReduce [2] is a distributed parallel processing model and execution environment for processing large data sets on clusters of commodity machines. Fig. 1 shows our algorith- mic framework for parallel co-location mining on MapReduce.

In Phase I, the mappers divide input spatial objects according  Fig. 1. A simplified co-location mining framework on MapReduce  to the partition of the study area. A reducer finds neighbor pairs using a geometric method, e.g., plane sweep algorithm. Phase II converts the neighbor pairs into neighborhood transactions.

The mapper checks neighbor constraints to avoid duplicate neighbor relations and assigns reference types for partitioning neighbor pairs. The reducer groups all neighboring objects per object and outputs the neighborhood transactions. After finishing the preprocess stages, Phase III starts to find prevalent co-located event sets without generating candidate event sets.

Each mapper finds co-location instances from the shards of neighborhood transactions. The reducer computes the preva- lence measure and outputs prevalent co-located event sets.

The framework was implemented on Apache Hadoop [1]. The proposed method shows the scalability of performance.

