A k-anonymity Method based on SEM (Search Engine Marketing)  Price of Personal Information

ABSTRACT ? Privacy is a major concern in management of Big Data, especially for datasets that contain sensitive personal information. A model that is widely used to protect privacy is k- anonymity, which can be generally defined as a clustering method in which any record in a dataset is indistinguishable from at least (k-1) other records in the same dataset. Most of the approaches to k-anonymity suffer from huge information loss by abstraction of continuous numerical and categorical attributes that have a hierarchical structure. It is difficult to use conventional k-anonymity in actual internet services because of computational complexity and value loss from loss of information.

This paper presents a k-anonymity method based on the SEM (Search Engine Marketing) price of personal information for practical use in Big Data management services. We evaluate k- anonymized qualitative data with SEM price, which is a quantitative indicator. This approach makes it possible to calculate only the necessary data and keep a k-anonymized level.

Application the method to actual data shows that there is a point at which a high value can be achieved for both k-anonymity and SEM price. Developing this method will enable efficient storage of personal data and the application of k-anonymity to actual Internet services.

Keywords? Privacy preserving, Big Data mining, Big Data security, k-anonymity, Algorithm, SEM (Search Engine Marketing)

I.  Introduction A result of increasing awareness of the need to protect  personal information in recent years is the high cost of storing and maintaining personal information (microdata) and the risk of data leaks borne by companies that provide communication services as well as companies in other industries.

Businesses and other organizations guard against data leaks by continuous updating of security systems to meet frequently-changing standards (SOC, PCIDSS, and ISO27001, etc.) at great cost and commitment of resources.

Anonymization is one promising way to safely distribute personal information. An approach called k-anonymity [2] in particular has been well-studied as a good means of evaluating security level, but it has been used in very few actual internet or marketing services. Examples of actual use include medical information provision tools that use optimal lattice  anonymization [5][9] and public information provision tools that use the ?-argus algorithm. [5]  Such services are not as easy to use as ordinary Internet services, because the types of data and how the data can be used are fixed and immediate responses cannot be provided.

One contributing problem is the large number of attribute combinations. Also, implementation of k-anonymity requires the calculation of a huge number of attribute combinations (identifiers, quasi-identifiers, sensitive attributes, non-sensitive attributes, etc.). Because important personal information tends to have many important attributes, the complexity of k- anonymity increases with the number of combinations of data required. Also, because personal information is constantly changing, a k-anonymity method that allows periodic recalculation is needed.

A practical service that uses k-anonymity must have a response time of about 2 seconds. It is well-known that Internet customers demand that pages be displayed within three seconds. Research done in 2012 has shown that over 40% of e-commerce site customers consider switching to other sites when a page fails to display within 2 seconds. [3]  The relationship between the response time and the size of the database is shown in Fig. 1, where the horizontal axis represents the number of rows of data in one database table and the vertical axis indicates the response time for queries.

We investigated "count(*)" and "like? queries under the assumption that the queries are run as pre-processing checks for the entire table in a typical application.

Figure 1. Database response time  From Fig. 1, the response time is calculated as the number of columns times 9.4e-09 seconds for a ?like? query and the  SocialCom/PASSAT/BigData/EconCom/BioMedCom 2013  DOI 10.1109/SocialCom.2013.162     number of columns times 3.24e-06 seconds for a ?count(*)? query. Although server performance will continue to improve in the future, we should set the maximum number of anonymous data table rows to between 10^6 and 10^9 for suitable performance.

The logical limit for computational complexity in k- anonymizing is the sum of the products of the numbers of data items for which there are two or more choices (k 2).

Kn : Number of calculations An : Data attributes An(c) : Number of attribute cases K(1) = A1(c) + A2(c) + A3(c) +? Am(c) K(2) = (A1(c) *A2(c) ) + (A2(c) *A3(c) )?  ? K(n) = ( A1(c) , A2(c) , A3(c) ? An(c))  Figure 2. Calculating the number of k-anonymity patterns  Because the number of multiplication operations increases with the number of attribute combinations, the computational complexity increases exponentially with the number of personal information attributes.

Another problem is the lack of criteria for measuring the value of anonymity patterns. In particular, there is no qualitative evaluator for free-description type qualitative attributes. Even for a relatively quantitative attribute such as age, there are three patterns for abstracting the data into broad classes as listed below.

1. Mathematical: Automatic classification by analysis tools (histograms, Sturges' formula, Pareto analysis, etc.) 2. Marketing: Classification by general concept or QID (teen/20's/30's  or school grade, etc.)  3. Limited application: Classification according to particular marketing needs (e.g., ?QID: over 20 years old? is required by alcoholic beverage makers)  Even the above three patterns allow for unlimited classification schemes, so it is impossible to know what best pattern meets any particular purpose. It is also impossible to know in advance what classification needs might arise in our society.

As the amount of data to be processed increases, there is a greater division of labor between engineers that process the data and marketers that use the data in analysis. That can result in a large recognition gap between the marketers, who put utility first, and the k-anonymization engineers, who put security first, and situations arise in which the technician may remove items that marketers need. Such problems occur because there are no criteria for judging the suitability of methods for abstracting sensitive attributes.

To apply k-anonymity in actual services, we must both reduce the computational complexity to a level that enables use of ordinary databases and establish some criteria for evaluating data abstractions without loss of usability.

In this paper, we propose a means of reducing the computational complexity of k-anonymity while minimizing loss of data utility. We also present the results of experiments  conducted with real service data that confirm the effectiveness of our method.



II. RELATED WORK The k-anonymity method has been well-studied as a means  of processing personal information so that it cannot be used to identify individual persons. The personal information is represented as attribute and value fields of records in a database table. Although individual attributes do not identify a person, there are combinations of attributes that may identify individuals. We call such combinations ?quasi-identifiers? (QID). We also define ?sensitive attributes? (SA), which should not be disclosed if a person is identified.

If the values of QID attributes are known in an attack, they can be used to identify the user's record in the database and thus to discover the values of sensitive attributes. One known way to prevent that is to generalize the QID attribute values to more abstract values. Then, if there at least k records that are identified by the QID, the table satisfies k-anonymity [2].

The main algorithms used to implement k-anonymity in applications for anonymizing government and medical data include Datafly [4] [7] and -Argus[4] [8]. Those algorithms suppress and generalize data so that the number of occurrences is no greater than k. Most of the algorithms recode and generalize  the data of each dataset (SA/QID) into anonymized attributes by reducing the number of occurrences of identifying combinations of data to the value of k or less.

Recoding can be broadly categorized as local suppression and global recoding. Local suppression rewrites the value of the attribute itself. Global recoding rewrites data to change the overall occurrence rate of attributes. Global recoding involves so many possible changes that it is difficult to find the correct method efficiently.

Evaluation criteria for k-anonymity are mainly based on the level of information loss. If the value of k is defined as the level of security, there will always be a conflict with the current use of information loss to evaluate anonymity.

These criteria are also affected by social situations in different areas, such as customer complaints or religious doctrine. For example, in the case of the ?T point toolbar? in Japan in 2012, many users complained that toolbar provisions relating to the collection of personal information were not clearly evident and the company was forced to change their business policy.[11] The doubt and questions from users caused by such cases affect other companies in the industry as well, forcing changes in business practices and reducing business opportunities.

In the future, the government will continue to specify legal guidelines regarding security, so even if the value of k meets the criteria established by law at a particular time, changes in the criteria may result in the occurrence of a major security incident.  Flexible response to changing levels of security for personal information is required to meet user needs.

Regarding the level of information loss, too, there is a clear gap between the security level that the majority of users considers good and the level desired by marketers in actual     practice. Information loss cannot serve as the criterion for evaluating the level gap between user needs and marketer needs. We think the index for evaluation in k-anonymity should be a concept that varies according to marketing and customer value rather than the amount of information loss.

Having indicators that can be used to evaluate the security and benefits of k-anonymity in actual business applications would allow application of k-anonymity in ordinary internet services.



III. A k-anonymity based on the Search Engine Marketing Value of Personal Information  We suggest that change in information value after k- anonymity processing should be evaluated using the SEM (Search Engine Marketing) price. SEM has been established as a standard in qualitative marketing. The SEM indicator can be used to measure changes in the marketing value of data.

Also, because  the current monetary value of SEM is linked to current user preferences, the value is constantly changing. For example, we usually do not need Christmas gift information in the summer vacation season. If we eliminate unnecessary seasonal information, we can reduce waste in computation and data archiving.

The SEM auction is a contest for the order of ad display rather than a contest for a single product. Therefore, the display position is determined by the relationship between the bids of companies. A lower bid results in a lower display position. These prices are established only when the buyer (ad clicker) and seller (ad agency and company) are both present.

Ads that have never been clicked by a user in the past will be priced at zero.

Very many businesses now use SEM, so the SEM price has become an index of economic conditions because it indicates what is selling in various industries.

Table 1. Change in data ?price? and ?k?  When converting the value of data into SEM prices, we encountered several situations in which the anonymized data had a higher value than the original data. An empirical example of change in value between original data and anonymized data is presented in Table 1.

Detailed data is not necessarily good data. Good data is often that which is simple and easily used. Therefore, data is abstracted to the level of highest economic value.

Generalization reduces attributes, so the number of users per attribute will increase, and security also increases. This is compatible with the concept of the security level of ?k- anonymity?. Having an attribute dictionary that has a high level of both security and utility should enable application of  k-anonymity to ordinary internet services with very fast response.

First, we try to evaluate each attribute. If we want to advertise to all users that have attribute S, the price is calculated as advertising cost for the attribute times number of persons that have the attribute.

We obtained the advertising cost from an SEM tool and multiplied the unit price by the number of people that have the attribute to get to get the total marketing price for each attribute. We then summed the values to obtain the total value for all of the attributes. This ?price? indicator does not represent the business profit, but simply indicates data priority.

S(e):Attribute S value S(k):k-anonymized S value s1, s2, ... sn : QID c1, c2, ... cn : number of QID e1, e2, ... en : SEM price of QID  s1(e) = c1 * e1 s2(e) = c2 * e2                    Multiply the SEM Price ...                                       and number of people sn(e) = cn * en Amount of Attribute Value  S(e) = ?{ ci * ei} Reduction rate of k-anonymized data Value  M(k) = S(k) / S(e) Figure 5. Calculation of change in value  This can prevent the removal high-value options among the attributes as noise because of a low incidence rate. If anonymization automatically removes items that have high marketing value, the price impact will be very high even if the frequency of occurrence is low. Such removal can be stopped by checking the prices for a certain level of reduction.

SEMPB k-anonymity Method::={ Input: A table T to be k-anonymized, P1 P2 is the word variation table, that was investigated for the SEM price Output: A generalized table of T2 , that is k-anonymized and sustained the maximum price of SEM.

for i1 = 1 to l do // l : The generalized pattern table number (P1,P2...)  for i2 = 1 to m do // m : The generalized word variation number of data Pi int P[i2]  // n : The number of rows of data Pi for i3 = 1 to n do  int ri3 // Pattern_i2 SEM price of a row.

int ci3 // Pattern_i2 count of a row.

int pi2 = pi2 + { ri3 * ci3 }  // The amount of Pattern_i2 SEM price.

P[i2] = pi2 // SEM price add Into an Array  // P[i2] ={ p1, p2, ?, pi2,} i3 = i3 +1  end for i2 = i2 +1  end for // Update price at Temporary table R Connect Database query = Update Table R set price = { p1, p2, ?, pi2,}; i1 = i1 +1  end for     // Get calculate priority by SEM price Int k = 1 // k-anonymized check Int num = 1  while k <2 do // 2-anonymized level Connect Database  query = Select word pattern from R order by price desc limit num, 1 ; Table copy T into T2 query = Update T2 set {At1,At2.. Ati1}=Word pattern of Max price  k = Select count(min(At1,At2.. Ati1)) from T2 group by (At1,At2..

Ati1) ;  num = num +1 end while  Response: T2 : The k-anonymized word pattern table with highest SEM price }     Table 2. Input and Output table     Table 3. Data Sets and Algorithms  Preparation  We entered the current word group and generalized word group into the SEM tool, and then calculated the SEM prices of those words. (make table: P1,P2?)  Anonymizing procedure  1. Use the price data and the number of occurrences of each data item to determine the total value of the attribute.

2. Store the attribute price in the database and list the generalized words in descending price order.

3. Copy the user data to a temporary table and rewrite the word as a generalized word that has a higher price.

4. Check the anonymity level and compare the value of total advertising if the level is less than or equal to anonymous state 2.

Figure 6. Proposed method for data evaluation

IV. Evaluation of a k-anonymity method based on SEM price of personal information using real data  In an experiment, we applied the method described above to convert actual data to the 2-anonymous state, in which personal identity could not be determined, and checked the change in data value. The properties of the actual data are listed in Table 5.

We used the Google SEM tool to determine the unit prices at October 19, 2012. (https://adwords.google.com/)   Table 5. Anonymized data values  We generalized the data by the following procedure. We conducted experiments in which data was stored as anonymous data recoded in the form of highest price. The values of the data determined by this method are presented in Table 5. When the data was put into the k-anonymous state by     this method and generalized to the form of least loss in utility value, there was a 60.6% change in value. We then removed the ID (irreversible data) connection to the original data to complete the anonymization.



V. Relationship between k-anonymity and marketing value  We conducted experiments in which we used this data to create multiple data generalization patterns for different values of k to investigate the changes in value. The five patterns of generalization for the age attribute are listed Table 6.

Table 6. Values of the anonymized data  The results are presented in Table 6. There is no significant relationship between the value (SEM price) and the security level (k). The generation grouping pattern has high value for both advertising and security. The five-year grouping has an advertising value of zero despite the lower loss of information.

Figure 8. Results arranged in order of k value   The data are arranged to compare the average marketing  value and the standard deviation of the k value in Fig. 8. No significant relationship between the marketing value and security level (k value) is seen, so we conclude that there is no significant relationship between marketing value and security standards. We can therefore use the marketing price of the data evaluate security and utility.



VI. Conclusion The results of our experiments show that the SEM price  can serve as an indicator of the marketing value of data after k-anonymity processing. We can therefore prioritize the generalization of actual data. We also found no relationship between the anonymity level (k) and data utility, so if there is  a qualitative criterion for evaluation, there is a point at which high levels of both value and security are possible.

We have begun the development of a price database for anonymized word data. We believe that establishing a clear priority based on data analysis value in that way will enable implementation of a mechanism for automatic, time-sensitive optimal anonymization. There is also a possibility that SEM can be used to compose generalization patterns that can handle the appearance of new terms for use together with automatic semantic analysis.

Determining the optimal solution for cost and security also makes it possible to measure the maximum value of the data.

We can also expect a reduction in cost from the viewpoint of data distribution by storing high-value anonymized data in ordinary databases as a way to achieve operational independence from the original data. There are, however, many problems with using SEM price, some of which are listed below.

1. Daily response is required to keep up with price changes.

2. Dealing with concepts that do not have an SEM price or words that have the same meaning  3. Applicability of the method to any language  We will investigate issues such as those listed above in future research. We will also prepare a dictionary and criteria for anonymization words.

