ECG Identification of Arrhythmias by using an

Abstract- Changes in the normal rhythm of a human heart may result in different cardiac arrhythmias, which may be  immediately fatal or cause irreparable damage to the heart  sustained over long periods of time. Therefore, the ability to  automatically identify arrhythmias from ECG recordings is  important for clinical diagnosis and treatment. In this study,  classifier by using associative Petri net for personalized ECG  arrhythmias pattern identification is proposed. Association  production rules and reasoning algorithm of APN are created for  ECG arrhythmias detection. The performance of our approach  compares well with previously reported results and could be a  part of monitoring system for the detection ofECG arrhythmias.

Keywords-Electrocardiography Arrhythmia; Associative Petri Net; Association rule; Reasoning

I. INTRODUCTION  Heart disease is an umbrella term for a number of different diseases which affect the heart such as arrhythmia, myocardial ischemia, and myocardial infarction. As of 2007, it is also one of the leading causes of death in the world, and especially according to the American Heart Association, One American is dying in every 34 seconds because of this disease.

Changes in the normal rhythm of a human heart may result in different cardiac arrhythmias, which may be immediately fatal or cause irreparable damage to the heart when sustained over long periods of time. Electrocardiogram (ECG) is an important routine clinical practice for continuous monitoring of cardiac activities. The ECG is the record of variation of bioelectric potential with respect to time as the human heart beats. It provides valuable information about the functional aspects of the heart and cardiovascular system. Since ECG signals vary greatly for different individuals and within patient groups [ 1], ECG pattern recognition is a difficult problem even with the aid of a computer. Even for the same individual, heartbeat patterns significantly change with time and under different physical conditions. While normal sinus rhythm originates from the sinus node of heart, arrhythmias have various origins and indicate a wide variety of heart problems.

Under different situations, the same symptoms of arrhythmia produce different morphologies due to their origins such as premature ventricular contraction [ 2]. Moreover, since the bio? signals are non-stationary signals, this reflection may occur at random in the time scale. In this situation, the disease   symptoms may not show up all the time, but would manifest at certain irregular intervals during the day. Therefore, for effective diagnostics, the study of ECG pattern and heart rate variability signal may have to be carried out over several hours. Thus, computer-based analysis and classification of diseases can be very helpful in diagnostics [3]. A number of methods have been proposed to classify ECG heartbeat patterns based on the features extracted from ECG signals. In this study, classification of ECG arrhythmias by using associative Petri net (APN) [ 4], as shown in Fig. 1, is proposed for the first time in the literature and is compared with several pioneering studies for arrhythmias detection.

C;k  Pi ?k  APN=(P,T,S,C,D,L,G,I,O,a,I3,G,W)  P={Pi, pJ, T={?J, S={Sik}, C={CiJ,  D={di, dk}, L={iiJ, G={gik} 1(?k)={Pi}' O(?k)={Pk} G(?k)={CiJ=[O,1), W(Sik)=[O,1) a(pi)=[O,1), a(pk)=a(pi)*G(tik) !3(Pi)=di , !3(Pk)=dk  Fig. 1 A generalized APN structure

II. MATERIAL AND METHOD  Classification by using APN was applied for the detection of arrhythmic beats in long duration ECGs. The MIT -BIH Arrhythmia Database is used for ECG Arrhythmia classification and it provides us to compare the performance of our proposed APN with other related conducted studies in Arrhythmias detection problem. The experimental procedure for arrhythmic beat detection is divided into the following stages: ECG filtering and sampling, feature extraction, transfer function building and classification. In the first and second stages, preprocessing of the ECG recording was performed to achieve noise removal and extraction of the signal features were used for beat characterization. The sampling size of ECG data set has been estimated by the population ratio. In the third stage, the degree of truth of each proposition was transformed through membership functions in order to be utilized for APN    model. In the fourth stage, APN reasoning algorithm of classification was used for arrhythmic beat detection.



III. RESULTS  APN construction model was shown in Fig. 2 and an APN reasoning algorithm is used to classifY the feature vectors into the following category pairs: normal/abnormal heartbeat or 11 different types of arrhythmic beat in Table 1.

Our proposed APN for the symptoms of heart disease reasoning have eight inputs (8 features), eleven middle states (one normal heart beat and lO symptoms of heart disease), and one final state. All the degree of truth and states of the input places in the APN are gained by the membership functions.

All the ECG samples are gain membership degree and linguistic variable themselves from the input of APN by membership function.

Table 1 Type of heartbeat and its description Cluster Description  Normal C1 Normal heartbeat Abnormal C2 Left Bundle Branch Block Beat Abnormal C3 Right Bundle Branch Block Beat Abnormal C4 Atrial Premature Beat Abnormal C5 Fusion of paced and normal beat Abnormal C6 Ventricular Escape Beat Abnormal C7 Aberrated Atrial Premature Beat Abnormal C8 Junctional Escape Beat Abnormal C9 Ventricular Fusion Beat Abnormal CIO Paced Beat Abnormal CII Ventricular Premature Contraction  Table 2 Confusion matrix of our heartbeat reasoning CI C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 C9 CIO CII  CI 38 I I C2 4 18 2 C3 6 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 C9 8  CIO CII 8     4 2  0 3  3 2   In our evaluation, we use 3 6 8  cases in training and 1 85 cases for testing. In our experiment, APN is used to classify heartbeat into two categories: normal cluster and abnormal cluster. The abnormal cluster consisted of all the clusters 2 ,  3 . . .  11 are shown i n  Table 1 .  After learning and testing, Table 2 summarizes the results of the confusion matrix displayed classification of beat recognition using our proposed APN reasoning model. Table 8 summarizes the comparative results of the accuracy of beat recognition with other methods. And, the comparison result indicates good accuracy of our proposed APN model.



IV.CONCLUSION  In this study, we have proposed a methodology for the automated detection of ECG arrhythmia that employed classification using a generalized APN model. The  performance evaluation using the MIT-BIH arrhythmia database shows a sensitivity of 95% and overall accuracy of 84.6% for ECG arrhythmias detection. Moreover, our APN reasoning model also can discriminate different beat types and have accuracy rate from 84.6% to 97.8%. The results strongly suggest that our proposed APN model can aid in the diagnosis of ECG arrhythmia.

