Coal Sales System Based on Data Mining

Abstract?Coal enterprises informatization level falls behind other industries. In order to speed up the development of coal enterprises informatization, and to reduce management costs to maximize the profits, this paper sets up a coal sales system based on data mining as a good reference for the coal enterprises. The paper first analyses the necessity of design of such system, then defines the functional modules of this system, and later presents detailed design for each functional module.

Finally, the paper introduces algorithm and pseudo code of data mining  Keywords-Coal Sales System; Data Mining; Apriori Algorithm

I.  INTRODUCTION With development of computer technology and wider  spreading of computer network, different sectors including coal enterprises in China have already gone through informatization development. Yet compared with economic, manufacturing industry and education sectors, informatization of coal enterprises is in a lagging behind position. On the contexts of economic integration, the lagging information management in fact increases costs for these enterprises and reduces efficiency, and the enterprises also cannot easily grasp the law of marketing changes. Such situation causes negative impact on growth and development of these enterprises which may even be washed out of the market. Therefore coal enterprises should strengthen rapid growth of informatization and apply advanced technology for management to provide decision making and support for long-term development.[1]  In such a competitive market, establishment of a data mining based coal sale system can greatly contribute to help coal enterprises initiatively find out the customer's buying habits and develop new marketing strategies according to changes in market demand, in order to seek maximization of corporate interests. There are in fact many successful cases of data mining in other industries especially in the retail industry. The most successful example was undoubtedly the ?beer and diapers? story. Wal-Mart used data mining techniques from a large number sales data and drew out such a law ?Men buying baby diapers also buy beer?. Therefore Wal-Mart decided to put together these two non-relevant goods accompanied with some dishes drinks, and this arrangement increased sales of these goods significantly. So establishment of the coal sales system based on data mining technology will not only improve enterprises? efficiency and reduce management costs, but also contribute to maximization of benefits for the enterprises.[2]

II. REQUIRMENT ANALYSIS AND SYSTEM DESIGN  A. Requirment analysis The sales process of coal enterprises is generally divided  into these four steps including business order, production, goods delivery, and payment. First coal enterprises and customers sign order contract, then the enterprises record these order forms before order production tasks are conveyed to the relevant production sectors. The production sectors are responsible for product manufacture. After quality control process, goods will be stored. As the following step, the enterprises will deliver goods and products through delivery section. Customers make payment based on signed contracts after receipt of the goods. This coal sales process and other general business look a bit similar, but they are slightly different. The coal enterprises sale some kind of natural resource coal which is mainly located in the northwest China, while bigger coal consumption happens in Southeast regions where economy is more developed. Sales of coal enterprises relatively cover vast geographical areas, and logistics is in a very key position in the sales process.  This is what the sales system should well consider. This system will accumulate quite a lot of data. So there should be a module within such system for data mining, which helps companies make decisions and improve the competitiveness.

According to this analysis, the coal sales system can be split into 4 major modules:  ? Order management module. Data in this module is extremely important for coal enterprises as other following production is subjective to order forms. So if there is any data error within this module, there may be disastrous consequences for coal enterprises.

The transaction numbers for both goods and payment for coal enterprises are relatively huge, and payment in most cases is made in several installments instead of one-off settlement. Hence the management of payment clearing is an important part for sales system. So each order form in the system should record each customer?s settlement information, and staff of enterprises can remind customers to make the payment on time.

? Cargo warehouse management module. Order forms will be generated after signing the contracts, then production sector will manage and monitor manufacture, and goods will be stored properly. Data in this part does not belong to the coal sales system,       but coal inventory should be a sales system management module. This module records daily incoming and outgoing coal. Coal inventory information can be checked according to the different conditions, and the results can be displayed by visualized charts so that reasonable arrangements for following production can be properly made.

? Coal flow management module. Coal enterprises measure quantity of goods in thousands of tons.

Management of such storage of goods in the sales system is very important. Each cargo must be scheduled very carefully, and time, quantity, destination, means of transport of good delivery must be well arranged and recorded.

? Data mining module. The module uses association rules for data mining and mines data accumulated in the system. Use of existing data resources, coal enterprises can explore consuming habits of customers to contribute to decision-making and strategy development for the enterprises.

B. system architecture design The system uses ASP.NET as development platform and  MY SQL as the back-end database. Web server combining internet network is the intermediate level of the system. Such system not only meets the needs of practical and actual function, but also ensures efficiency and safety of information resources. Therefore the operating efficiency of the whole system is strengthened. The system is divided into data acquisition layer, data storage layer, and data access layer as shown in Figure 1 below.

Figure 1. The whole system structure diagram

III. SPECIFIC DESIGN OF THE SYSTEM  A. Design of system modules A complete sales system contains not just these four  modules mentioned above, but should also include user  management, data backup, and so on. The complete and solid system modules are in Figure 2 below:  Users can login the system from the main interface legitimate and authorized users can access system management interface. Unauthorized users will be denied back to the login page. The order management module generates order forms according to goods contracts, and users can modify, delete, and print order forms. The warehouse management module records coal storage conditions, and the inventory data can be modified, queried and printed. The logistics management module records for logistical information for each order, including the coal delivery time, means of logistics, transit situation, and arrival time to destination. These can be queried and printed as well.

The data mining module mines data in the system and can identify the customer's consumption habits and other information. Uses of such system do not have solid computer knowledge, and hence the system just provides a simple user interface. The users simply make some choices, and then the system will analyze data and finally present the results of data mining. Data backup periodically backs up system data.

User management allows users to add or delete users.

Figure 2. The figure of system module  The system uses ASP.NET as development platform and MY SQL as the back-end database. AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript and XML) is a development technology to create interactive web applications. Most significant advantage of application of AJAX is that you can maintain data by updating the entire web site which avoids sending unchanged information.[3] This allows web applications to respond to users more quickly. AJAX technology is quite mature and well developed and there are a lot of AJAX frameworks.

AJAX framework contributes to stabile development of the codes, and can improve development efficiency. MY SQL     based database can develop fast with flexibility and powerful functions, rich API, as well as a rich feature set.[4]

IV. DATA MINING ALGORITHMS AND ITS OPERATION There are many data mining algorithms. They basically  analyze and explore some hidden rules and patterns from massive data. Coal sales system database is based on transactional database design, and the association rules of data mining mainly analyses data in transaction database. So the system selects the classical algorithm of association rules named Apriori.

The core idea of the Apriori algorithm is any subset of the frequent item sets is frequent. The first step of the implementation of the basic algorithm is to identify all the frequent item sets not less than minimum support degree set by the users. Then these frequent item sets generate strong association rules that meet the minimum support degree and the minimum confidence. As the following step, the frequent item sets are developed to the minimum trust rules. The specific operation approach follows like this: First, find the frequency 1 set and mark it as L1, then generate candidate item set C2. Then items of C2 will be assessed to generate frequency 2 set which is marked as L2. This process repeats until more frequent item K- sets cannot be found. In order to generate the frequent item sets, Apriori algorithm uses a recursive method. The algorithm pseudo-code is as follows: L1={frequent1-ItemSet}; for (k=2; ???1kL ;k++) do begin sup)min_,(_ 1?? kk LgenaprioriC for all transaction t D do begin  C1=subset(Ck ,t); for all transactions c Ct do  c.Count++; end Lk={c Ck c.count?min_sup}  end Answer= kLk;Ck  Generate the frequency 1- set L1 first, and then frequency 2 set L2. The algorithm stops until there is some r value that makes Lr empty. The item sets of Ck are used to generate candidate sets for frequent item sets. The last frequent item set must be one of the subsets Lk. Each element in Ck must be verified to determine whether to join the transaction  database.[5][6]

V. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK paper presents some design plan for establishing a coal  sales system based on data mining technology. It also analyses the sales process of coal enterprises, sets different functional modules for the system, and outlines overall framework of the system. The paper finally illustrates the basic ideas and implementation of the pseudo code of the Apriori algorithm for data mining.

[1] Bin Ge and Xiangrui Meng, ?Data Mining of Coal Enterprises Based  on ERP Theory and it?s research?. Journal of Anhui Univ ersit y of Science and T echno lo gy ( Natur al Science), 2005(24):76-79  [2] Xiaoting Yan, Junling Qiao, ?Application of Data Mining in Network Marketing System?, Science & Technology, 2011(16):257-258  [3] Xianwei Xie, ?The Design Scheme of Coal Sales System Based on ASP.NET_AJAX?, Coal Technology, 2011(10):279-280  [4] Qionghan Li, En Zhou, Yuanji Huo, Ya Wu, Shaofeng Li, Shuxiao Zhuo, Zonghai Ou, Mei Cai, Tinghua Li, ?Design and implementation of scientific research management system in Colleges and Universities Based on ASP.NET_AJAX, Computer Knowledge and Technology, January 2011, pp.263-264,275  [5] Agrawal R, Imielinski T, Swami A. Mining Association Rules between Sets of Items in Large Database. in: Proceeding of 1993 Washington DC.1993.207-216  [6] Agrawal R, Srikant R. Fase Algorithms for Mining Association Rules.

