Monitoring LHCONE traffic in Romanian grid sites

Abstract? Grid computing is evolving fast, with specific needs for computing power, storage capacity and available bandwidth.  Network security is a big concern for grid networks because attacks can endanger the availability of grid usual services. High amounts of data transferred between sites can make difficult the traffic analysis needed to identify possible cyber-attacks. This paper presents some aspects about network specific security improvements done in RO-LCG and how existing open-source tools can be used to gather, analyze and discover relevant information about what is happening within the network.

Keywords? grid site; netflow; network security; LHCONE;RO- LCG;RoEduNet;open-source

I.  INTRODUCTION Grid technology is making big contribution to scientific  research, helping scientists around the world to store and analyze massive amounts of data.  There are hundreds of thousands of servers used in grid for computing power in various domains like: biology, earth science, high-energy physics, engineering, arts and social science [1]. For example, for the project Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN [2] a collaboration entity called Worldwide LHC Computing Grid (WLCG) was created, with more than 170 grid sites in about 40 countries [3].

Figure 1. Romanian grid sites    In Romania, the contribution to WLCG is represented by RO-LCG, a federation of tier 2 grid sites located at member  institutions [4]. Figure 1 shows each RO-LCG grid site contribution related to processing power (CPU). RO-LCG provides about 99% of Romanian grid production [4]. For each site, monitoring software in place tests the functionality of the most important grid services such as computing element, storage element and BDII (Berkeley Database Information Index).

A generic grid infrastructure is divided in four layers, two layers for the hardware-centric part (Network layer and Resource layer) and other two on top of them for the user- centric part (Middleware layer and Application layer). The architecture of a grid site is depicted in Figure 2. In every grid site there is installed a middleware responsible for the management of all resources provided by the resource layer. A number of services are provided by this layer, such as job management, authentication, authorization, and security. These services are:  ? Computing Element (CE) [1], is responsible for jobs management within the site, CPU and memory resources allocation, work nodes monitoring and access rights;  ? Storage Element (SE), is responsible for managing disk space, data access rights depending on which organization the user belongs and file management;  ? User Interface (UI), is responsible for jobs to be executed submission, job cancelling, copying and deleting files from the grid system and retrieving the output of finished jobs;  ? Work nodes (WN), are responsible for the management and execution of jobs within the server.

Figure 2. Generic grid site architecture     The grid sites are interconnected using national or  continental education networks (see Figure 2). As in networking, to have the same advantages of separating functions and allowing the independent evolution of technologies, the proposed model is organized in layers, starting with hardware-centric and ending with user-centric layers.

Since the grid sites are interconnected it is possible that  they are exposed to cyber-attacks. In this paper, we will describe the monitoring process of cyber-attacks in the national grid sites that helps us to improve the security level and to fix some problems.



II. NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE Data communication between RO-LCG sites and with other  WLCG members is done using RoEduNet (Romanian Education Network) infrastructure. RoEduNet is the name of the Romanian National Research and Education Network (NREN), which participates with other NRENs in forming the pan-European GEANT network  [5].

RoEduNet uses optical fiber and DWDM equipment to provide needed capacity parameters for data circuits. Data is passed through the optical network using routing equipment installed in Network Operation Centers (NOCs). This equipment is interconnected with multiple 10 Gbps circuits (and 100 Gbps lambdas) to achieve redundancy.

Figure 3 shows the relevant part of RoEduNet network (area surrounded with dashed line) and existing Romanian grid sites, members or not of RO-LCG.

Figure 3. RoEduNet and Romanian grid sites    Connectivity between GRID sites and RoEduNet NOCs is done using optical fiber. In Bucharest NOCs (labeled as NAT and BUC in Figure 3) and Cluj NOC (CLU), GRID sites were connected within the metropolitan area, while in Iasi NOC (IAS) the RO-16-UAIC site is co-located within RoEduNet Iasi NOC datacenter.

Recently RoEduNet DWDM network was extended from Bucharest NOC to Magurele (MAG) sites, using a point of presence installed at IFIN-HH premises. Using DWDM technology, available capacity for sites connected to MAG can be easily increased as needed, with costs covering new transponders procurement and installation.

Upstream communication is done using the connection between RoEduNet border router and Bucharest GEANT POP [5], both installed in RoEduNet datacenter at NOC NAT.

Data traffic of GRID sites uses same physical infrastructure as other institutions connected to RoEduNet. In November 2012 RoEduNet joined LHCONE network  [6] which aims to connect CERN LHC project sites within at least a logically separated network. Traffic separation is done using the so- called L3 VPN with VRF technology (VPN Routing and Forwarding)  [7]. VRF technology implies the use of an MPLS core, a separate forwarding table within the routing equipment and some way to classify the traffic as ?interesting?, e.g. to be routed via dedicated LHCONE VRF. The decision to include traffic into a VRF instance can be made by incoming interface or by source IP address. For RO-LCG sites, the solution using source IP addresses is used because there were no available separate network interfaces to connect only GRID sites to RoEduNet routers. Also, we wanted to avoid complicating existing IP addressing plans.

Upstream connection of RoEduNet LHCONE VRF to GEANT uses a virtual interface configured over the 10G circuit between RoEduNet border router and Bucharest GEANT POP router. GEANT provides LHCONE traffic separation within its infrastructure using the same VRF solution.

Figure 4 shows a rough relevant map of GEANT network and LHCONE connected sites1; also GEANT connections to other WLCG structures around the world are represented in the upper part of the picture.

Figure 4. GEANT and LHCONE   1 Figure 4 uses information provided in a DANTE presentation at LHCONE Meeting held in Washington on 31st January, 2013, and after some updates received from the author of the presentation (https://indico.cern.ch/getFile.py/access?contribId=1&resId=1&materialId=sli des&confId=212656)     Inside GEANT, routing information needed for data  transport is provided using BGP routing protocol. Each LHCONE national-level aggregator (e.g. NREN) announces into GEANT LHCONE VRF only IPv4 prefixes of LHCONE members within the country.



III. NETWORK MONITORING Because the complexity and needs of LHCONE, the usual  task of network monitoring is more important. There are many software tools that can ease this. Some of the tools used in RoEduNet for network monitoring are NMIS  [8], Cacti  [9], and  NfSen/nfdump [10].

Cacti is a solution for network graphing based on information collected using various acquisition methods. The information is stored in RRD  [11] and can be visualized using an intuitive web interface. Network traffic values, equipment environmental parameters, server?s resources usage are some examples of graphs that can be obtained using Cacti tool.

Figure 5 show traffic statistics for the Romanian LHCONE community since LHCONE setup is in production. Figure 5 a) shows network traffic as it is seen from RoEduNet side and it is taken from a Cacti instance running at RoEduNet network management system (NMS), while Figure 5 b) is from GEANT NMS.

Figure 5. a) RO-LCG traffic - RoEduNet monitored b) RO-LCG  traffic ? GEANT monitored   Because of the data sampling used for these graphs (once per day at 3:00 am) traffic seems to be not so big. Average values are calculated for the entire span of time covered by the graph that means one year.

An increase of traffic may be observed at the beginning of July, when sites from Magurele were connected to RoEduNet LHCONE VRF, after installing a new router in MAG RoEduNet site (Figure 3).

One of the widely used sets of tools for network traffic tracking and for network security incidents handling in NREN  community is NfSen/nfdump. These tools are based on netflow.

Netflow  [12] is a protocol used to collect information about IP traffic. Network equipment that supports netflow can export so-called netflow records to a data collecting system where information will be stored and analyzed. Netflow records are exported using UDP, each record has relevant information about flows passed through exporting equipment.

Such information is ingress and egress interfaces, source and destination IPv4/IPv6 address, source and destination ports for TCP or UDP, type of service, next-hop and other, but no user data is present.

Nfdump is the basis of NfSen/nfdump suite, collecting and storing flow information exported by routing equipment. It is also capable to generate various traffic statistics from gathered data, beginning with plain flow listing and going to various top N statistics, being able to do filtering of displayed information according to the analysis needs of the operator.

Nfsen is in fact a frontend with web interface that facilitates drawing graphs from captured data and generate alerts if specified conditions are met. Current network traffic or specific profiled graphics can be created. Figure 6 is an example for the NfSen web interface used at RoEduNet, showing information for a specific profile created for Romanian grid sites.

Figure 6. NfSen web interface    The Figure 6 displays network traffic and traffic values for each site, while at the bottom part of the picture there are some tools to generate reports based on pre-configured or user-based filters. Displayed information can be an overview of all collected traffic information or generated using profiles. A profile can contain filters reassembling to those used with tcpdump, such as matching a host, a network prefix, a TCP or UDP port, protocol or combinations of these.



IV. (RESULTS) Using network monitoring tools, it can be observed that  between RO-LCG and WLCG there is traffic varying between generous values, going up to 10 Gbps. To make a detailed analysis for this traffic it is necessary a big storage space and powerful servers. One good solution for this problem is to use the NfSen/nfdump tools.

Using the described NfSen/nfdump suite, traffic tracking and analysis can be done for RO-LCG sites (Figure 7). In this  a)  b)    graph the network traffic of the sites is represented in logarithm scale because we want to visualize the traffic per institution.

Sites located at Magurele are all shown as IFIN because they use IP addresses from one /24 prefix. Correlating Figure 7 with Figure 1, it can be observed that the traffic is proportional with computing power available to each institution.

Figure 7. Traffic statistics RO-LCG institutions   Before Romania sites were part of LHCONE network all  the grid traffic was send only to France because RO-LCG was connected to Tier-1 grid infrastructure called ATLAS FRANCE CLOUD. Now it is possible to transfer information to all Tier-1 and Tier-2 sites. A top n statistic of RO-LCG ATLAS sites is presented in the Tabel 1.

Download  Nr. SRC   DST   Packets (G)  Bytes (T)  1 NDGF- CENTERS  SE IFIN-HH RO 71.7 106.9  2 CERN-LCG CH IFIN-HH RO 28.7 43.0  3 IN2P3 FR IFIN-HH RO 13.9 19.4  4 GRIDKA-DE DE IFIN-HH RO 7.0 8.8  5 INFNET1 IT IFIN-HH RO 4.1 6.1  Upload  1 IFIN-HH RO KIAE- MOSCOW  RU 6.4 9.6  2 IFIN-HH RO GRIDKA- DE-KIT-2  DE 6.3 8.1  3 IFIN-HH RO CAS-TCZ CZ 4.6 6.0  4 IFIN-HH RO FR-CEA- RENATER  FR 3.0 4.1  5 IFIN-HH RO LLNL- SAT  CA 2.7 4.0  Download  SRC   DST   Packets (M)  Bytes (G)  1 UAIC RO IN2P3 FR 1180.2 1503.7  2 UAIC RO ITIM RO 529.5 488.3  3 UAIC RO UKHEP- MAN-3  UK 253.9 380.9  4 UAIC RO UNIVER-  CA 130.7 196.0  5 UAIC RO UTNET2 JP 129.5 193.7  Upload  1 IN2P3 FR UAIC RO 691.0 422.6  2 RAL-IP UK UAIC RO 96.8 144.2  3 RoEduNet RO UAIC RO 109.8 127.9  4 CERN-LCG CH UAIC RO 80.3 120.1  5 BROOKNET USA UAIC RO 59.3 88.7  Download  SRC   DST   Packets (M)  Bytes (G)  1 ITIM RO UAIC RO 169.6 9.5  2 ITIM RO GOOGLE USA 2.3 3.2  Upload  1 CERN-LCG CH ITIM RO 8.0 10.1  2 ISRAEL- UCC  IL ITIM RO 4.3 4.7  3 POLISHTier2 PL ITIM RO 3.6 4.6  4 RAL-IP UK ITIM RO 2.2 3.0  5 IN2P3 FR ITIM RO 1.9 2.8  Tabel 1. Top 5 trafic statistic of RO-LCG ATLAS sites     Figure 8. a) Total traffic in the Romanian LHCONE. b) Suspect  traffic in the Romanian LHCONE   It is difficult to analyze the traffic of a grid site because it is not uniform (see Figure 6) and may be compared with a cyber- attack like distributed denial-of-service attack (DDOS). As a first stage, tracing and removal of the rightful known traffic from total traffic (Figure 8 a) is needed. To remove the legitimate traffic we configured a new profile in NfSen and we select traffic that does not use known TCP or UDP ports in grid technology. With this mechanism the amount of information to be analyzed is greatly reduced and thus we may find easier the traffic outside of WLCG scope, as it can be seen in Figure 8  a)  b)    For example we analyzed the top traffic between Sep 10 2013 - 15:30 - Sep 10 2013 - 19:20 and we found that 52.5% of Magurele traffic (Figure 8 b) is on port 53 (~400K packets) and have suspect requests coming from IP addresses registered in United States, Netherlands, Finland, Denmark, Spain, Kazakhstan, Syria and others that could indicate an attack method similar to the one that uses open recursive resolvers.

In the top traffic between Sep 15 2013 - 13:40 - Sep 15 2013 - 22:05 we identified an possible brute force attack from United States to RO-16-UAIC, from Pakistan to RO-14-ITIM and from China and Germany to NIPNE.



V. CONCLUSIONS This article describes the research and education network  from Romania and the services offered for RO-LCG grid community, such as LHCONE access used to connect CERN LHC project sites within at least a logically separated network.

Another service offered by RoEduNet is Network Monitoring that helps grid sites to get traffic statistics and warnings about various attacks.

This paper presents a method to analyze the Romania LHCONE traffic and identify two possible cyber-attacks: brute force attack and open recursive resolvers attack.

