(seiscon 2012),VCTW, Tiruchengode, Tamilnadu, India on  27-29 December, 2012.

Abstract: Unstructured data intend to any data that has no distinctive structure. This paper aims to extract the structured data from unstructured data using Parts Of Speech (POS), analyzing this data syntactically, organize the data into entities, rules, associations and facts.

Prepare the data into structured way in the form of data tables. The textual data in documents to be transformed into text fi le which can be transferred into database.

Parts of Speech categorize the data into entities, actions and build the relations among these entities and actions.

Due to complexity involved in extracting, mining and structuring the data, research is considered for textual data either in form of documents or web pages. The structured information can be used in decision support systems or serve the purpose intended for the process. This approach is to extract the key information from scattered unstructured data exist across database. In this paper, an application ?News retrieval system? has been proposed as model which takes out the news from various web pages and processes them on the basis of page ranking and display on a single web page. The use of regular expressions is to realize the required patterns of the data and to convert the web pages into plain text. This plain text analyzed for entities, facts, relationships, synonyms and verb phrases. Data dictionary is used to realize English words. Extracted data is stored in database in the form of tables. Database models can be constructed using constructive information by inference rules or actionable intelligence. The structured information can be used for the purposes signifi ed in order to achieve improved, effective information retrieval system with this approach.

1. Introduction A database is organized collection of data for many uses typically in digital form. Data as an abstract concept can  be viewed as the lowest level of abstraction from which information and then knowledge are derived. Data can resides in  xed  elds within a record or  le and expressed as text, numbers, graphs, images,etc,. Structured data is data with a proper model organized into the tables, tags or objects.

The unstructured data is any data without a well de  ned model or schema for accessing information, like word documents, emails etc.

Unstructured Data contains TEXT NUMBERS AUDIO IMAGES, etc.

Large concerns may have branches in many places,  each of which create a large volume of data. For example, Bank may have data from thousands of local branches.

Further, large organizations have complex data structure with or without schemas. Unstructured data can take many forms like word documents, spread sheets, email messages, blogs, images,etc, and also  refers to information that either does not have a pre-de  ned data model and does not  t well into relational tables .By the use of  data mining or ?analysis? of the Unstructured Data to arrive at the results or statistics that will be placed in the structured world .Text Mining [1] is the discovery by computer of new, previously unknown information, by automatically extracting information from different written resources.

Unstructured data mining should contain the document name & title, location of source, discovered context, raw term, context, and exact position within the document, and possibly a few other key conceptions. The mining engine should be capable of ?clustering? terms together to form an idea, a context. Data mining is the process of semi automatically and analyzing large databases to  nd useful patterns. Text mining is a variation on a  eld called data mining [6], that tries to  nd interesting patterns from large databases. Text mining, also known as Intelligent Text    (seiscon 2012),VCTW, Tiruchengode, Tamilnadu, India on  27-29 December, 2012.

Analysis, Text Data Mining or Knowledge-Discovery in Text (KDT), refers generally to the process of extracting interesting and non-trivial information and knowledge from unstructured text. Unstructured data analysis and mining is much more than this. Unstructured Data can be scattered, complex and different structures, different schemas. The tools available for data mining techniques may or may not be very useful to extract and represent the structured information out of unstructured data.

2. Signifi cance and Analysis of Unstructured Data Management The process of mining, exercising and analyzing the unstructured data to capture actionable form [3].Nowadays, modern computer systems ensure that even routine cases can require the analysis of gigabytes of documentary data.

The need arises due to some of the following facts [4]:-  80 percent of all entity data is unstructured Amount of Unstructured Data is getting doubled in every two months of Respective Domain.

We are very good at dealing with unstructured data in small amounts, dif  cult to handle the vast quantities of data produced in even moderately sized legal cases today. Need electronic assistance to manage the vast amounts of information delivered to us [5].

All Tools have simpli  ed the process somewhat, but they still have not solved the problem of computers? inability to deal with tacit and context-based information.

At present even the most sophisticated arti  cial intelligence has only a small faction of the analytical ability of the most inexperienced legal trainee.

At present, that text analysis technology may be better at data reduction than actual data analysis.

3. Th eory Foundation Unstructured data is one without a de  ned data model or cannot be easily usable by a computer program. With a structured document, certain information always appears in the same location on the page. The advantage of structured data is that it allows users to re  ne their search using concepts rather than just individual keywords or phrases.

. In contrast, an unstructured document has the opposite characteristics ? information can appear in unexpected places on the document.

Value of Unstructured Data.

o Business Value: o Better information  o Apropos information o Pertinent Information o More information is available to store, manage and  modeled.

To manage unstructured data, information from various sources has to be extracted, organized, differentiate, analyze the data, data mining, classi  cation of data, text mining and modeling of the processed data[6].Since unstructured data commonly occurs in electronic documents, the use of a content or document management system which can categorize entire documents is often preferred over data transfer and manipulation from within the documents.

Document management thus provides the means to convey structure onto document collections.

Feature extraction Extract Information Text mining Organized the facts Modeling and de  ned the structure of processed data.

Process of extracting information from textual data (emails, documents) and utilizing for better decisions is called as Text Mining. Business Intelligence (BI) tools are used for this process and focus on semantics [7] is made.

The following categories to mine the text - Syntactic and Semantic feature extraction:  Structure Determination: names, companies, places, locations, people, verbs, objects etc.

Event extractions like sales, elections, anniversaries, birthday events, etc.

Extract the relationships among the identi  ed entities and events.

Categorizing the documents in an order or de  ned structure.

Summarization of data and thematic analysis to  nd the theme or context in the documents.

Information Extraction (IE) software identi  es key phrases and relationships [8] within text. It does this by looking for prede  ned sequences in text, a process called pattern matching. The software infers the relationships between all the identi  ed people, places, and time to provide the user with meaningful information. Traditional data mining assumes that the information to be mined is already in the form of a relational database. Unfortunately, for many applications, electronic information is only available in the form of unstructured documents rather than structured databases. Since IE addresses the problem of transforming a corpus of textual documents into a more structured database, the database constructed by an IE module can be provided to the Knowledge Discovery in Database (KDD) module [7] for further mining of knowledge as shown in Figure 1.

(seiscon 2012),VCTW, Tiruchengode, Tamilnadu, India on  27-29 December, 2012.

After mining knowledge from extracted data, it?s easy to predict information missed by the previous extraction using discovered rules.

4. Approach It?s hard to  nd a tool that deals the unstructured data which can be stored, retrieve data extracted into structured database. The following steps to be carried out to get the output into actionable form from unstructured data.

Unstructured Data Data extraction Syntactic & Semantic Analysis Data classi  cation Inference rules  Representation into structured format Data Relations Unstructured Data: Unstructured data to be analyzed  is considered as input from document. Data Extraction is the act or process of retrieving data out of  data sources for further data processing or data storage .

To extract the data, consider following tasks: De  ne its input: Input can be unstructured data Using text pattern matching also known as Regular expression: To identify small or large-scale structure Target the extraction: Extraction target can be a relation of k tuples, where k is number of attributes in a record or object.

Syntactic & Semantic Analysis: For syntactic analysis, structure is determined by generating a parse tree or by using POS by classifying sentence into subjects, verb phrase (verb, object). Similarly semantic analysis  nds synonyms.

Data classifi cation: Data classi  cation [9] is to categorize data based on required models like object oriented model or Entity Relation (ER) model. The objective is to learn classi  ers from known examples (labeled documents) and perform the classi  cation automatically on unknown examples. The algorithms include Bayesian algorithm and Concept Vector Based (CVB) algorithm to classify words in documents.

Inference rules and Representation into structured format: Inference rules [10] can be employed to draw conclusions of the classi  ed data by preserving the semantic property. The classi  ed data is stored in the form of data tables is used to store the data based on the requirement of the desired action planned from the unstructured data.

There are many tools available to extract data as follows:  Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques: RAPDIER, SRV tools [2] build relationships between sentences, elements and phrases.

5. Proposed Model  Pages  URLs   URLs   Information  Storage  Scheduler Multi-threaded  Downloader  World W ide Web    Queue  Fig.  2: High level architecture of basic crawler.

A crawler is a computer program that browses the World Wide Web (WWW) in a methodical, automated manner or in an orderly fashion. Figure 2 shows crawler to fetch web pages & index the document [11] .Multi threaded downloader which should support downloading multiple  les at the same time and Scheduler decides which of the ready, in-memory processes are to be executed next.

Fig. 1. Overview of IE-based Text Mining    (seiscon 2012),VCTW, Tiruchengode, Tamilnadu, India on  27-29 December, 2012.

The project aims at developing a system that would use a crawler based search method which would pull out news from major news websites, forums, portals and blogs. The news will be processed based on its popularity and exact upward force move on a news story by the internet. The news will be presented to the user based on his preferences and general behavior that the system learns over time to produce highly relevant results.

6. Conclusion This paper presents an approach to extract the data from unstructured data by organizing into structured way in the form of Data Relations. Set of rules are used to interpret domain knowledge from the unstructured data. By segmenting the data using POS and its syntactic structure present in the input unstructured text, which will help us to categorize the data into entities, actions and construct the relations among these entities and actions. This approach applied in the ?News Retrieval System? which collected news from Various Pages and processed on the basis of Page ranking and displayed on the Single page in an effective way.

7. References [1] Berry Michael W., (2004), ?Automatic Discovery  of Similar Words?, in ?Survey of Text Mining: Clustering, Classi  cation and Retrieval?, Springer Verlag, New York, LLC, 24-43.

[2] Navathe, Shamkant B., and Elmasri Ramez, (2000), ?Data Warehousing and Data Mining?, in ?Fundamentals of Database Systems?, Pearson Education pvt Inc, Singapore, 841-872  [3] Rao R. ?From unstructured data to actionable form? appeared in IT professional, ieee.org computer society.? Inxight, Sunnyvale, CA, USA  [4] Unstructured Data in http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Unstructured_data  [5] Andrew Harbison & Pearse Ryan,The problem of analysing  unstructured data ,The limits of computers in electronic discovery , 2009 Grant Thornton  [6] Vishal Gupta, Gurpreet S. Lehal, A Survey of Text Mining Techniques and Applications, Journal of Emerging Technologies in Web Intelligence, vol. 1, no. 1, august 2009  [7] David Alfred Ostrowski. IEEE International Conference on Semantic Computing ?A Framework for the Classi  cation of Unstructured Data.? Berkeley, CA, USA 2009.

[8] Sungjick Lee and Han-joon Kim (2008), ?News Keyword Extraction for Topic Tracking?, Fourth and Advanced  Information Management, IEEE, Koria,554-559 [9]   Setu Madhavi Namburu, Haiying Tu, Jianhui Luo  and Krishna R. Pattipati (2005), ?Experiments on Supervised, Learning Algorithms for Text computer society, 1-8.

[10] Pak Chung Wong, Paul Whitney and Jim Thomas, ?Visualizing Association Rules for Text Mining?, Laboratory, USA, 1-5  [11] Dean J. and Henzinger M.R. (1999), ?Finding related pages in the world wide web?, Computer Networks, 31(11-16):1467-1479.

