

Abstract - A Smart Grid is an enhanced version of  electric grid in which the demand and supply are balanced to meet the customers need. The paper deals with the formation of a cloud-based Smart Grid for analyzing the Bid-Data and taking decisions to balance the demand of customer needs. The proposed formation of smart grid will deal with Big Data set which will contain the data regarding the power usage patterns of customers, historic weather data of the location, the current demand and supply details. The grid will operate on the data being fetched from the cloud storage. The paper also focuses on smart grid being framed with the renewable energy sources.

Keywords ? Smart Grid, Renewable Energy, Cloud  Computing, Hadoop, Big Data Analytics, Cassandra, Hive

I.  INTRODUCTION  The Smart Grid is formed as a combination of altering currents in which the production of electricity from the renewable energy sources are considered and analyzed whether if the supply will meet the demand and alternate decision to be taken by the Smart Grid in meeting the demand. The need for generation of electricity is growing worldwide and it has greater impact towards the industrial development of a country [1]. The growths in databases are also tremendously increasing as the historic data are helpful in the future analysis and can be taken as a factor for decision making. The historic weather data are stored in the cloud using the service ?Cassandra? database and Hadoop File System is used to retrieve the needed data during the time of estimation of the need by the Smart Grid. The query language used to query the Cassandra database is the Hive Query Language also known as HiveQL. The paper aims in giving a proposal to form a cloud-based Smart Grid which will act as an intelligent system to maintain the balance between the demand and the supply.



II. SMART GRID  The Smart Grid is formed by integrating the use of information technology, automation, telecommunications and electric network control. The electric network control in turn involves the sensors, smart meters and deployment of control strategies and real-time data processing [2]. The Smart Grid involves all the operations of a system such as generation, transmission and distribution. The Smart Grid combines all the power generation resources such as solar  energy, Wind Energy, Nuclear power, Wind power, Thermal Power etc.

Figure 1 represents the basic structure of a Smart Grid.

Figure 1: Basic Structure of a Smart Grid   A Smart Grid takes its source of generation from various power generation resources like both renewable and non-renewable. The renewable resource includes solar energy, wind energy, hydraulic power etc where as the non-renewable energy resources include conventional power systems such as nuclear power, fossil fuel etc. The usage and implementation of Smart grids is high that most of the countries shows interest in the inclusion of smart grids in their infrastructure. A Smart Grid in turn consists of Micro Grids which will be separate modules to produce energy from renewable energy sources and non-renewable energy sources.

An example to be considered here is the ?Puducherry Smart Grid Pilot Project?. The project is implemented by the Government of Puducherry, India and Power Grid Corporation of India Limited. The project is being implemented with the objectives [3] of having a common sharable platform, help the consumers reduce their electricity bills, user friendly interface and balance the demand/supply chain.

The Smart Grid is a major thrust area in which several ongoing researches are done. Many countries have started implementing the Smart Grid to add to their existing power grid to increase the production of electricity.

Especially the European countries and United States have large number of projects implemented using smart grids.

A cloud-based architecture for Big-Data Analytics in Smart Grid: A Proposal    M.Mayilvaganan1, M.Sabitha2 1, 2 Department of Computer Science, P.S.G College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, India.

mayilvaganan.psg@gmail.com,sabithamuthusamy.psg@gmail.com     Smart Grid  Solar Energy  Thermal Power  Wind Power  Nuclear Power  Industry Use  Domestic Use

III. BIG DATA ANALYTICS   The Big Data Analytics is a field which deals with data which are high in volume, velocity and variety.

When the data to be analyzed is high in volume (i.e in Petabyte, Exabyte or Brontobyte), the velocity is high and the variety is also present then the usage of Big Data analytics becomes mandatory. Big Data Analytics comprises of distributed file systems framework such as Hadoop, Mahout, a multi- user database to handle huge amount of data such as Cassandra, MongoDB, HBase and a query language namely HiveQL. These software are open source in nature from Apache Foundation.

The big data analytics can be used in our smart grids to store the temperature history of a place, user demands, production data etc. The data can be stored in cloud environment and processing can be done.

A.  Hadoop   The Apache Hadoop is a framework which helps in  distributed processing of large data sets. Hadoop can be scaled up from one server to thousands of machines with local computation. The Apache Hadoop Library is designed in such a way to handle failures and provide reliable service to the customers. Hadoop uses the concept of MapReduce. The MapReduce framework consists of single master and one slave node per cluster.

Block ops  Read  Data Nodes  Replication  Data Nodes     Rack 1   Write    Rack 2         Figure 2: Hadoop Distributed File System Architecture  The Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) [4] follows master/slave architecture. A HDFS cluster consists of a Name Node and a master server that supervises the file system namespace. A Data node is present to manage the storage in the cluster. In HDFS a file is split into one or more blocks. These blocks are in turn stored in the Data Nodes. The Name Node handles the namespace operations such as opening, closing and renaming directories. The Name Node also takes care of  the mapping of blocks to the Data Nodes. The above architecture gives an idea about the working of the Hadoop Distributed Files System.

B.  Cassandra Cassandra is an open source distribution DBMS which was designed The Cassandra database is used to store large data sets. The Cassandra also support cloud infrastructure making it to suit for our smart grid implementation. Cassandra is in use at Netflix, eBay, Twitter, Reddit etc. Cassandra has a proven history of reliability as it does not have a single point of failure. As the CAP Theorem also known as Brewer?s Theorem states no distributed computing system can have all of three values Consistency, Availability and Partitioning Tolerance [5]. Cassandra takes the two values Availability and Partitioning Tolerance. The Cassandra database can be used in our smart grid to store the temperature data, user demand and supply.

C.  Hive  Apache Hive data warehouse software is used to query large datasets which are stored in distributed environment. Hive uses a simple SQL-like query language called QL to query the databases. MapReduce concept can also be implemented with Hive. Hive consists of two components namely Hcatalog and WebHcat.

Hcatalog is a table which allows the users to easily write data on the grid. WebHcat provides a service to run Hadoop MapReduce, Pig, and Hive using a HTTP interface [6].



IV. FORMATION OF A SMART GRID  The traditional electric grid can be replaced with a smart grid. A smart grid consist of sensors, actuators, smart meters, distributed management system, decision support system etc [7]. The smart grid formation is done by identifying the different resources of power generation such as solar energy, wind energy, fossil fuel etc.

Transmitter       Figure 3: A Smart Grid  Name Node Metadata  Client  Blocks  Client  Smart Grid  Domestic Use Industry  Solar Panels  Wind Turbines  Nuclear Power       The traditional electric grid can be transformed by placing a smart grid which is bidirectional that it balances the load between the consumer and the producer. Smart Grid is of high usage when it comes to the efficient usage of power. Smart meters are fixed in the smart grid to monitor the consumer requirements and measure the resource produced. The load balancing is done by the smart grid by transferring the load from low demand grid to high demand grid. The production and storage of power is monitored by the smart grid to enable/disable the production depending upon the demand.

The user can also calculate the usage requirements and switch between the peak hours to regular hours for power requirements. The smart homes are helpful for the consumers to keep track of their monthly usage and cut down their monthly electric bills.



V. A CLOUD-BASED ARCHITECTURE   The smart grid consists of components such as smart meters, sensors, decision support systems etc to achieve the goal of making the conventional electric grid to behave ?smart?. The cloud based architecture discussed in the paper will contain the inclusion of big data analytics to analyze the historic data, the consumer usage history and predict the production of power from various resources.

A cloud computing has various different definitions [8], the one such definition is [9]  ?Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction? The cloud computing environment provides various services models such as Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Network as a Service (NaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Software as a Service (SaaS). There are different kinds of cloud deployments such as private cloud, public cloud, community cloud, hybrid cloud, distributed cloud etc [10]. A cloud- based architecture can be used with the big data analytics in the smart grid to efficiently balance the load in power production and supply. The advantages of the three technologies viz., smart grid, big data analytics and cloud computing are pooled together to produce an improved version of smart grid to perform the following functionalities,   ? Analyze the historic weather data and predict the energy production.

? Analyze the consumer behavior (power usage) patterns to predict the demand in advance.

? Keep track of the energy production from various sources and take decision of switching between the high/low priority demands.

? Balance the load with the demand/supply chain.

? The storage/transfer of the generated power to be done efficiently.

A cloud-based smart grid [11],[12] will use the micro grids to compute the task of storing the historic weather data and its architecture will contain a node storing the weather data and the smart meters working on the demand-response system to access the data to take decision.

SMART GRID HDFS       Cloud Environment           Nodes  Rack 2   Rack 1       Cassandra DB    Figure 4: An improved smart grid architecture   The above proposed architecture consists of a smart grid in which the other mandatory electronic components are available and apart from it the HDFS is included. The architecture consists of database such as historic weather data, consumer behavior pattern, supply and demand details. Each time the system predicts the demand and calculates the supply based on the historic weather data and consumer behavior patterns. The data are stored in cloud based Cassandra Database. To manage the storage and retrieval of the data the system uses the Hadoop Distributed File System. The HDFS takes care of  Historic Weather Data    Domestic usage    Consumer Behavior Pattern  Industries  Solar  Wind  Nuclear Power   Power Resources  Demand Supply       distributing the storage to nodes in racks. The processing is done using the Map/Reduce concept. The smart grid in the proposed architecture uses a prediction algorithm to predict the demand and supply. The system uses a distributed environment in which the energy resources (renewable and non-renewable) are distributed; the consumers such as home, industries are also in a distributed environment. The proposed architecture of implementing big data analytics will be suitable for the smart grid environment.



VI. CONCLUSION  In this paper, we have dealt with the efficient planning of power production and distribution. The implementation and usage of smart grids have increased now days. The paper has suggested architecture to implement big data analytics and cloud architecture in the smart grids to make them even better. The proposed architecture is a proposal and the implementation of the smart grid is in process.

FUTURE WORK  The future work deals with the implementation of the architecture with few connected smart grids and storing the weather data in cloud based databases and using the big data analytics to calculate the user demand and supply.

