

Message from Mobile India chairs  The integration of social networks on the move, the analysis of massively Big Data and provisioning of associated services over the cloud has been gaining momentum. The theme for Mobile India 2014 is Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud (SMAC). In India, the subscriber base of Facebook and LinkedIn together has surpassed 100 million mark; and the mobile Internet user base has surpassed 140 million. These two phenomenon generate huge amount of data and a potential user base for myriad of applications in the areas of enterprise, education, healthcare and government programmes. At the same time, it also gives opportunities for niche companies in the area to provide Big Data and analytics support to personalize these services towards individuals and organizations. The cloud paradigm provides a viable alternative, especially for Small and Medium Enterprises to reduce their capex spend and attain advantages of reliability and quick time to deploy. Mobile India 2014 will explore opportunities and challenges in the following four sessions:  ? Mobile in SMAC  ? Big Data Analytics and Visualization: Key for success  ? Mobile Cloud  ? Mobile Social Media  KEYNOTE-1 Dr. Sanjoy Paul, IEEE Fellow and Managing Director, Accenture Technology Labs India  Session 1: Mobile in SMAC  Mobility in the Social Mobility Analytics and Cloud (SMAC) is important as it provides a context for any application or service rendered. This context information, once a privy to mobile operators, is now available through various channels to whoever wants to leverage it. Further, users now demand the same type of services that were available on their PCs and Laptops to be made available on their mobiles.

With the proliferation of Smartphones and tablets, how does Mobile fit in to SMAC? This session with experts in the field of mobility who are trying to fit it in to the SMAC paradigm will deliberate on the challenges and opportunities in this area.

Panelists: Ramesh Adiga, AVP & Head, Global Delivery - Mobility Unit, Infosys Ltd Bharati Jacob, Founder Partner, Seedfund Manjunath Gowda, CEO, i7 networks  Moderator: S.R. Raja, Founder President, MoMo Bangalore  Session 2: Big Data Analytics and Visualization: Key for success    Business data analytics is key to survival in todays business environment. The huge amount of data generated by information systems, especially those that are mobile enabled, create opportunities for firms to dig deep in to it for not only analyzing status-quo but also do prediction on key factors for business growth. The Big Data generated by the SMAC paradigm has created many start-ups such as price comparison sites, mobile advertising firms, media analytics companies, and telecom analytics solution providers. Larger IT companies have also started incubating business units in this area. The session will explore the challenges and opportunities for firms wanting to explore this area, including data availability, reliability of data, the technologies and business models for handling Big Data and associated analytics.

There are companies that found white space in this area and have developed niche products. Hear from the experts on how to leverage technology for Big Data analytics and the subsequent monetization of the same. The session will also delve in to visualization models for Big Data and businesses around the same.

Panelists: Muralikrishnan, G., COO, Sasken Network Engineering Ltd.

J. Ramachandran, CEO, Gramener Venkatesh Vaidyanathan, VP - Product Management, Business Analytics, SAP Labs Sridhar Pai, CEO, Tonse Telecom  Moderator: Dr. Rajeev Shorey, Co-Founder, ChiSquareAnalytics  KEYNOTE-2 Dr.Gopal Pingali, Distinguished Engineer and Director, IBM Academy Leadership Team Member, IBM India  Session 3: Mobile Cloud With large amount of data to process varied needs of the users especially to support mobile devices  of various form factors and platforms, organizations are migrating their information systems thus far in client-server mode to cloud platforms. Then there are cloud providers who provide on-demand services thus reducing time-to-deploy critical applications. The evolution of technologies for cloud enablement including open source repositories and techniques such as Hadoop are increasingly in use. Apart from pay-per use and shift of capex to opex, cloud enablement also provides advantages of shared resourcing, economies of scale and other associated benefits. However, the adoption of mobile cloud is strongly corre- lated with good quality network connections which are often very poor in countries such as India. Experts will discuss cloud strategies, monetization models, economics of the cloud, how the cloud paradigm fits in to SMAC and challenges in deploying cloud services in India.

Panelists: Girish, S., COO, ConnectM; Shreekanth Joshi, Vice President, Cloud Practice Head, Persistent Systems; Madhwesh Kulkarni, General Manager - Advanced technology solutions, Wipro technologies Ajayan Narayanan, Senior Director, EMC Software and Services India  Moderator: Swami Krishnan, Head Marketing, Sasken Communication Technologies  Session 4: Mobile Social Media Enterprises are exploring ways to leverage the power of social networks, along with the ubiquitous use    of smart mobile broadband devices, and the cloud to be agile, flexible, and productive. Social networks generate the Big Data that can be analyzed in depth for improving customer centricity and directions of market spend. Within large organizations, both formal and informal social networks help improve employee stickiness, knowledge sharing, employee mentoring thus improving organizational performance.

A number of start-ups have sprung up recently to tap on the opportunities provided by the social media, augmented by Smartphones and Tablets on the move. This session will deliberate on the challenges and opportunities that social networks generate for the SMAC paradigm.

