ASSOCIATION RULES MINING ALGORITHM BASED ON  INTEREST MEASURE AND ITS APPLICATION IN MEDICAL

Abstract  How to use the data mining technology, to discover the potential mass audit data in doubt is the hot spot of audit technology research. This paper proposes a new association rules mining algorithm based on interest measure, to set up a new interest model, to improve the accuracy of the strong association rules, and apply it to the audit of the business data of medical fees, to realize the application of data mining technology in the medical audit.

1 Introduction  The data mining technology is to extract or mining knowledge from large amounts of data[1]. It can use many methods, which include machine learning, statistics, visualization, pattern recognition, neural networks and so on, to mining all kinds of interesting knowledge patterns, such as characteristic, distinction, association and correlation analysis, classification, prediction, clustering and outlier analysis, etc., from multiple types of data which can be space, time series, texts, streaming data, multimedia, etc.. Association rule analysis is a kind of important and commonly used method, through to find frequent item set in data to produce a strong association rule, such as BA .The frequent item set need to meet the minimum support measure threshold and the strong association rules need to meet minimum confidence measure threshold. Association rules analysis[2] has been widely used in business and financial fields such as shopping basket analysis and is mainly used to forecast future trends or customer behavior. However, its application in auditing is still in the exploratory stage. In fact, according to the hidden association rules analysis of historical data in audit work, we can research whether the audited entity are legal when exercising their functions and powers. This article is to find audit suspects from the audit business data collected from a hospital according to association rules mining algorithm based on interest measure.

In order to solve the disadvantages that exist in the association rules mining[3] and improve the efficiency of association rule mining, a rule mining algorithm based on interest has been presented by research scholars at home and abroad. There are various models which measure the interest and different definition methods of interest. The interest of  association rules is generally divided into two categories: subjective interest and objective interest. Subjective interest reflects the user's subjective measure of concern to association rules, which is associated with user's prior knowledge and the expectation of the rules. Some support measure of rule and confidence measure are high, but the user is not interested in them. Objective interest is decided by structure of rules and the mining data objects and is related to the support measure and confidence measure.

2 Apriori Algorithm  Association rule mining algorithm can be divided into two steps: the first step is to find all frequent item set based on Apriori algorithm[4], and the frequency of each of these item set is the same as the predefined minimum support technology counting at least; The second step is to produce strong association rule from frequent item set, and these rules must meet minimum support measure and minimum confidence measure.

Apriori algorithm is put forward by R.Agrawal and R.Srikant in 1994 as a original algorithm for Boolean association rule mining frequent item set. Apriori algorithm is to find all frequent item set by using the step by step search iteration method and k item set is used to explore ( 1)k  item set. First accumulate count of each item and collect the item to satisfy minimum support measure to find out the set of frequent l item set. The set is wrote as 1L . Then 1L is used to find the set of frequent 2 item set 2L , 2L is used to find 3L  and so on until not finding the frequent item set k .

Apriori has such properties: all nonempty sets of frequent item set must also be frequent[5]. In order to improve the efficiency of frequent item sets generated step by step, we can make use of the property of monotonicity of Apriori to compress search space. Particular way can be divided into two steps: connecting step and pruning step. First to generate the set kC  of candidate k itemset through connecting 1kL and itself. kC  is the super set of kL  and the member of kC may or may not be frequent, but all frequent item sets k includ in the kC . At this time using the Apriori property, if the ( 1)k  subset of candidate k  itemset is not in 1kL , the candidate item set cannot be frequent,  which can be removed from kC  to achieve the goal of compress search space.

Apriori algorithm flow chart as shown in figure 2.1.

278 ICSSC 2013    Start  Input minimum support minsup and minimum confidence minconf  Set each item's support, items which greater than minsup consist of itemset  k- itemset empty?

connecting step get candidate k itemsets to connect  K-1itemset and itself  pruning step Delete item that the subset is not in the k-1 itemset  Calculate support, get k- itemset which satisfy minsup  Take the first item of k-itemset  Calculate the confidence conf of each non-empty subsets of the itemset  Whether the footer?

output to the association rules result table   Figure 1. Apriori algorithm flow chart  As shown in figure 2.1, the step of finding frequent item sets in Apriori algorithm is only related to support measure and the second step getting strong association rules is only related to the confidence measure. However, such pattern existing defects in practice, this paper hopes to find a new model to supplement the confidence measure and improve the method of getting strong association rules.

3 Association Rules Mining Based on Interest Measure  3.1 Introduction of Interest Measure Usually, using low support measure threshold can find many interesting rules. In such case, although the minimum support measure and confidence measure[6] thresholds contribute to rule out a large number of boring rules, it produces many rules which many users are not interested in. When using low support measure threshold to dig, this kind of circumstance is particularly serious and support measure and confidence measure is not enough to filter out boring association rules so as to produce a large number of irrelevant and error rules.

Therefore, we need to use suitable interest measure[7] to supplement support measure-confidence measure framework.

3.2 Improved Interest Measure Model When building a interest measure model, the improved interest measure needs to satisfy the following requirements: 1. Model should be able to reflect the coupling degree of antecedent A and consequent B. The higher the degree of coupling is, indicating that the association rules are more relevant and should be digged.

2. Model should be able to reflect the effects of the consequent B to interest measure of rules. The greater the probability of consequent B is, the smaller the probability of antecedent A deducing consequent B. So the probability of consequent B and interest measure should be monotonically decreasing.

3. Model can reflect the influence of antecedent A to rules.

The larger the emergence probability of antecedent A is, the more the attention of users is. So users' interest measure should also be greater, and the probability of antecedent A and interest measure should be monotonically decreasing.

4. Model should be associated with the support measure of frequent item sets. The higher the support measure of item set is, the higher the interest measure of association rules is. So the support measure and interest measure should be monotonically decreasing.

5. Model should be also associated with the confidence measure. The higher the confidence measure of rule is, the higher the interest measure is. So the confidence measure and interest measure should be also monotonically decreasing.

Based on the above analysis, the calculation formula of interest measure model is:  1 1 1  P B I  P A P AB P B A (1)  The interest measure both maintains the relationship of support measure and confidence measure and reflects the coupling degree of antecedent and consequent. It also can reflect the master-slave relationship of antecedent and consequent and satisfy the design requirements of interest measure model.

3.3 Simulation Comparative Experiments Experiments use the SalesOrderDetail table of Microsoft sample database AdventureWork as experimental object.

There are 121317 records. Set order number SalesOrderID as a transaction identifier, product number ProductID as transaction item identifier, a total of 31465 transactions. In experiment, a minimum support threshold is 0.01, and receives frequent item sets. Minimum confidence measure and each interest measure model are not set threshold, and output all the association rules from frequent item sets to analyze the effect of different model. Experiments get 167014 association rules, as shown in table 1.

Table 1. The calculation results of confidence measure and interest measure of part association rules   The statistic analysis on confidence measure of association results and different interest measures is shown in table 2. we can find that new improved models with interest measure     have larger particle size than other models and are easier to set the threshold to get association rules which users are interested in.

Table 2. The statistical distribution table of association rules of different models    4  Application of Association Rules Mining in the Medical Audit  4.1 Medical Audit Data Preprocessing In order to standardize and strengthen the management of health care prices, Shanghai has unified the main medical service items and the price which are provided by medical institutions. Except for providing the highest price of the main medical services project, it also made clear the use scope and required that the medical institutions should not adopt double charges and packing charges. Auditing department also focuses on this aspects in the audit process of hospital, and this time is to audit the hospital whether or not it meets the relevant requirements of Shanghai in charges in the case of medical services through association rules mining based on Apriori algorithm and interest measure[8].

In this experiment, we choose emergency door fees in hospital information system of one secondary hospital in 2010 as  the object of association rule mining, covering medical expenses, laboratory fees, oxygen fees, inspection fees, transfusion fees, inspection fees, perspective fees, charges radiography, magnetic card fees, medical fees, radiology fees totaling 11 categories of fees[9]. The data source has a total of 1162146 records. Set the fph indicating pay invoice numbers as the transaction identifier, the wjdm indicating charging items code as the transaction item identifier, a total of 459543 transactions that indicates there are 459,543 of the fee. There are 714 entries affairs, that means a total of 714 kinds of medical services.

4.2 Mining Results and Analysis of Improved Association Rules Algorithm To try to dig more interesting rules, the experiment set a lower support measure, setting minimum support at 0.01. For 459543 transactions set of transactions, their minimum support count are 4595.43. The minimum confidence measure is 0.9, the minimum interest measure is set to 2000, we can  get 368 strong association rules. As shown in Table 3.

Table 3. Part of strong association rules   Analysis of the strong association rules, we can find that the vast majority of association rules reflected existing large number of packaging charge in laboratory class medical services.

Figure 2 shows the number of mined strong association rules under different support measure between Apriori algorithm based on interest measure and  the classic Apriori algorithm.

The minimum interest measure threshold of the Apriori algorithm based on interest measure is 2000, and the minimum confidence measure threshold of the classic Apriori algorithm is 0.9.

Figure 2. The number of strong association rules of two algorithms under different support measure  Experimental result shows that the association rules mining algorithm based on interest measure can get strong association rules which users are interested in more efficiently in the case of low support measure, and can select rules more accurately. From figure 2, when support measure is 0.01, the classic Apriori algorithm gets 1674 strong association rules, and the Apriori algorithm based on interest measure only gets 368. The number of contrast is about 9:2. Strong association rules mined can be used as an audit doubt, and auditors need to further analyze and audit them. The decrease of audit suspects can greatly reduce workload of audit and greatly improve the efficiency of audit work. Thus in the audit work, adding user interest measure indicators can be more accurately to get audit doubt and reflect the efficiency of the algorithm.

5 Conclusion  This paper analyzed the association rule mining algorithm and proposed a new association rules mining algorithm based on interest measure which improved the accuracy and  : Classic Apriori algorithm : Apriori algorithm based on interest measure  X axis: Support measure Y axis: The number of strong association rules     efficiency of association rule mining. In experiment, the new algorithm is used to mining association rules and classifies and analyzes hospital medical fees, founding that the vast majority of the strong association rules belong to laboratory class in the medical service. A large number of strong association rules with high interest measure indicators reflect that the different test items have very strong relevance and hospitals in the process of diagnosis and treatment often requires having test in multiple projects and charge at the same time. However, the reasonability that these projects are needed to conduct at the same time needs further verification.

But only from the results of data mining, we can think of that there is the possibility of packing charge in part of diagnosis items. Experiments can find that hospitals have audit suspects of packing charge in part of laboratory diagnosis and treatment projects quickly and efficiently. This provides the basis for the next step audit work and improves the efficiency of audit greatly.

