* To whome correspondence should be addressed.

Abstract?In order to handle the information overload on the tourism websites and understand user?s travel preference, we propose to build a users? preference matrix to reflect the users? preference degree on a set of scenic spots, and then propose a method of combining user clustering with Markov chain to predict the next scenic spot a user will browse on a tourism website. The experimental results indicate that the preference matrix can catch the travel preference of users and the proposed method can be used for predicting the next browsing behaviors of users.

Keywords-users? scenic spot browsing behaviors; clustering; Markov chain; user-generated content; travel preference.



I. INTRODUCTION With the rapid development of Internet and the online  travel, we can get various travel information through the tourism websites anytime and anywhere. However, the serious phenomenon of information overload makes it much more difficult for users to get the information what they really need, and leads to less efficient travel decisions.

Nowadays, personalized recommendation system, an effective service to solve the problem above, has become a hot topic. While one important part of it is user preference access. When a user is visiting a tourism website, the users? behavior information can be the major source of users? preference. Through analyzing a user?s online behaviors, we can predict the next behavior that he (or she) is really likely to take, and provide he (or she) with actively pushed travel information which will make further contribution to the personalized recommendation service.

In general, users' online behaviors include explicit and implicit feedback behaviors[1,2,3] which provide different degrees of expressivity of the users? preference[4,5]. It is easy to get the users? preference from the explicit behaviors, such as users? rating to one scenic spot, tagging ?like? or ?don't like?, clicking ?want to go to? or ?don't want to go?, ?have been? or ?have not been?, users? directly inputted  information, and so on. Now, most tourism websites are generally collecting the explicit feedback behaviors to do recommendation, such as after users choose their own favorite tourism products, or fill out a requirement form, the website will provide them with some travel information that conform to their demands.

However, it?s very difficult to know the user?s preference from his (or her) implicit feedback behaviors. What?s more, tourism is a comprehensive industry that composed by food, shelter, transportation, travel, purchase and entertainment. So, the preference of users in tourism domain is quite more complex than in the other domains, we have to get their preference from more than one aspect.

Fortunately, there is a large amount of information that belongs to implicit feedback behaviors, so we can indirectly get users? preferences from different aspects by analyzing those large and various online behavior data. According to users? general behaviors when visiting a website[2,6], they usually search in a searchbox, or click a link text for further browsing. If they are interested in some content in one page, they usually do some markings, such as selecting, or staying for a while for careful reading. These behaviors are important for understanding the users? preference, because users' browsing behaviors tend to be driven by their intrinsic interest for travel, i.e. users will only open the links what they are really interested in, and take the initiative to browse the related contents.

So, how do we analyze a user?s implicit feedback behaviors to get his (or her) preference in travel domain? For example, when a user is only browsing the pages of a tourism website, how do we know who is he (or she)?  How much can he (or she) afford? Which scenic spot does he (or she) really like to see?

In this paper, we collected users? implicit feedback behaviors when he (or she) was browsing a tourism website, and carried out Markov prediction model to analyze those   DOI 10.1109/ICTAI.2013.38       data for understanding his (or her) preference and predicting the next scenic spot he (or she) will browse.

The rest of this paper is organization as follows. In section II, some works related to scenic spot prediction are given. Section III introduces Markov chain. Section IV presents how to establish Markov model for prediction. The experiments and results are given in section V. At last, a conclusion is made and some future research aspects are put forward.



II. RELATD WORK The travel information of scenic spots are attached in  webpages, so there can be certain similarities and correlations between scenic spot browsing behavior prediction and web prefetching, and the methods used for web prefetching can also be used to predict the next scenic spot the user will browse.

Ban et al. made a survey on the method of intelligent web prefetching[7]. They said that there were five kinds of typical methods: method based on DG(dependency graph), method based on data mining, method based on the cost function, method based on semantic prediction model and method based on Markov prediction model. Many scholars have used Markov prediction model to do web prefetching. Dhyani et al. modeled the browsing process as a Markov chain, and carried out an n-step transition matrix to predict[8]. Awad et al. carried out a new method to predict users? web browsing behavior by combining a modified Markov model with association rule mining[9]. In [10] and [11], the authors also used a lower order Markov model and association rules to predict next web usage accesses, the integration like that can compensate each other, it can not only avoids the complexity of high order Markov model, but also reduces the large number of association rules to make a more accurate prediction. After describing the prediction method of combing both Markov model and DG, Nanopoulos et al.

proposed a new method of accusation rules to make prediction[12]. Xing et al. pointed out that affected by their purposes, cultural backgrounds, hobbies and other kinds of factors, different users? browsing processes show different characteristics[13]. They assumed that each user?s web browsing behaviors can be described as a Markov chain. By calculating the similarities between two users? state transition probability matrixes, they grouped users by clustering Markov chains according to a criterion function and established a new Markov model for each group. When a user visits the website, according to his (or her) browsing behaviors, he (or she) is classified into one certain group by using the Bayes classification algorithm, and then the corresponding Markov model is used to predict the next behavior for this user.

In this paper, we try to use Markov prediction model and association rules technology to analyze users? online behaviors on a tourism website respectively.



III. MARKOV CHAIN Markov chain is a memoryless time sequence, which  means that the next state depends only on the current state and not on the previous states[14]. A Markov chain can be represented by a state transition probability matrix P which can be described as follows:  11 12 1  21 22 2  1 2  n  n  n n nn  p p p p p p  P  p p p  ? ? ? ? ? ?= ? ? ? ? ? ?  ? ?  ? ? ? ? ?  (1)  1( | )ij t j t ip P S s S s?= = =  ij iq  q n S S  ? ?  = ? In which ijp  is the probability of transiting from the state  is  to the state js , t-1 stands for the previous time, t means the following time. 1tS ?  stands for the state in previous time, and tS  stands for the state in the following time. ij represents the frequency of occurrences of the state pair ( , )i js s .

In this paper, a users? browsing sequence of scenic spots on one tourism website can be handled as a special random process that changes over time. The domain of discrete state variable S is set as the set of scenic spots. So, the state variables   S = {s1, s2, ..., sn}, n means the number of scenic spot, si stands for scenic spot i. Then a user?s browsing sequence of scenic spots on the website can be described by a Markov chain, which is a value sequence of random variable S.

For instance, suppose that there are only two users, one of the users? browsing sequence is ?ABACA?, the other one?s is ?ABCAB?, thus, the state set S={s1, s2, s3}={A, B, C}, then the number of occurrences of each pair of states is :  11 12 130, 3, 1,S S S= = =  21 22 231, 0, 1,S S S= = =  31 32 332, 0, 0.S S S= = = Then, the transition probability P12 can be calculated as  below: 12 2 1 1( | )t tp P S s S s?= = =  1( | )t tP S B S A?= = =  12 11 12 13( )S S S S= + + 0.75=  In the same way, we can calculate out other transition probabilities and finally build the following state transition probability matrix P:  0 0.75 0.25 0.5 0 0.5 1 0 0  P ? ? ? ?= ? ? ? ?? ?         Assuming the previous state of user i at time t is is , then the next state of the user at time t+1 can be predicted as follows:  1 1 { | max( )}t j ij ijj nS s p p+ ? ?= =                       (2)  js is the predicted next state to which it can maximize the transition probability from the state is .

For example, if the user?s current state is A, then we can get that the user?s next state will be B, because 12p  can achieve the maximum transition probability. If the user?s current state is B, for its transition probabilities to A and C are equal, we randomly choose one state between A and C as the next state.



IV. PREDICTION MODEL BASED ON MARKOV CHAIN  A. Establishing users? preference model The more times the user browses a scenic spot, the higher  is the user?s preference on it. In this paper, we proposed to build a user preference matrix M to reflect the users? preference degree on a set of scenic spots, the row of M represents the users, and the column stands for the scenic spots, the element of M represents the preference degrees. A row vector reflects one users? preferences on all the scenic spot. The preference matrix M can be described as follows:  11 12 1  21 22 2 ,  1 2  n  n m n  m m mn  h h h h h h  M  h h h  ? ? ? ? ? ?= ? ? ? ? ? ?  ? ?  ? ? ? ? ?  (3)  ij ij ik  k n h hits hits  ? ?  = ? In which m is the number of users and n is the number of  scenic spots. ijh stands for the preference degree of user i to scenic spot j, ijhits represents the frequency of user i brows scenic spot j.

For example, suppose that there are four users, their browsing sequences are ?ACABA?, ?ABCABC?, ?ABCA?, and ?ABA? respectively. The state set S={s1, s2, s3}={A, B, C}, by using the method above, we can figure out that:  11 12 133, 1, 1.hits hits hits= = = Then the first user?s preference degrees to the three  scenic spots are respectively as follows: 11 3 (3 1 1) 0.6,h = + + =  12 1 (3 1 1) 0.2,h = + + =  13 1 (3 1 1) 0.2.h = + + = Similarly, we can compute other users? preference  degrees, and the preference matrix M is: 0.6 0.2 0.2 1 3 1 3 1 3 0.5 0.25 0.25 2 3 1 3 0  M  ? ? ? ? ? ?= ? ? ? ? ? ?    B. Clustering  users For the reason of different users may have different travel  preference, the users with similar travel preferences tend to have similar browsing behaviors. The similarity between two users can be measured by calculating the cosine value between its corresponding row vectors of M:  1 1 2 2cos( , ) i j i j in jni j i j  x x x x x x X X  X X ? + ? + + ?  = ?  ? (4)  2 2  1 1 ,  n n  i ik j jk k k  X x X x = =  = =? ?  Among them, iX or jX  respectively stands for the ith or jth row vector of M. The smaller the cosine value, the higher the similarity of users? preferences. In this paper, k-means clustering algorithm[14] is used for grouping the users.

C. Establishing prediction model Based on the theory of Markov chain, Markov prediction  method analyzes the rule of time series, and determines the future state according to the initial probabilities of all the states and the transition probabilities between two states. In this paper, due to the equal probabilities when users firstly browse one scenic spot in the website, the initial probabilities of all the states can be ignored.

After dividing the users into k groups by using k-means clustering algorithm to preference matrix M, k Markov chains can be trained by each user group. The Markov transition probability matrix of group c can be described as follow:  11 12 1  21 22 2  1 2  ( )  c c c n  c c c n c cij  cn cn cnn  p p p p p p  P p  p p p  ? ? ? ? ? ?= = ? ? ? ? ? ?  ? ?  ? ? ? ? ?  (5)  cij cij ciq  q n p S S  ? ?  = ?  cijp  means the transition probability from state is  to state js  in group c, and cijS  represents frequency of occurrences of state pair ( , )i js s  in group c.



V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS It is well known that Guilin in China is a very famous  travel destination in the world, so we choose a tourism website of Guilin to run experiments.

A. Data collection There are several ways to collect users? online browsing  behaviors. Pierrakos et al. proposed that the users? behaviors can be obtained from server-side or client-side[15]. Because there are some behaviors that cannot be obtained from server-side, such as mouse selecting and page browsing, so we collect the data from client-side.

Combining with JavaScript and AJAX, we collect the users? behaviors by using PHP programming language and MySQL database technology. When a user is browsing a webpage, JavaScript is ready to capture the user?s behavior in client-side, then the behavior data will be transmitted to the server-side by using AJAX technology, and finally the data will be stored into MySQL database in server-side. The process of collecting data is showed below:   Figure 1.  The process of collecting data  In this paper, we have collected four types of the real users? online browsing behaviors, like clicking, searching, selecting and page browsing.

Clicking: once a user clicks a link, the text of the link will be captured.

Searching: when a user types the keyword (search word) in an input box to get more information, then the keyword will be captured.

Selecting: when a user drags mouse to choose some words, then the chosen the words will be stored.

Page browsing: when a user is browsing a webpage, then the content in the center of the page will be collected after a certain time.

Assuming that the same IP represents the same user, and then we have got a total of 861 users? 44,656 raw behavior records. Part of the data is showed in table I.

TABLE I.  RAW USER BEHAVIOR DATA   B. Data processing  In this subsection, we firstly extract the state from each raw behavior record by matching the behavior content with a set of scenic spots in Guilin. When a behavior record contains more than one scenic spot, we let the first matched scenic spot as its current state. Part of the preliminary result of data processing is showed in table II.

TABLE II.  PROCESSED USER BEHAVIOR DATA(1)   Then we can do the next two main tasks of data  processing: Remove the invalid data: when the extracted state from  one raw behavior record is null, then the behavior record is deleted.

Remove the duplicate behaviors: for the same user, if his (or her) two or more consecutive behaviors are all about the same scenic spot, it means that the user is focusing on the same scenic spot, so those behavior records can be simply represented by one record, then use one scenic spot to denote the state in the user?s behavior sequence. For example, if the behavior sequence is ?ABBA??, after processing it becomes ?ABA??, in which A and B represent state.

The processed result of the data is showed in table III.

TABLE III.  PROCESSED USER BEHAVIOR DATA(2)   In the above tables, the ?currentstate? means the current  state of a user, while ?nextstate? stands for the next state of the user.

The following table IV shows the final browsing behavior sequences of some users. As the results of data processing, the final experimental data includes 175 users? behavior sequences. We use them to establish the preference matrix.

TABLE IV.  BEHAVIOR SEQUENCE OF USER   C. Experiment design  In order to test the availability of the proposed prediction model, we take three experimental strategies as below.

Markov prediction model based on non-grouped users: we don?t divide the users into groups, just use all the users? behavior data to train one Markov prediction model.

Markov prediction model based on randomly grouped users: firstly, we randomly divide the users into k groups, and each group is almost in the same scale. Secondly, k Markov prediction models are trained on the corresponding group.

Markov prediction model based on clustered users: firstly, establish a preference matrix for the users. Secondly, use k-means clustering algorithm to group the users into k groups according to the similarity of user?s preferences on all scenic spots, each user in the same group tends to have similar travel preference. In the process of this algorithm, we randomly initialize the cluster centers, and according to the results of many experiments, we set an appropriate k as 5.

Thirdly, k Markov prediction models are respectively trained on each group.

In order to ensure the availability of the test results, 5- fold cross-validation[14] strategy is used for estimating the accuracy of the trained model. And further, all the users? behavior sequences are randomly scattered before cross- validation.

The final estimated accuracy can be calculated as: 1 2 3 4 5( ) / 5acurracy a a a a a= + + + +          (6)  ia stands for the accuracy of the ith cross-validation, and it can be calculate as:  i i ia correct total=                         (7) In (7), icorrect  represents the number of the correctly  predicted states in the ith cross-validation, while itotal stands for the total number of the states to be tested in the ith cross-validation.

For instance, assuming the browsing sequence is ?ABCD?, we want to predict the next state of the state A, B, and C respectively. The state D has no next state, so there is no need to predict its next state. If the predicted result is ?BCA?, while the real next states are B, C, and D, we can know that the accuracy is about 66.7%.

D. Experimental results Each strategy is repeated 100 times for getting the  average value as the final result. The following table V illustrated the results.

TABLE V.  ACURRACY(1)  Method Non-grouped users Randomly grouped  users Clustered users  Accuracy 18.57%?0.26% 17.25%?0.64% 38.66%?0.60%  It can be seen from table V that the third strategy has got the highest accuracy. Considering that 68 scenic spots are used as the state set, the accuracy of 38.66% is indeed a good result. With the strategy of randomly grouped users, the result is a little worse than that of the first strategy. Both of them are largely worse than the third strategy.

The reason why the third strategy leads to the most accurate result lies in that the users in the same group tends to have similar travel preference, so the users in the same group will take the similar behaviors. And further, it can be concluded that the preference matrix M really catches the travel preference of the users.

E. Verification of the proposed method?s applicability In order to prove the applicability of the proposed  method, we also run the proposed method on webpage prefetching data which can be downloaded from http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/database/msweb.

After processing, the data set includes 294 pages, 6169 users? page browsing behavior sequences. We apply the above three methods to the dataset and use the 5-fold cross- validation to estimate the accuracy. And after 100 times of experiments, the results are showed in the following table.

TABLE VI.  ACURRACY(2)  Method Non-grouped users Randomly  grouped users Clustered  users  Accuracy 25.85% ?0.25?10-4% 25.10%  ?0.96?10-2% 35.00%  ?0.81?10-4%  From table VI, we can see that the results are very similar to the results showed in table V.  This verifies again that the preference matrix M really catches the users? preference and that the proposed prediction model can be used for predicting the next scenic spot the user will browse.

F. Contrastive experiments with other methods In order to make a further validation of the efficiency of  the proposed method, we take other two methods to do contrastive experiments by using the same database collected and processed in this paper.

Random prediction: this is the baseline method to provide a contrast.  We use all of the users? behavior data for testing, and randomly generate a scenic spot as a next state.

Sequential Association rules[16]: instead of using the common association rules technology in [14], we use one kind of sequential association rules method named n-gram prediction model in [17], which considers the sequential feature of user?s browsing behaviors and uses the latest- substrings rules and most-confidence selection, to predict the user?s next browsing scenic spot. In this paper, we set n as 1,?  as 5, and ?  as 20%.

As the experiments done before, we also use 5-fold cross-validation strategy and run each experiment 100 times to estimate the accuracies of those methods.

The results are showed in table VII.

TABLE VII.  ACURRACY(3)  Method Random Prediction Sequential  Association rules Markov Prediction  model  Accuracy 5.56% ?0.39?10-4% 13.83%  ?0.10?10-2% 38.66% ?0.60%  We can see that comparing with the other two methods, the proposed prediction model has got the highest accuracy.



VI. CONCLUSION This paper collected the users? browsing behaviors data  from one real tourism website of Guilin in China and proposed a prediction model based on Markov chain to predict the next scenic spot a user will browse. The experimental results showed that the accuracy of the proposed method is much higher than that of the methods based on randomly grouping or non-grouping. The experiments that ran on webpage prefetching data also proved the applicability of the proposed method. Two contrastive methods, random prediction and sequential association rules, have been used to make a further validation of the better efficiency of the proposed method.

We intend to improve the proposed method from 3 aspects in the near future. Firstly, get more types of user?s browsing behaviors and combine with users? explicit feedback behaviors to get more accurate user preference.

Secondly, collect more data to build more accurate prediction model. Thirdly, try to take a consideration of k- order Markov model to improve the accuracy of the proposed method.

