The Investigation of Laws Underlying Association Rules of Treating Coronary Heart Disease Which by Famous old TCM doctor Wang Xing-kuan

Abstract?Objective: Analysis and Data Mining the treatment laws of Coronary Heart Disease by famous old TCM doctor Wang Xing-kuan. Explore the methods of famous old TCM doctor's experience. Method: To collect 143 effective cases and 267 diagnoses, and establish Coronary Heart Disease clinic database, the study investigated the inherent laws of Treating Coronary Heart Disease by Prof. Wang. Result?? In the 143 cases, chest tightness, shortness of breath, heart palpitations are common symptoms; liver-heart dysfunctions, heart meridian stasis, phlegm-blood stasis are common pathogenesis, liver, heart, blood stasis are common syndrome elements, and liver-heart conjunction treatment, removing phlegm and blood stasis, liver-discharging, and enhancing qi is the most common treatment method. Conclusion: The research analyzed the association mode between pathogenesis and treatment method.

It reveals the academic thinking of Wang?s liver-heart conjunction treatment, and it also provides a good clinical guidance.

Keywords-Coronary Heart Disease; Association Rules; Pathogenesis;Syndrome Elements; Treatment Method

I. INTRODUCTION Wang Xing-kuan, Senior Instructor of the old Chinese  medicine experts in the academic experience of inheriting of the second, third, fourth and fifth session, Expert of the national old Chinese tradition studio. As a famous TCM doctor of Hunan province, he is also the first tenured professor, medical academic leaders, chief physician, and PhD supervisor of the First Affiliated Hospital of Hunan University of Chinese Medicine.

By the guidance of advanced theory of ?Collection of  Experiences of Famous Physicians in the Ming Dynasty? and ?Chambers and the Secret Record?, based on the 50 years of clinical experience, Prof. Wang advocated liver-heart conjunction treatment in differential treatment of coronary heart disease.

So far, some academic papers and writing appeared, in  order to introduce his writing features, the case analyses and the academic experiences. But the papers were lack of system analysis and research. Therefore, this study discussed the clinical syndrome differentiation rules of coronary heart disease, by using the data mining technology and statistical analysis on the cases of treating coronary heart disease in recent one year.



II. OBJECT AND METHOD  A. Research Object Cases Source: took the photes of medical records from  the coronary heart disease patients who were treated by Prof.

Wang in the First Affiliated Hospital of Hunan University of Chinese Medicine during August 1, 2012 to July 31, 2013.

This research collected 143 effective cases and 267 diagnoses. Coronary heart disease complicated with other disease as following: hypertension(100 cases), cervical spondylosis(44 cases), chronic gastritis(25 cases), arrhythmia(23 cases), chronic cardiac insufficiency(17 cases), chronic bronchitis(16 cases), lacunar infarction(15 cases), diabetes mellitus(10 cases), etc.

B. Diagnostic Criteria The diagnostic criteria of coronary heart disease refers  ?Clinical diagnosis and treatment guidelines, Cardiovascular?[1] .

C. Inclusion Criteria In accordance with the above coronary heart disease diagnostic criteria.

Patients who using traditional Chinese medicine decoction.

D. Exclusion Criteria Accordance to the ICD-10 diagnostic criteria, coronary heart disease is the secondary diagnosis.

High blood pressure is out of control(Resting blood pressure within 1 week 160/100mmHg).

Accompanied by severe arrhythmia, combined with heart failure. (NYHA class?, IV).

E. The Database Establishment and Statistical Methods Case Arrangement: Arrange the case data to the form by  word. Form include in the basic information (name, gender, age), syndrome, pathogenesis, syndrome elements, treatment, etc.

Refer to the Standard Terminology of Traditional  Chinese Medicine, and Differentiation Theory of Syndrome Elements, and combined with coronary heart disease theory of Prof. Wang[2,3,4], it was extremely necessary to normalized the case terms. There are 145 species of      syndrome, 54 pathogenesis, 36 syndrome elements, 73 treatment methods were normalized.

Database Establishment: After arranging the cases, the  database was established by ordering the family name of patients. Follow-up Records were arranged in the case data, so it means each patient had its unique case data.

Classify the information of syndrome, pathogenesis,  syndrome elements, treatment, etc, and then coding with the 145 species of syndrome, 54 pathogenesis, 36 syndrome elements, 73 treatment methods. Using the data mining software Weka 3.6, We can get frequency statistics on syndrome, pathogenesis, syndrome elements, treatment, and we also can get association rules analysis between pathogenesis and treatment by Apriori algorithm. Set minimum support to 3%, Set minimum confidence to 50%.

Note: The database establishment and statistical process  above were done by two person with its own computer respectively. And then, the result should be approved by the third person.



III. RESULT  A. Common Pathogenesis and Treatment The top 10 pathogenesis and treatment are shown as  Figure 1. As we can see, Prof. Wang thought the main pathogenesis of coronary heart disease is liver disorders.

In the aspect of liver disorders(the frequency is 157,  15.57%), it?s include liver-qi invasion, liver-Yang hyperactivity, liver-kidney deficiency. In the aspect of heart disorders(the frequency is 416, 40.96%), it?s include heart meridian stasis, phlegm-blood stasis, heart Qi-Ying deficiency, emotionally disturbed, heart Qi-Yin deficiency, etc. In the principles of liver-heart conjunction treatment, the liver treatments(the frequency is 99, 11.7%) are liver- discharging and tranquilizing liver-yang, and the heart treatments(the frequency is 329, 38.89%) are removing phlegm and blood stasis, Qi-Ying supplement, emotionally composure, nourishing heart, dredge heart meridian, etc.

B. Common Syndrome and Syndrome Elements The Top 10 of syndrome and syndrome elements are  shown as Figure 2. So we conclude that Prof. Wang believes that, the main syndrome elements are liver and heart(the frequency is 467, 22.79%). and the main syndrome are thin tongue with yellow spot, shortness of breath, chest pain(include chest pain and chest tightness, the frequency is 225, 8.39%), heart palpitations, thin pulse string(include thin pulse string and pulse thin string, the frequency is 214, 7.98%).

Besides, frequency statistics of syndrome elements in the  viscera are shown as Figure 3. It is evident that the frequency of liver and heart is much more than others.

C. Association Analysis between Pathogenesis and Treatment Combining the basic theory of TCM, association analysis  is researched between the common pathogenesis and treatment, the result is shown as Figure 5. As we can see, the confidence of the association between pathogenesis and  treatment is more than 0.50, and the confidence is 0.71 between liver-heart disorders and liver-heart conjunction treatment. This model is proved to be highly reliable.



IV. CONCLUSION This study analyzed 143 effective cases and 267  diagnoses in the treatment of coronary heart disease by Prof.

Wang in recent one year. His practical conclusion follows: In the treatment of Prof. Wang, the main syndrome  include chest pain, heart palpitations, shortness of breath, light red tongue, thin tongue with yellow spot, thin pulse string, etc. The major syndrome elements are liver and heart, and then the minor syndrome elements are blood stasis, heart meridian, Qi deficiency, mental, etc. The liver-heart disorders is the main pathogenesis.In the aspect of liver disorders, it includes liver-qi invasion, liver-Yang hyperactivity. In the aspect of heart disorders, it includes heart meridian stasis, phlegm-blood stasis, heart Qi-Ying deficiency, emotionally disturbed, heart Qi-Yin deficiency, etc. In the principles of liver-heart conjunction treatment, the liver treatments are liver-discharging and tranquilizing liver- yang, and the heart treatments are removing phlegm and blood stasis, Qi-Ying supplement, emotionally composure, nourishing heart, dredge heart meridian, etc.

According to the association analysis, the confidence of  the association between pathogenesis and treatment is more than 0.50, and the confidence is 0.71 between liver-heart disorders and liver-heart conjunction treatment. This model is proved to be highly reliable. It shows the academic thinking of prominent TCM doctors on the liver-heart conjunction treatment. And it also provides an important guidance of the treatment of coronary heart disease.



V. DISCUSSION Prof. Wang suggested treating heartache from liver and  liver-heart conjunction treatment. There were three main theoretical basis as following: Firstly, the important revelation from the typical theories as ?Huangdi Neijing? and ?Treatise on Febrile and Miscellaneous Diseases?.

Secondly, the guidance of the ancients theories of liver treatment as ?Collection of experiences of famous physicians in the Ming Dynasty? and ?Chambers and the secret record?.

Thirdly, with the development of psychosomatic medicine, the Psychological factors have an important role on the genesis, development and treatment of the coronary heart disease.

Liver-heart conjunction treatment was proposed with the  experiences of long-term clinical practice. The XINTONGLING No. , No. ?, and No. ? had been developed by its own research on the coronary heart disease.

It also indicated the process of academic thinking on liver- heart conjunction treatment.

The study analyzed cases and diagnoses in the treatment  of coronary heart disease in recent one year by the data mining technology. The project found that the conclusion is basically the same as the law of the previous summarize treatment. The confidence is up to 0.71 between liver-heart disorders and liver-heart conjunction treatment, and the    model is proved to be highly reliable. And it also provides an extremely important guidance of the treatment of coronary heart disease.

Figure 1. Frequency Statistics of Pathogenesis and Treatment.

Figure 2. Frequency Statistics of Syndrome and Syndrome Elements.

Figure 3. Frequency Statistics of Syndrome Elements in the Viscera.

Figure 4. Association Results of Pathogenesis and Treatment  Figure 5. Statistical View of Pathogenesis and Treatment.

