Server Authentication for Blocking Unapproved  WOW Access

Abstract? An interesting function named Wake on WLAN (WOW) has recently captured researchers attention as one of the remote computer administration functions that may turn on the remote computerized system through the network connection at the time point of receiving a specially coded packet. The phenomenon comes from the physiognomies of the coded packet such that each and every computerized system including smart-phones in the same network area receives the code where the transaction code will be broadcasted. Just in case predetermined a piece of coded packets from a server is acquired, not only authorized users but also unapproved user within the area network can wake the computerized system up. Therefore, there are pros and cons for the WOW functionalities: The one is that once the computerized system is awake, it is vulnerable for the unapproved WOW attacks or hackings so that the possibility of information leakage can be increased. The other is a good thing such that only the activated servers among the set of servers like server-farm can be woke up, so that by reducing the electricity power Green energy possibility can be achieved. In this research, a novel technique to block Unapproved WOW attacks resulting from involuntary switch-on of a computerized system has been exploited, so that the good points can be achieved by getting controllability for the weak points [13, 14].

Keywords? Wake on WLan, Coded packet, Unapproved WOW Attack, Security, Green IT.



I. INTRODUCTION WOW have established recently requisite for rich internet  infrastructure services in companies, public offices, colleges, streets, and modernized cities. These services characteristically organize thousands of AP centric networks inside as well as  their constructions and environment. These networks can afford WiFi Internet, telemedicine, Sensor Network, VoIP, and many communication services to the districts in a cost effective and power optimized mode.

WOW, a function that remotely turns on a computer, refers to the method for switching on a PC?s power through operation of a LAN card. While analyzing the information of the signals sent from the network card connected to the mainboard, the WOW technology checks whether a specially coded signal (e.g., magic packet) contains 16 duplications of the machine?s MAC address, and then awakes the computer when the information matches [1, 2, 5]. This technology is utilized in various ways, and is applicable to diverse online computers (i.e., PC, server, server farm, smartphone).

Whereas expanding from IPv4 to IPv6 protocol, if IP address is assigned to every electronic device, the effect of developing the technology evidently would amplify. Therefore, the technology has a potential to be dispersed to diverse fields through alterations [7, 8, 9, 15].

If a protection policy is not prepared regarding WOW, a user without a specific intention, or a hacker with malicious purpose can turn on another computer through this method, thereby resulting in security problems. In this research, we suggest a protection method against this risk by controlling the PC?s status through analyzing the signals, and checking the confirmation status with a server which authenticates the signals [16, 17].

The rest of this paper is constructed as follows. In Section 2, we explain the operation method of WOW and magic packet.

Then, we elaborate on the risk of using WOW in Section 3, and the WOW protection method through signal authentication server in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper.



II. WOW AND MAGIC PACKET WOW is a combination of hardware and software  technology which wakes up a sleeping machine by sending specially coded network packets [2]. This function was devised for installing software and altering the settings of a machine managed by system administrators, and switching on the system using WOW function when everybody leaves office where all PCs are turned off after the working hour.

If there is no such technology, system administrators would have to directly go where the machines are located, and push each of the power buttons. Having been developed since October, 1996 through the cooperation between Intel and IBM Advance Manageability Alliance, the technology was publicized in April, 1997.

A. Setting for WOW During the signal reception process through the network  card, WOW is activated when the machine receives a specific signal referred as the magic packet. Therefore, even though the machine is turned off, the network card always has to stay powered. Previously, since the network card and motherboard have been separately produced, they were used only by linking them with a 3-pin connector.

Figure 1. Foxconn IEEE 802.11G Network Card  Figure 1 above is an example of these kinds of network cards, to which the power switch could be connected by attaching the 3-pin connector of WOW cable to the motherboard. However, currently network cards and motherboards are produced in an integrated form, most of which supports the WOW function.

As aforementioned, as long as the motherboard and network card support the WOW function, after altering the setting of related item to ?ENABLE? at the CMOS setting stage, and checking the magic signal function among the network card?s properties, WOW function can be utilized.

B. Operation Method of WOW As explained above, having completed all the settings, the  WOW operation can be easily initiated by sending signals pre- set for the machine within the network. The details of the signal would be discussed in the following sections.

Since the WOW process is operated in a simple method, accordingly, translating it into a code is not an excessively difficult task.

Figure 2 depicts the program coded with Visual Studio 2008 based on C#. To analyze the code, the signal is broadcasted in order to send it to the client, and then transmitted to each computer?s UDP port 40000. Next, a signal is generated through a function, which is sent to client within the network. The UDP port 4000 mentioned above is one of the RPC variable ports.

The RPC refers to the protocol used for calling process functions on separate processes of an identical computer, or on a different computer. In general, port numbers from 40000 to 40010 are used, through which the signal reaches the computer crossing the firewall?s border [6]. A signal sent in this way is called the ?magic packet?.

Figure 2. WOW Program Translated into C#  Consequently, since WOW can be readily operated by sending signals, although it is easily assumed that the technology can be applied only within the range of LAN because signals cannot cross the boundary of the router, when partially altered, it can also operate within the wireless, or WAN area.

This is since recently produced routers and switches support WOW function, thereby generating specially coded signals for the machine when WOW setting is applied [3, 4].

Taking advantage of this property, WOW function is adopted to recently launched smartphones.

C. Magic Packet Magic packet is sent through the data link section, or OSI-  2LAYER. Since this part is set to be broadcasted, every machine in the network receives the signal. Magic packet consists of a UDP header, code FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF, and 16 duplications of the machine?s MAC address.

Figure 3. Structure of Secure-On  Magic Packet  Figure 3 below depicts the analysis of a magic packet that is generated for waking up the machine with a MAC address of 00-E0-4C-31-03-AC. To illustrate the content, the picture depicts the status of sending the signal composed of code FF- FF-FF-FF-FF-FF, and 16 duplications of code 00-E0-4C-31- 03-AC from a computer with an IP address of 192.168.1.4 to a computer with a destination IP address(i.e., broadcast address) of 192.168.1.255 at 3:01:11 on Jan. 28, 2012. The reason why 00-00-00-00-00-00 is included in the end is because the  machine receives only the signals containing the password 00- 00-00-00-00-00 due to its Secure-On function. Having sent the aforementioned signal, among every device in the network, only the machine with a MAC address of 00-E0-4C-31-03-AC is awoken. Other machines do not start any activity.



III. RISKS IN WOW As it can be inferred from the previous chapters, WOW can  be activated as long as the MAC address of a computer within the same network is obtained, which enables a malicious attacker to attack.

The MAC address of another person?s PC can be readily obtained. Figure 4 below depicts the procedure of finding the MAC address.

From the figure 4 below, it can be observed that using the program, nbtscan, the computer with an IP of 165.246.104.113 discovered the MAC address, D7-E0-22-31-38-03 [10]. Having obtained the MAC address, when the magic packet is sent to the corresponding address, the designated device can be awoken.

Figure 4.  MAC Address Obtained by Using Nbtscan  The most correct way is to allow the authorized user of WOW in the company to utilize the function only at the IP confirmed by managers and the user him/herself. In addition, in case of individuals, WOW ought to be operated only at IP authorized by the user.

If an IP address is assigned to every electronic device as the recently prevalent IPv6 protocol is developed, WOW would be a technology which facilitates remote switch-on of every device from outside. Consequently, the IPv6 technology could exacerbate the problem. Due to the relatively simple operation method of WOW, a partial error during the programming process or access to the machine by a malicious user can easily occur.

This phenomenon might involuntarily wake up most of the home appliances to which an IP address can be applied. This situation not only should not result from applying the WOW technology, but also has to be prevented.

Figure 5. Secure On Signal     The technology referred as the Secure-On is one of the recently developed protection technologies that can be adopted for such purpose. As illustrated in the signal of Figure 5 which is an example of this technology, having added a 6-byte password at the end of a typical signal, the technology operates by only permitting reception of signals in which the password is included.

Yet, this method is inconvenient from an administrative perspective in that different pass-words are set for each of the machines. Moreover, machines equipped with this kind of function are expensive, and provided for only a limited number of NIC and routers [2, 11, 12]. A corporation called AMT circumvents the risk stemming from the use of WOW by adopting the TLS encryption method. This method uses a password of 128 bits and RSA key module of 2048 bits in length. However, this system is supported in only AMT-based computers [2].



IV. WOW PROTECTION METHOD THROUGH SIGNAL AUTHENTICATION SERVER  In order to solve this problem, in this research, we adopt a signal authentication server. Due to the characteristics of signals used for WOW (e.g., magic packet), all electronic devices in the network receive the signal; therefore, if a signal authentication server exists in the network, the server would analyze the received signals. We aim to check whether the signal is intended by confirming the source IP of authorized users after analyzing the header file. The figure 6 above depicts the conceptual diagram of signal authentication server.

Figure 6. Conceptual Diagram of Signal Authentication Server  A. Authors and Affiliations The operating principles are as follows  1) Managing the PC, the signal authentication server acknowledges the power is turned off.

2) When the PC is waked up, terminate the monitoring, whereas if the PC is turned on by the signal, analyze it.

3) Check whether the source IP is an authorized one; then, send the confirmation packet if it is, and send the termination code if it is not.

4) When the a response is transmitted after the confirmation packet is sent, do not initiate any action, but if no response or a response that signifies unauthorized access, turn off the machine by sending the termination code.

5)  Restart monitoring when the corresponding PC is switched off.

The reason why the monitoring is terminated when the machine is turned on is in order to prevent the overload on signal authentication server that could result from analyzing all signals since the PC receives numerous signals while it is awake. Furthermore, sending the confirmation packet is for checking whether the header file of corresponding signal has been altered or not.

Figure 7. Operating Process of Server Authentication Server  Figure 8. Operating Process in case the Header File is altered  B. Responding to Altered Header File If a malicious user is aware of these operating principles,  he/she can send a false signal by altering the IP of header file to an authorized IP. In order to prevent such attack, as mentioned     above, a confirmation packet is sent again. When a response which indicates that the signal is transmitted from a manager or authorized IP, no action is taken, but if not, termination code is sent. Through this process, the alteration status of the signal can be determined. Figure 8 below illustrates the operating process. Through this method, the risk derived from the header file?s alteration can be prevented.



V. CONCLUSION WOW technology has a huge potential to be further  improvement for accessing remote computerized systems. It is also convenient for managers and is also dangerous for being attacked by unapproved WOW attacks. In addition, as the technology is recently widely known, it is being applied to mobile devices such as smart-phones and mobile PADs.

However, due to its shortcomings in terms of security, the technology is not being easily adopted despite of its potentials.

In this research, we proposed a system which distinguishes authorized IP from unauthorized IP by adopting the signal authentication server, and switches off the machine by sending termination code when the IP is unauthorized or unapproved.

Moreover, by processing the analysis only when the computer is turned on, we constructed a system that prevents overload on the authentication server, and circumvents the risk if the header file is altered. Once each and every computerized system in the same network area receives the code, the predetermined a piece of coded packets from a server is acquired, not only authorized users but also unapproved user within the area network can turn the computerized system on.

In this research, a novel technique to block Unapproved WOW attacks resulting from involuntary switch-on of a computerized system has been exploited, so that the good points can be achieved by getting controllability for the weak points. The vulnerability for the unapproved WOW attacks so that the possibility of information leakage can be minimized.

Additionally, the good things such as Green energy can be maximized so that only the activated servers among the set of server-farm can be woke up and shut down.

