Estimating the Number of Species in Metagenomes  by Clustering Next-Generation Read Sequences

Abstract? Fast and cheap next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies with the ability to sequence uncultured microbes present us unprecedented opportunities to distill meaningful information from millions of short read sequences of metagenomes. Contrary to the case of a single species genome, NGS read sequences from metagenomes are extremely complex and heterogeneous because metagenomes are a collection of genetic materials from very large number of microbes with varying abundance levels. In this paper we present a method to estimate the number of species in metagenomes sequences through the efficient clustering of metagenomic NGS read sequences. We believe that our method will contribute to the better understanding of a microbial community in metagenomes.

Keywords?Metagenome, clustering, Expectation-Maximization, sampling.



I.  INTRODUCTION Metagenomics is the study of metagenomes, which are  genomic contents recovered from samples of organisms in a common habitat [1]. Recent advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS) have enabled the generation of NGS read sequences from metagenomes. However, distilling meaningful information from metagenomic data is very difficult and time- consuming because it comes from complex and heterogeneous microbial communities [2]. For example, we attempted to make clusters from simulated NGS read sequences, which consist of 11 million reads from Acetobacter, Neisseria, Staphylococcus, and it took about 150 hours.  Although there exist a number of tools such as Ray Meta [3], MetaVelvet [4], and MetaPhlAn [5], all of them have limitations, such as the requirement of reference genomes or long reads. In addition, the fact that most of current approaches are based on overlaps among NGS read sequences makes them unsuitable for metagenomic data because NGS read sequences from different species may have an overlap [4]. Therefore, the grouping of NGS read sequences from the same species is critical for accurate down-stream analyses, such as metagenome assembly, and the estimation of the number of groups (species) in metagenomes is an integral part to achieve the purpose. In this paper, we introduce a method for efficient clustering of metagenome NGS read sequences. Our method is based on (i) prior-clustering of NGS read sequences to create longer contigs, and (ii) Expectation- Maximization (EM) [6] -based estimation of the assignment of the read clusters to their origin of species by taking advantage  of genome signatures. We believe that our method will contribute to the better understanding of a microbial community in metagenomes.



II. THE PROPOSED METHOD  A. NGS read grouping algorithm Our ultimate goal is to make groups of NGS read sequence  clusters where each group may represent each species in the microbial community in metagenomes. It is known that genome signatures, such as relative abundance of short order oligonucleotides, GC richness, CpG dinucleotides, and AT concentration, are fairly constant in the genomes of different prokaryotes [7]. We developed an EM-based NGS read sequence clustering method by taking advantage of the aforementioned genome signatures, which is summarized in Table 1.

At phase I, the framework generates clusters of read sequences by using the popular clustering tool SEED [8], in order to (i) collect similar read sequences, and (ii) create longer sequence contigs by concatenating read sequences in the same cluster. At the estimation step in phase I, the number of possible species is estimated (refer to subsection II-B). At phase II, the framework produces groups of clusters based on Eq. (2).

Here, ????means groups of clusters at time i and ??????  is a kth cluster group comprised of j clusters. Different ??????  could share the same read cluster. By alternating the composition of clusters in each ?????? , the EM step continues until convergence.

Table 1. Clustering framework Input: ?? = {??1, ? , ????} (a set of reads) Output: N groups of read clusters (N: estimated number of species in ??) Phase I: Do Clustering Step: execute SEED [8].

E Step: estimation of the number of species (subsection II-B).

Phase II: Do E Step: compute Q(?; ?i) based on Eq. (2).

M step: ?i+1 ?argmax?Q(?; ?i) until Q(?i+1; ?i)- Q(?i; ?i-1)?T End  ?={Distributions of genome signatures} (1) Q(?; ?i)=??(????+1|????)=? ??(????+1|?, ????)??(??|????)??? (2)  ???? = {??1?? , ? , ?????? }, ?????? = {??1, ? , ????} (3)     B. Estimation of the number of species In the above framework, the estimation of genome  signatures is very critical. However, direct estimation from raw NGS read sequences is very difficult because of their short length as well as computational burden due to their very large number. As an attempt to address the above difficulties, we developed a method to estimate the possible number of species in metagenomes. The estimation method is based on a simple observation. For example, suppose a read sequence ra is observed for three times in metagenome datasets, then we can think of three different assignments of ra to species: (i) all of them assigned to the same species, (ii) two of them assigned to the same species, and the other one assigned to a different species, and (iii) each of them assigned to three different species. Similarly, for two read sequences ra and rb, we can assume that there are m possible assignments of ra and n possible assignments of rb. Then the possible number of read sequence assignments both for ra and rb is computed as:  m + n + (??1) ? m (4) The above idea is implemented by an efficient sampling  approach (Table 2).

For the assignment of the tth read sequence, we generate all possible read sequence assignments ???? = (??1??, ? , ?????? ) based on a chosen original read ?????????? . Next ????  is used to estimate the next original  ??????????+1  by considering prior knowledge ??(??????????+1 |????) and a user defined distribution q. The probabilistic choice based on ?? makes it possible to include inferior read sequences as well.

Figure 1 shows the cumulative and relative ratio of the number of different read sequence assignments that generate the specific number of species to the number of all possible read sequence assignments, which were generated by using a simple example dataset of four read sequences with their occurrences 6, 3, 4, and 3 respectively in metagenomes. The estimated possible number of species was ranged from 31 to 431. And for example, there were total 2,232 different assignments of read sequences producing potential 31 species.

Among the 10 estimated numbers of species, the ratios of 71, 107, 161, and 242 were dramatically higher than others, indicating the potential usability of our method to choose the most efficient cutoff value of the number of species.

Figure 1. Ratio of the number of different read sequence assignments that generate the specific number of species to the number of all possible read sequence assignments. The x-axis denotes the number of species in the ascending order of the ratio. The y-axis denotes relative and cumulative ratios.



III. DISCUSSION In this paper we developed a method for estimating the  possible number of species from the observed NGS read sequences of metagenomes by taking advantage of clustering and genome signatures. Our method is critical for an accurate and efficient down-stream analyses, such as metagenome assembly, and further contributes to the better understanding of microbial community in metagenomes.

