Fuzzy D-S Theory Based Fuzzy Ontology Context Modeling And Similarity Based Reasoning

Abstract?The data that the Internet of Things(IOT) produced is fuzzy and enormous, and the Complex Events Processing(CEP) which is the key part of the Internet of Things need to meet the big data?s quantity and complexity. In CEP, how to describe the context and infer from the context is the most important, and in this paper, a fuzzy D-S theory and fuzzy ontology based context model is proposed, according to the model, we design a similarity based context reasoning method. The experimental results show that this method can support fuzzy context in CEP and have better performance and accuracy than other methods.

Keywords-IOT; CEP; context modeling; context reasoning; D-S Theory

I. INTRODUCTION As the RFID and sensor network technical developed  quickly, the apply range of the Internet of Things become more and more extensive. Among this, how to process the information, especially different kinds of data is the key problem. The complex events processing of Internet Of Things[1] demand complete devices could recognize the current context information and its transformation of users and make the response to this. Among this procedure, the collecting and processing of the context information play the important role. Since the description of the context information model exists heterogeneity, however, the machine may has a different understanding for the same context, so it is very hard to achieve the knowledge's sharing and reusing, and makes the knowledge based reasoning much complicated, on the other hand, as the limitation of hardware device and network transmission problem, the information that collected may be incomplete and high-level context information which deduced from the uncertain perception data also exists uncertainty. Hence, how to describe the context information formalized and able to use the uncertainty to execute knowledge reasoning, judgment and decision making has become particularly important.

A well accepted definition of context is proposed by Dey [2], ?a Context is any information that can be used to characterize the situation of an entity. An entity is a person,  place, or object that is considered relevant to the interaction between a user and an application, including the user and application themselves.? And the ontology modeling has a higher formalization level and a good inference capability, its representation of the complex and dependency relationship between context data make it well accepted solution by many researchers. But its biggest weakness is that the representation and processing of the fuzzy and uncertainty context problem [3]. Therefore, in this article a fuzzy D-S theory based fuzzy ontology context modeling approach is proposed correspondingly, the fuzzy D-S theory is also presented to deal with the uncertainty fuzzy context reasoning problem.

In this paper we describe a fuzzy D-S Theory and fuzzy ontology based context modeling and an algorithm used for similarity based context reasoning. The structure of this paper is as follows: the context modeling and similarity based reasoning will be introduced in the next section, and in section III, we introduction some concepts about context modeling and discuss the fuzzy D-S theory and fuzzy ontology based context modeling. In section IV, we discuss the algorithm of the similarity based context reasoning. In section V, some simulation is presented. And we make a conclusion about this paper in section VI.



II. RELATED WORK The common used context modeling approach concludes:  1) Key-Value model, which is easy to manipulate but it is not convenient for complicated structure and does not permit a good reasoning on context. Many of the early researches used this approach, such as Schilit et.al. [4] used a Key-Value model to represent the location context. 2) Mark- up models are most of the time specific to a particular field and are limited to some aspects of context. The representative method of this model is CC/PP [5] , which is though too simple but supplied a basis for other models to extend. Comparing to the key-value model, markup model already has a better structure and can describe complex data structures. 3) Graphical models are simple but less formal than the other models. 4) Object oriented models require low level execution agreements between applications to ensure interoperability. For example, Bouzy [6] used the OO   DOI 10.1109/CIS.2013.154     model to deal with the computer go related context information, the GUIDE project [7] used Active object model to encapsulate and process context. 5) Logic based model try to represent the context using fact, expression and rule.

In 1993 McCarthy et.al. [8] had already researched and published the earliest logic based context model Formalizing Context. 6) Ontology based model is good at representing the relationship between the computing concepts and many papers are all based this method.

As to the similarity based context reasoning, Chun et.al.

[9] presented a similarity based Distributed Context Reasoning with layer context model, this method enhance the trust of reasoning outcomes than the earlier approach.

The reference [10] proposed a similarity based reasoning method with the D-S theory applied, in the paper, the new context merge with the most similar context and have no influence with other branches.



III. CONTEXT MODELING Generally, An ontology is an explicit specification of a  conceptualization. It means that ontology is an explicit, shared and formal description of important concepts and their relationships. Ontology based context model has strong expression ability and can deduce the high level context information. Moreover, it is also easy for the knowledge sharing and reusing, and there are many mature ontology base that can be reused. With help of ontology user and system can communicate with each other. But the ontology based context model cannot handle the fuzzy context information and their uncertainty reasoning. For example, the context information could be ?very fast? and ?very slow?. So we propose to use the fuzzy ontology to address this issue. Several fuzzy ontology descriptions have been proposed [11], its basic definition is described as follows:  Definition 1 Fuzzy Ontology: a fuzzy ontology of domain D is a quintuple defined as O(D)= <I, C, T, N, X>,for details: I is the individual set which includes all the instances, C is the concepts set which includes all the concepts of the domain D,T is the fuzzy taxonomic relationship, N is fuzzy non-taxonomic relationship and X is axioms that expressed in a logical language.

Definition 2 Extended Fuzzy Ontology: an extended fuzzy ontology means extending the Entity E, fuzzy taxonomic relation T, fuzzy non-taxonomic relationship N as <V, M>, where V and M is the corresponding linguistic variable set and membership function. Fox example, Speed = <{Slow, Medium, Quick}, {S, M, Q}> and S, M, Q are depicted in Eq. (1).

xxF  xxxxM  xxS  /) 100(  /)  200(/) (  /)  100(          ? ??  ?  ? ?  ? ??  ? ?  ?1?  Unfortunately currently there are no corresponding fuzzy ontology standards from w3c yet. So we just build our fuzzy context ontology FOCM using the extension of OWL2 [12].

In this paper, as we can see from the figure 1,it is a fragment of the fuzzy ontology context model, the main entity are Person and Comp Entity, the real line arrow is means has a relationship, and the triangular arrow means is a relationship, for example ,the Driver is a subclass of Person, the Car is a subclass of Device, the Driver has a relationship with the Car, in other words, Driver could drive the Car, this relationship is a fuzzy relationship, because we don?t know where or how fast does the drivers the car. Also, the Car has a speed property, and at most time, we say the driver drives the car with a slow or medium or quick speed, it is a fuzzy concepts, so we can describe it use the extended fuzzy ontology like the Definition 2 depicts.

Figure 1. FOCM Fragment  Based the basic fuzzy ontology model, in this paper, we add three necessary external classes, the three classes and its relations are as the figure 2 shows.

Figure 2. Basic added classes and its relations  Like the figure 2 shows, we can know the three added classes: Conclusion, Evidence, BPA that represents the high     level context, low level context and the basic possibility assignment function respectively. And Conclusion and Evidence both has an attribute called type that distinguish the discrete and continuous type of context and another attribute called level that reflects the context level. There are both two kinds of Conclusion and Evidence, the discrete one (DiscConclusion, DiscEvidence) and the continuous one (ContConclusion, ContEvidence). For the former only the choosing values will be presented, while the latter one needs to define all the linguistic variable and their corresponding membership functions. For example, in the figure1,the Driver can be see as the Evidence in some situations, and it has a DiscEvidence like the Name and a ContEvidence like the Age, name is a choosing value and age sometimes it may be a fuzzy value. Each pair of Conclusion and Evidence relates one BPA instance, which contains the occurrence possibility of the candidate conclusion value deduced from a certain evidence. Based this model, then, we can carry on the reasoning. Otherwise, the BPA class has two object properties: consTo attribute represents its related evidences, while the has Consbpa identifies all the related conclusion and corresponding mass functions.



IV. CONTEXT REASONING  A. Rule based and ontology reasoning Rule based reasoning method which takes the existing  facts match the predefined rules to produce new knowledge.

For example, when the sensors collect that John is in driving and the speed is slow, the brake light is bright, then we can infer John is parking. Ontology reasoning is similar with the rule based reasoning, and use the rules which are defined by OWLlanguageitself,likeSymmetricProperty,TransitivePrope rty and so on, so as to obtain implicit knowledge from the explicit definitions and declarations.

B. D-S theory based reasoning D-S Theory[13] is proposed by Dempster in 1968,and  his student Shafter improve it in 1971,so it?s called D-S theory. The basic D-S theory is as follows:  Definition 3: assume that ? is set of possible conclusions to be drawn, which is called assumption space, discernment framework. We can regard a subset of the framework as a proposition, the belief degree of assigned to each proposition calls the basic possibility assignment (BPA, also calls function m),m(A) reflects the belief size of A.A BPA under a certain ? is a function :2??[0,1] such that the following two conditions hold:  ? ??  ??? A  Amandm 1)(0)( ?2?  Definition 4:under discernment framework ? the belief function based on BPA m can be defined as:  ? ?  ? AB  BmABel )()( ?3?  Definition 5:the plausibility function under discernment framework ? and BPA m is:  ?    ? ?AB  BmAPl )()( ?4?  In the D-S theory, for an assumption A under discernment framework ?, its belief function Bel(A) and plausibility function Pl(A) can be calculated according to the basic probability assignment BPA, then the belief interval[Bel(A),Pl(A)] will be used to identify certainty degree of this assumption.

Having all these basic concepts, different evidence?s BPA will be combined to deduce the occurrence probability of ?. Assume m1 and m2 are the BPA deduced from the two independent evidence source, In this paper, the extended Dempster combinational rules is used to calculate the new BPA. The formula is as follows:  ?  ?     ?     ?? ??  BA xiBAxi  CBA xiBAxi  BmAmX  BmAmX  Cmm  ,   )()())(max1(1  )()()(max  )(     (5)  In this paper, we proposed a similarity based context reasoning algorithm, the general process of this algorithm is presented in the follow figure:  Figure 3.Algorithm flow chart  (1):Ensure the evidence set and conclusion set in the domain, then, we should ensure the all evidence set?s subsets and its BPA value, the value of m is represents the perspective which people according to the propositions make. Once we acquire the BPA value ,and then we can combine the evidence that comes from the different evidence resources.

(2):In this paper, before we combine the evidences, we have to weigh and correct the BPA value, because in the classic theory combination rules, the evidences that combination involved must have the equal weigh, but in the complex events processing in the Internet Of Things ,the evidences which acquire from different evidence sources have a different weigh to the target?s importance and reliability, so we should weigh and correct the BPA value     before the evidences combined. The correct formula is as followed:  ??? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? iii iii  ii AAm AAmEBel  Am )(1 )()(  )( '' ?6?  For different context complication, the Bel?s obtaining is also different, but in general, it follows the following rules:  a):The evidence?s importance and reliability much higher, the corresponding corrected coefficient much bigger, it means the bigger weights are assigned to the important evidence.

b):The evidence?s conflict much higher, the corresponding corrected coefficient much smaller, in other words, it need to correct it much larger and pass the reliability of the conflict to the unknown field.

The literature[14] proposed the weighed combination rules to merge the evidences, solve the evidence theory?s shortages when evidences highly conflicts, but this method is not adaptive, so in this paper, we use the extended combination rules and only merge the most similar fuzzy subset and has no influence to other branches to achieve adaptive.

(3):After the former two steps, we then combine the evidences, first, we should use the formula (7) to find the most similar two subsets of the evidence set, C and A are the two fuzzy subset, and their similarity is:  ? ???? t iaic AC )()(11),( ~~  ??? ?7?  This formula is proved to be accurate, as soon as we acquires their BPA value, weigh and correct it, then merge the two subsets to generate the high level context and use the extended Dempster combinational rules to calculate the new BPA value.At last,return the conclusion.

pseudo-code: Em,En are two random fuzzy sets of EvidenceSet  ?i??int i=0; LOOP  i<?levelContext? EvidenceSet?i?<?selectEvidence??? LOOP  selectMostSimilarity(Em); Weigh(EvidenceSet); ConclusionSet(i)<?Merge?Em?En?? Return BPA value; EvidenceSet(i)<?EvidenceSet(i)-Em; If(!EvidenceSet(i)){  Break; } End if;  End Loop? i++?  End LOOP?  First, ensure the context level i, and then execute the selectEvidence() method, this method will select the evidences and ensure the evidence set of level i.Next, we find a random fuzzy subset of evidence set calls Em, use the selectMostSimilarity() method to find the another most similar fuzzy subset of the common evidence set, for example the answer is En, then, we weigh and correct the subset Em and En and merge the two sets to generate the new high level context, after return the new BPA value, we delete the subset Em of the EvidenceSet, and back to find another random fuzzy subset until there is not a subset in EvidenceSet.



V. EXAMPLE SCENARIO Let us consider this traffic scenario: when the driver  drives the car, the state around it includes: driver information, location information, speed property, the services around and device information and so on. We can deduce the driver?s destination and driving statement through these context information and driving lines formerly.

So, we should model the state of the driving, and then doing the uncertain reasoning to reach the conclusion.

A. Modeling We can establish the fuzzy ontology model according  to the section II, assume the discernment framework ?={{Home},{Working Place}, {Restaurant}, {Parking}}, and the related context property information also called evidence E={Speed, Time, Current Road, Passed Road},then we should ensure the state space of each context property information:Speed={Slow,General,Quick},Time={Morning, Afternoon,Night}, Current Road={Jiefang Road},Passed Road={Hongxing Road, Yuhua Road}, at last, according to the formerly driving lines to determine the relationship between the context property information and the reasoning results.

B. Reasoning The uncertain reasoning process is a course that merge  the evidence through the combination rules. In this experiment, we obtains the BPA values by the formerly driving lines.And calculate the Bel value with the formula (6),in order to make the reasoning method adaptive, the Bel value also should reference the formerly data, the details as followed:  (1):Establish the users?s driving statement table, the table mainly storage the car?s ID, destination(that is conclusion) and the times of the conclusion to acquire the conclusion?s time and other information. When reasoning, compare with the conclusion in the table and update the times and other information ,so as to calculate the Bel value next time.

(2):Calculate Bel value, Assume the destination in the table are D1,D2,...,Dn, and the corresponding times are t1,t2,...,tn, in the reasoning process, assume the used evidence     are E1,E2,...,Em, and each Bel value of the evidence are Bel1,Bel2,...,Belm, then , we consider Ei has the most weigh to the Di,so we find the maximum ti, assume it is the tmax ,and then we can calculate the Bel with the followed formula :  Belj = tj/tmax (8) When the context information changed, generates the  new context, calculate the similarity with other contexts use the formula (7),then, the new context merges the most similar context, generates the high level context.

For example, if the car?s speed is changed from quick to slow, this is a new context, we find the most similar context in this level is :?the current traffic situation is flowing?, hence, the two fuzzy set will deduce a conclusion set:{{the front of the road is red light(0.2)},{the driver will go to restaurant(0.5)},{the driver is making phone calls(0.3)}}.In order to acquire a much more accurate conclusion, we need to merges the new generated contexts with the next level context, and continue to find the most similar context in the next level, and we find the context is this:? in the front of this road has a traffic light and there is no restaurant around ?, so we can achieve the new conclusion set: {{the front of the road is red light(0.8)}, {the driver is making phone calls(0.2)}}, and now we can know the front of the road is red light would be the right answer.

In this paper, we use 10 groups of test cases to test the algorithm compares with the method reference[10] proposed, and for the 10 groups, the size is increased by 1000, the results is showed in figure 4(0.8 means among the 1000 test cases,800 of it is the right result). It shows that with the fuzzy sets increases, the accuracy is becoming early stabled and higher than method reference [10] proposed, it also can adapt itself and according to the historical data and collected data to erase the influences the evidences conflicts causes.

Figure 4. The comparison of the accuracy

VI. CONCLUSION In this article, a fuzzy ontology is proposed to model  the fuzzy context information and fuzzy D-S theory based reasoning method is also presented to resolve the problem of uncertainty reasoning of fuzzy context. Finally an example scenario is demonstrated to prove the usability of the proposed approach, this method also can adapt itself and  according to the historical data and collected data to erase the influences the evidences conflicts causes.

But there also some areas need to be improved, first, when the fuzzy ontology?s scale is bigger, the performance of the context reasoning also need to improve, and in the reasoning algorithm, the method that find the most similar subsets need to be improved to become much efficient.

