The Online Diagnosis System for Sanger sequencing  based genetic testing

Abstract?Sanger sequencing based genetic testing has been well established for many genetic diseases. In these testings, DNA sequencers produce vast amounts of data that need to be interpreted by the clinicians within a short peiod of time. To achieve this goal, a bioinformatics platform that can automates this process is yet to be developed. To fulfill this gap, we developed Online Diagnosis System (ODS), which is implemented as a web server and supports the commonly used ABI trace file format generated from Sanger sequencing. ODS seamlessly integrates useful functions covering base calling, Small Nucleotide Variant (SNV) identification, and comprehensive SNV annotation. It also allows the clinicians to manually inspect the quality of the identified SNVs when generating the final report.

ODS can therefore significantly reduce the data analysis time, allowing the completion of the genetic testing in a timely manner.

Keywords?Online Diagnosis System; genetic testing; Sanger sequencing; small nucleotide variation

I.  INTRODUCTION Molecular genetic testing, or gene testing, examines single  genes or short lengths of DNA to identify small nucleotide variations (SNVs) or mutations that lead to a genetic disorder.

The results of a genetic testing can confirm or rule out a suspected genetic condition. Currently, at least 2,000 genetic tests are in use, and more are being developed, detailed information of which can be found at http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/genetictesting.html.

As the most widely used genetic testing method, Sanger sequencing is a method of DNA sequencing by selectively incorporating of chain-terminating  dideoxynucleotides by DNA polymerase during in vitro DNA replication [1-3].. It requires the individual amplification and sequencing of each exon of a set of genes to identify the causative SNVs. The data analysis of Sanger sequencing based genetic testing typically involves several steps: (i) processing of the raw sequencing data for base calling and quality control; (ii) identifying SNVs from the processed sequencing data; and (iii) annotating the identified SNVs and evaluating their pathogenic effects on tested gene.

The steady increase of the demands for Sanger sequencing based genetic testing has raised the issue of inefficiencies in data analysis that associate with manual inspection of sequencing raw data (i.e., electropherograms), SNV identification, and extracting annotations for each identified SNV from different annotation sources. Reducing the time needed to interpret the results of each amplimer is critical to  create a practical genetic test. Seamless integration and automation of the Sanger sequencing data analysis, including raw data analysis, quality control, file handling, variant identification, and variant annotation, will largely improve the turn-around time for the genetic testing and ultimately reduce the costs of the tests. To this end, we implemented Online Diagnosis System (ODS), a web-based tool for Sanger sequencing based genetic testing, which can speed up the data analysis and interpretation process through an automatic bioinformatics web server. We also demonstrated the usage and performance of ODS using real clinical data. The results indicate that ODS can be used to streamline the analysis of clinical Sanger sequencing data with the ability to accurately interrogate electropherograms for base calling, identify SNVs, and provide comprehensive annotations for those identified SNVs, therefore, serves as a novel useful tool to aid the clinician to complete the genetic testing in a timely manner.



II. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION  A. Workflow of ODS ODS is an integrated, easy-to-use bioinformatics platform  for Sanger sequencing based genetic testing. It consists of the following major components (Fig. 1):   Fig.1. Workflow of ODS. (A) SNV detection module. (B) SNV annotation module. (C) SNV validation module.

(i) SNV detection module. In this module, ODS allows the user to provide the sequencing data file in ABI format       (Applied Biosystems Genetic Analysis Data File Format). In order to run ODS, at least one sequencing file is required to be uploaded. There is no up limit for the files to be uploaded. To detect SNVs, ODS first performs the base calling for all sequencing raw data files uploaded using Phred software [4, 5].

The nucleotides on the 3?-end of each sequence with poor qualities are automatically trimmed and the overall quality of each sequence is also evaluated. The resulted sequences are then aligned to the reference genome (NCBI 37/UCSC hg19) using BLAST [6, 7] and the alignment results are visualized using the UCSC Genome Browser [8] and side-by-side comparisons to the reference genome. Based on the alignment results, ODS employs in-house algorithms to screen both homozygous (including substitutions and microindels) and heterozygous SNVs (substitutions). Finally, SNVs in both categories are merged into the final list of identified SNVs (Fig. 1A).

(ii) SNV annotation module. In this module, SNVs in the final list are independently annotated using different sources and approaches. First, the location of each SNV will be examined, i.e., if it lies in the exon regions of Ensembl [9] / RefSeq [10] genes or if it falls into any important regulatory CpG islands [11]; Second, it will be annotated with the public available SNP or mutation databases such as dbSNP database [12] and Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) [13]; Lastly, the potential pathogenic effect of the identified SNVs will be evaluated by SIFT (Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant) software [14] and the annotation obtained from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) [15] records (Fig. 1B).

(iii) SNV validation module. In this module, the final results, and the sequencing data statistics will be summarized and presented as tables and figures (visualization). In addition, ODS provides the functions for clinicians to validate and comment on each SNV manually in order to further assess the quality of the identified SNVs (Fig. 1C).

B. Implementation and availability ODS is implemented as a web-based system freely available at http://sunlab.lihs.cuhk.edu.hk/ODS/ for academic users. A complete manual and examples for several genetic diseases are also provided on the website.

Fig. 2. Web interface of ODS for uploading Sanger sequencing data files and job submission.

To use ODS, the users need to provide Sanger sequencing files in ABI format (i.e., files with extension of .abi or .ab1) through a web interface (Fig. 2), where the user can set the Job identification, input the test gene information (such as gene name, RefSeq gene identification or Ensembl gene identification) if available and upload the sequencing data file  one by one by using the ?Add another file? button. Users can upload as many sequencing files as they need. After clicking the ?GO ODS? button, the parameters and the uploaded sequencing data files will be sent to ODS for further processing.



III. RESULTS AND EXMAPLES To demonstrate the usage and performance of ODS, we applied ODS on Sanger sequencing data sequenced from two real clinical samples. More specifically, we tested ODS on patient samples with two different diseases: (i) McLeod syndrome, and (ii) hypercalcemia.

A. Sanger sequencing based genetic testing for McLeod syndrome  McLeod syndrome (or McLeod phenomenon, MLS) is a genetic disorder that may affect a patient?s blood, brain, peripheral nerves, muscle and heart [16, 17]. It is caused by a variety of recessively-inherited (i.e., both copies of the genes are affected) mutations in the XK gene on the X chromosome.

The gene is responsible for producing the Membrane Transport Protein XK (also known as Kx antigen), a secondary supportive protein for the Kell antigen on the red blood cell surface.

To test and identify causal SNVs responsible for this disease by Sanger sequencing, several pairs of primers were designed to target three exons of XK gene. As a result, a total of 10 ampliers was sequenced. When ODS was applied on the data, it first made base calling for each nucleotide position in amplicons and generated the summary tables for (i) base calling (Fig. 3A, ?Base calling summary? table), which includes the sequence length of the raw sequence after trimming as well as the overall quality evaluation for all the trace files provided; (ii) alignment (Fig. 3A, ?Alignment summary? table), where the actual aligned regions in the sequenced amplicons and the aligned positions on the reference genomes were reported. After generating these two summary tables, ODS visualized the amplicons on each tested exon of the target XK gene, in which the blue box represents the reverse strand amplicons and the red box represents the forward strand amplicons (Fig. 3B). After the visualization, for each exon/intron of the target gene, the number of amplicons designed to cover that region, the absolute and the proportion of the exons/introns sequenced and the SNVs identified within each exon/intron were reported in a ?Gene report? table (Fig. 3C). For each identified SNV, its associated information such as chromosome number, genomics location, the total number amplicon files where the same SNV was identified, reference and observed nucleotide/sequence pattern, the SNV types (e.g. deletion/substitution), and the clinician?s comment of the identified SNV were also reported in ?SNV report? table (Fig. 3C). In addition, for each SNV, a hyperlink under ?Genomic locus? column was also implemented for users to further navigate the SNV annotation information.

Lastly, the OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man) database records of the target test gene were also listed in ?OMIM annotation? table (Fig. 3C).

Fig. 3. ODS result for McLeod syndrome testing.

Fig. 4. (A) Visualization and (B) annotation for SNV chrX:37587236 in MLS test results.

When following the hyperlinks to navigate the SNV details, the raw sequencing signals and side-by-side comparisons to the alignment results are given to help the clinicians to manually inspect and evaluate the confidence of the identified SNV based on the base calling from electropherograms and the sequence alignment (Fig. 4A). In this MLS case, ODS  identified two 5-bp deletions (Fig. 3C ?Gene report? table).

One deletion is reported by ODS as chrX:37587236 (CTCTA deletion). This deletion is in the 3rd CDS (Coding Sequence) of the XK gene with no prior reports in both dbSNP and HGMD databases, suggesting it is a novel SNV. This deletion is also predicted by SIFT as ?damaging? since it causes a frame shift affecting around 36% amino acids of the translated peptide.

Furthermore, this 5-bp deletion has been independently validated by Man et al. as a novel causal mutation (c.856_860delCTCTA) in the reference sequence NM_021083.2 for MLS [17]. However, in this example, ODS also reported a false positive 5-bp deletion as chrX:37587234 (TACTC deletion) due to the alignment ambiguity (for example, the dinucleotides ?TA? can be ambiguously aligned on both the left and right boundary of the deletion region as showed in Fig. 5). This deletion is indeed the same as the deletion reported as chrX:3758234 when being carefully inspected manually, suggesting the importance of allowing clinicians to manually inspect the identified SNV.

Fig. 5. Illustration of a falsely identified SNV due to the ambiguous alignment.

B. Sanger sequencing based genetic testing for hypercalcemia  Hypercalcemia is a disease condition in which an elevated calcium (Ca2+) level is detected in the blood [18]. In this example, customized Sanger sequencing based genetic testing was designed for a patient suffering from high calcium level in blood which may be caused by SNVs in CASR gene [18].

Sanger sequencing has been done by designing 20 pairs of primers targeting all 6 coding exons of the CASR gene. After applying ODS on this dataset, 6 SNVs (2 heterozygous and 4 homozygous substitutions) were identified (Fig. 6C). All of the identified SNVs were confirmed as true SNVs by clinician?s manual inspection. Further inspection identified one homozygous substitution at chr3:122003832 (reference G, observed C) (Fig. 7A) which can be detected in both sequencing files covering this site with high quality signal; it is located at the 6th CDS (or 7th exon) of the CASR gene; it is annotated in dbSNP as rs1801726 as well as recorded in HGMD as CM045983 and associated with ?Increased blood ionised calcium level?, suggesting this SNV is correlated with the hypercalcemia phenotype. It causes a substitution on the 1013th amino acid of the CASR protein from E (Glutamic acid) to Q (Glutamine) based on SIFT prediction (Fig. 7B).

Fig. 6. ODS results for the genetic testing of hypercalcemia       Fig. 7. (A) Visualization and (B) annotation for SNV chr3:122003832 identified from the genetic testing of hypercalcemia  Furthermore, no other SNVs were found for the CASR gene of this patient by manual inspection, indicating, for this sample, the sensitivity and specificity of ODS are both 100%.



IV. DISCUSSION The increasing large volume of data generated from Sanger  sequencing based genetic testing demands the clinicians to analyze and interpret the data within a very short period of time.

However, without using an automatic bioinformatics data analysis tool, even for a trained clinician, it can easily take at least one working day to analyze one genetic testing dataset, which contains 10 sequencing files for a gene with 5 exons (both forward chain and the reverse chain of each exon are sequenced). With the help of ODS, it can be shortened to less than half an hour, which significantly facilitate the application of large scale Sanger sequencing based genetic testing.

Compared to the current software used in the testing, there are certain advantages of ODS: (i) to our knowledge, ODS is the only software that integrates SNV detection and comprehensive SNV annotation for Sanger sequencing based genetic testing data analysis. Comparing to the commercially available software, such as Mutation Suveyor (Softgenetics) which is designed only for SNV detection and Alamut (Interactive Biosoftware) that is implemented only for SNV annotation, ODS seamlessly integrates those two functions into one system which makes it possible for automating such data analysis process; (ii) as a web-based system, ODS does not         require any installation procedure, therefore, it is platform- independent. The users can even use ODS and view the analysis result on their mobile devices; (iii) ODS is easy to use.

As illustrated above, raw sequencing data can be uploaded without requirement of setting any parameters which is normally difficult for clinicians; (vi) the high cost of other commercial software has limited their usage among academic users; ODS, in contrast is freely available.

ODS is carefully configured and adjusted to the optimal performance to achieve the high sensitivity while maintaining a reasonable specificity in detecting SNVs. Due to the limitations of the Sanger sequencing, during the SNV identification, most of the false positive SNVs identified are associated with base calling errors, low sequencing quality, and alignment ambiguity, which pose great challenges for the identification of true SNVs. To overcome these difficulties, ODS applies several strategies to control the false positive SNV calls. For instance, only the sequenced regions with good qualities are considered for SNV calling; candidate SNVs with very low quality scores are automatically filtered out; those SNVs with poor quality scores are marked with distinct colors. To facilitate clinician?s decision making, for each called SNVs, raw sequencing signals of all the files covering that site as well as a side-by-side alignment are also plotted to help them determine whether it is a true SNV site or a false positive.

In the future, to further improve the performance of ODS, we will add some useful features to support heterozygous indel detection and to integrate more tools for SNV annotation and functional prediction (e.g., PolyPhen [19]). We believe that ODS can provide an easy-to-use and one-step solution for Sanger sequencing data analysis thus will become a critical tool for helping clinicians and researchers in the genetic testing.

