Ensemble Learning for Robust Prediction of microRNA-mRNA Interactions

Abstract?Different microRNA target prediction tools produce different results. Motivated by this fact, here we present an ensemble-learning approach that combines the outcomes from multiple tools to reduce prediction error. We test this approach with a dataset derived from a public database containing human microRNAs and microRNA-mRNA pairs. According to our exper- imental result, using the proposed method tends to be significantly better than using individual prediction tools in terms of increasing the area under curve (AUC) defined on a receiver operating characteristic curve.



I. INTRODUCTION  MicroRNAs (miRNAs) refer to small non-protein coding RNAs that regulate gene functions by down-regulating the expression of target genes [1]. MicroRNAs work by binding to target sites in the 3? untranslated region (UTR) of their cognate mRNAs. Existing computational approaches for miRNA target prediction can be categorized into several groups [2], [3].

First, ab-initio methods use structural features extracted from experimental data and generate computational models for prediction. Some examples of the ab-initio method are Tar- getScan [4], miRanda [5], RNAhybrid [6], DIANA-microT [7], PicTar [8], and PITA [9]. Second, to tackle the limitations of ab-initio approaches (e.g., high false positive rates), machine- learning methods have been proposed. Such methods use supervised classifiers trained with the features obtained from experimental data (e.g., the characteristics of miRNA binging sites). Some examples of this approach are miRTarget2 [10], TargetBoost [11], TargetSpy [12], and TargetMiner [13]. Third, hybrid approaches such as miREE [3] work by combining the ab-initio and machine-learning methods to overcome the intrinsic limitations of each method.

To alleviate the main weakness of existing approaches (i.e., robustness in prediction), here we propose an ensemble- learning method for microRNA target prediction. The mo- tivation of the proposed approach is that current prediction software often produces different results even for the same input [2], [14], [15] and that these diverse outputs from differ- ent prediction tools may contribute to reducing the prediction error. In general, ensemble learning consists of prediction models and a combination method. In ensemble learning, we train multiple models and integrate the outputs from individual models in order to reduce generalization error.



II. METHOD OVERVIEW  The proposed approach consists of three steps. It first uses existing miRNA target prediction tools to obtain individual prediction results. Second, the approach preprocesses the out- comes from the individual tools and generates training samples using a public database of miRNA-target pairs and the statistics obtained from the first stage. Finally, the proposed method trains a binary classifier using the training samples created in the second step and selects the best model via cross-validation.

The individual prediction stage predicts miRNA targets using the following six miRNA target prediction tools: Tar- getScan, miRanda, DIANA-microT, PITA, miRTarget2, and PicTar. We use miRTarBase [16], a public database that pro- vides human miRNAs with miRNA-mRNA pairs, and select miRNAs by removing redundancy with reference to miR- Base [17]. We let each tool predict the targets of each miRNA using its default parameter(s).



III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  Figure 1 shows the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves of our approach and the six miRNA target predic- tion tools under comparison. The average area-under-curve (AUC) values for the proposed approach, TargetScan, mi- Randa, DIANA-microT, PITA, miRTarget2, and PicTar are 0.92, 0.82, 0.55, 0.56, 0.46, 0.67, and 0.70, respectively. We observe that the proposed approach outperforms the other tools in terms of AUC by minimum 12% (with respect to TargetScan), maximum 100% (with respect to PITA), and on average 52%.

Additionally, we compare the performance of the classi- fiers used for combining individual outcomes in terms of six widely used statistics: sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), and F-measure. These performance statistics are defined in terms of true and false positives (TP and FP), and true and false negatives (TN and FN). TP (TN) refers to a positive (nega- tive) sample that is correctly classified as positive (negative), whereas FP (FN) is a negative (positive) sample that is incorrectly classified as positive (negative). Note the definitions of these performance statistics used:  sensitivity = true positive rate = recall = TP  TP + FN (1)     0 0.5 1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8   False positive rate  T ru  e p  o si  ti v  e r  a te  Performance Comparison  ProposedMethod  TargetScan  miRanda  DIANA?microT  PITA  miRTarget2  PicTar  Fig. 1. Comparison of proposed method with existing tools.

TABLE I. COMPARISON OF CLASSIFIERS USED FOR INTEGRATION  AdaBoost SVM k-NN Na??ve Bayes ANN  sensitivity 0.85 0.55 0.80 0.70 0.85 specificity 0.76 0.93 0.73 0.91 0.73 accuracy 0.81 0.74 0.76 0.77 0.79 PPV 0.78 0.89 0.75 0.94 0.72 NPV 0.84 0.67 0.78 0.59 0.86 F-measure 0.81 0.68 0.77 0.80 0.78 AUC 0.81 0.68 0.77 0.80 0.78  specificity = true negative rate = TN  TN + FP (2)  accuracy = TP + TN  TP + TN + FP + FN (3)  PPV = precision = TP  TP + FP (4)  NPV = TN  TN + FN (5)  F-measure = 2 precision ? recall  precision + recall (6)  Finally, Table 1 lists the result from comparing different classifiers used for integrating individual outcomes (AdaBoost, Support Vector Machine, k-Nearest Neighbor, Na??ve Bayes, and Artificial Neural Networks) in terms of the above perfor- mance statistics. Among these classifiers, we use the SVM classifier, which tends to show reasonable performance in all the aspects assessed. Different classifiers have different (dis)advantages for classification, and the user can adopt a classifier that is most appropriate for the needs.



IV. CONCLUSION  We have presented an ensemble-learning approach for computational prediction of microRNA-mRNA interactions.

The proposed approach utilizes the prediction results from existing tools and combines them to improve the accuracy of the prediction. According to our experimental results, the  proposed method is promising in that it can overcome the limitations of current methodologies by integrative analysis of individual outcomes.

