A Privacy-aware Query Authentication Index   for Database Outsourcing

Abstract? Recently, cloud computing has been spotlighted as a new paradigm of database management system. In this environment, databases are outsourced and deployed on a service provider in order to reduce cost for data storage and maintenance. However, the service provider might be untrusted so that the two issues of data security, including data confidentiality and query result integrity, become major concerns for users. Existing bucket-based data authentication methods have problem that the original spatial data distribution can be disclosed from data authentication index due to the unsophisticated data grouping strategies. In addition, the transmission overhead of verification object is high. In this paper, we propose a privacy-aware query authentication which guarantees data confidentiality and query result integrity for users. A periodic function-based data grouping scheme is designed to privately partition a spatial database into small groups for generating a signature of each group. The group signature is used to check the correctness and completeness of outsourced data when answering a range query to users.

Through performance evaluation, it is shown that proposed method outperforms the existing method in terms of range query processing time up to 3 times.

Keywords- Database outsourcing; Encrypted database; Data authentication index; Query result integrity

I.  INTRODUCTION Due to the advancement in cloud computing technologies,  the research on the outsourced database has been spotlighted as a new paradigm of database management system. Small- size Location-based Service (LBS) businesses outsource their spatial database to a service provider in order to reduce cost for data storage and management. The services provider maintains the data and answers queries to users. However, privacy needs to be preserved for sensitive databases (e.g., personal location data, financial and medical record) that are valuable and sensitive to unauthorized accesses. In addition, because a service provider is not the owner of outsourced database, it must prove the correctness and completeness of query result to users. In this context, two issues of data security including data confidentiality and data integrity become major concerns for users. Data confidentiality refers to protecting data access and disclosure from unauthorized parties. Data integrity refers to the trustworthiness of data, especially for query users. For example, since the service  provider is not fully trusted, the service provider may inject fake data in the query result, or may delete some genuine result data before sending them to users. The straightforward solution for protecting data confidentiality is database encryption. Many researches have been studied on database encryption, such as AES [1], OPES [2], schemes. By adopting those encryption schemes, data confidentiality for users can be solved.

On the other hand, in order to guarantee data integrity, verification information is sent to users with query result so that the result can be verified by using data owner?s signature.

Previous data authentication researches [3-18] can be categorized into three classes: signature-based approaches, authenticated data structures and bucket-based authentication.

However, authentication data structure does not guarantee the data confidentiality, since it cannot be built on the encrypted data. In addition, tree-based index suffer from inflexible data update and verification object transmission costs. To address these problems, J. Wang et al. [4] proposed a bucket-based authentication where a bucket contains a bucket id, data range (upper-lower bound), number of tuples in a bucket and a checksum. A checksum is similar concept to the data signature and generated by using a Hash function.

The limitations of existing bucket-based authentication are as followings. First, because it generates a bucket with equal width of the data range, the original data distribution can be disclosed. Moreover bucket id is assigned as the ascending order of the data range. The existing bucket-based authentication cannot fully provide the data security.

Secondly, existing bucket-based authentication methods only consider conventional relational database. The distribution of database may not be the objects to be protected. However, in terms of spatial database, the distribution of them could involve meaningful knowledge. To provide full-range of privacy protection coverage for spatial database, any additional information, including data distribution, of database can be revealed.

Motivated by these problems, in this paper, we propose a privacy-aware query authentication which supports data correctness and completeness for users. To support data confidentiality, it is assumed that databases are encrypted before outsourced to a service provider by using AES algorithm. In order to process range queries over encrypted  *corresponding author     d p f d p d n r g W d c c  p i e  c d s t s s e s d i i w n d b s t p  b b b e d s g r s r t s c a c i  t  database, a p proposed. Th function-based divides a datab periodic funct disclosure risk number of fal ranges. To pro generated by c When answer data group are correctness a comparing the  The rest o presents the re integrity sche experimental Section 5 conc  Existing categorized in data structur signature-base tuple and ve signatures of d significant ov example, well signing and 1 data structure index. Each intermediate n with data own nodes? inform does not guara built on the e suffer from i transmission proposed by [4,17-18]. A b based index c bound), numb bucket is ge equivalent dat data (count) in such that uniq generated buc range is 2000 same number 2500 to 3500, range from the the query resu sent to the q checksums, th and compares checksum mat integrity.

In bucket- tuples within t  privacy-aware he authenticati d data group base into smal tion for databa k of spatial da lse-positive re ovide query r condensed-RS ring a range q e sent with re and complete e received sign of this paper is elated Work.

eme is intro evaluation on cludes this pap

II. RE data authen  nto signature- res and buck ed approaches erify data in data within the  verheads for u l-kwon signat 123bytes in sp based approa  leaf node nodes indicate ner?s signature mation. Howev antee the data encrypted dat nflexible data costs. Final Hacigumus [  bucket is d-di contains a buc ber of tuples i enerated by p ta range (valu n a bucket. A que and efficie cket-based ind  to 6000 and e of data. In the a service prov  e index. In figu ult. In addition query result.

he user re-gen s them with re tches the origi  -based index, the same buck  e query authe ion scheme i ping scheme ll groups. The ase partitioning ata distribution esults bounded result integrity SA function is query, the sign esults. Then, th eness of the natures with ge s organized as In Section 3 duced. Sectio  n existing and per with brief s  ELATED WORK ntication res -based approa ket-based au assign one sig  ntegrity by c e results.  This sers both in t ture scheme R pace [19]. Se aches generat represents a  e a data group as a concaten  ver, authentica confidentiality  ta. In addition a update and lly, Bucket-b [16] and exte imensional rec cket id, data n the bucket partitioning d ues) or with th bucket checks ent in calculat dex is given in each bucket is e example, if a vider retrieves ure 1, bucket 1 n, the checksu Upon receivi  nerates the che eceived ones.

inal, it guarant  security lies i ket. The larger  entication ind includes a pe e, which priv  prime goal of g is to minimi n while reducin d within the  y, a group sign stored in the i  natures of retr he users check query resu enuine signatu s follows. Sec , our proposed on 4 provide proposed me  summary.

K searches can aches, authent uthentication.

gnature to each comparing al s computation time and spac RSA takes 10 cond, authent e a tree-based  a data tuple, . The root is s  nation of all ch ation data stru y, since it cann n, tree-based  verification based index ensively studi ctangle and bu range (upper- and a checksu databases wit he equal numb sum is a hash tion. An exam n figure 1. Th s generated wi a query ranges overlapping b 1 and 2 are add um of them ar ing the result ecksum with r If the reconstr tees the query  in the anonym the bucket siz  dex is eriodic vately  f using ize the ng the cyclic nature index.

rieved ks the  ult by ures.

ction 2 d data es an thods.

n be ticated  First, h data ll the  n leads e. For  0ms in ticated d data , and signed hildren ucture not be index object  was ied in ucket- -lower um. A th the ber of digest  mple of e data ith the s from bucket ded to  re also t with results ructed result  mity of ze, the  less ind ind app to t  flow assu arch The foll data auth gua out serv the trus pro resu use by The (2-a auth que (2-c gen from sign ver  A.

B  s the informat dex is. In buck dex contains lo plying existing the data distrib

III. PERIOD Figure 2 dep  w of the auth umed that th hitecture: data e scenario of lows: In the p a encryption hentication bu aranteeing qu tsources the E vice provider database encr  sted users so ocessing with ult verification  er transforms i applying the  en, the trusted a). When ans henticated dat ery result data c). Upon rece nerates group s m the data ow nature that is rify the correct    Periodic func  BID (L 1 [2000 2 [3000 3 [4000 4 [5000  Figure  Figur  tion disclosure ket-based auth ower and uppe g methods to t bution disclosu  DIC FUNCTION picts overall enticated quer here are thre a owner, serv f data flow in pre-processing n for outso ucket index  uery processi E(P) and the (1-a). At the s ryption inform o that they c the service p  n (1-b). At qu its query (Q) t  same encryp user issues th  swering a que ta index (2-b) a with the ver eiving query r signature for q  wner. If generat sent with th  tness and comp  ction based pri  L, U) 0, 3000) 0, 4000) 0, 5000) 0, 6000)  e 1.   Cipher text t  re 2.   System arch  e and more se hentication, th er range of eac the spatial data ure attack.

BASED DATA system archit ry processing.

ee main com ice provider a  n Fig. 3 can g phase, data ourcing spat generation fo  ing. Then, th e authenticatio same time, the mation and the can utilize th  provider as w uery processin to a transform ption of outso he query to the ery, the servi ) and forward rification data results, the au query results b ted signature i  he query resul pleteness of qu  ivate data aut  Checksu ry*nvhk&*!yie krrh*!ehbrwj*j y*bg&*!ecbrjy Jk&*!@#k4JK  table with checksu  hitecture and data  ecure the buck he authenticati ch bucket. Th abase is valuab  GROUP INDEX tecture and d . System mod  mponents in t and trusted us be explained owner perfor  tial data, a or data integr he data own on index to t e owner forwar e auditing data he range que  well as the que ng time, a trust med query (E(Q ourced databa service provid ice retrieves t ds the encrypt a (i.e., signatu uthenticated u by using the k is identical to t lts, the user c uery results.

thenticatin ind  um e7gtkfd6 jyu*!yyr ydgtr*th  Ks*w%gh  um  a flow  ket ion  hus, ble    X data dels this ser.

as rms and rity ner the rds  a to ery ery ted Q)) ase.

der the ted  ure) user key the can  dex     d i f d b w i i  p e w b e d a b d r d s t t s c e ? o i t a d T s g ?     In this sec database grou index for proc function base database into s by the data ow within the gro index is gen information to  Our system processing ran existing work with varying based authenti equivalent dat data (count) in authentication bucket. Henc database suff resolve this pr database parti spatial databas then the perio them into sma said to be p constant) if w example, the ??? ? 2?? ? 	 s on intervals of is divided whe to generate sm and lower p differentiation These peaks b small-group g group genera ?sin 2? ? c?s ?    (  ???? ? ?sin ?2  ????? ? ?12 ? s ? 	 ?12 ? s ? 	 ?12 ? c ? 	 c?s 2?  ????	??????	4  Figure 3  ction, we intr uping scheme cessing queries ed database small-groups.

wner using Co oup. By this m nerated with  o unauthorized m model assu nge queries. F  k generally pa methods. Wa  ication index b ta range (valu n a bucket. Ho n index contain ce, applying e fers from the roblem, in this itioning schem se is divided i odic function all-group g={g periodic with we have ??? ? ?  sine function sin ? for all va f length 2?. By ere the key val  mall groups g i peaks of th  n results f?(x) become the p g. Figure 3 i ation with ?/2?/2.

(a) Sub-group calc  x? ? c?s ??2?? 2 	??  sin 2??? ? ?12 ? c sin ??2?? ? 2??? c?s 2? ? 2? ? ?12 ? ? 14 ? sin  ?  4?	?12 ? 4? ? 13  (b) Small-group  3.  Private data p  roduce a perio and a private s at service pro grouping sc Then, each sm  ondensed-RSA means, the pri  hout revealing d accesses.

umed tuple-le For query pro artition the da ang et al.[4] by partitioning ues) or with th owever, as show ns lower and u existing meth  data distribu s paper, a peri  me is proposed into Group G= is applied on  g1, g2,?, gk}. H period P (P ?? ? 	???? for is periodic wi  alues of x. Th y using this pr lues are multip in each Gi, we he periodic ) of the func partitioning po illustrates the the periodic  culation based on  ?	?	????????	???  c?s ??2? ?? ? ?12 ? c?s  ? ??2?1 2 ? sin  ? 2 ?  2?  3?  p division with pe  partition with peri  odic function data authenti  ovider. The pe heme partitio  mall-group is s A [19] with PO ivate authenti g the partiti  evel encryptio ocessing effic atabase into g generate a bu  g databases wi he equal numb wn in figure 1 upper range of hods to the s ution problem iodic function d. In this sche ={G1,G2,?, Gn n each Gi to d Here, a functio  being a non all values of x ith period 2?, his function re roperty, the dat ple of periods.

e compute the graph where  ction f(x) are oints for gene  example of c function ?  cyclic block  ?????  ? ?2 ??  eaks  iodic function  based cation  eriodic ons a signed OI ids cation ioning  on for iency,  groups ucket- ith the ber of , their f each spatial  ms. To based  eme, a n} and divide on f is n-zero x. For since epeats tabase . Then, upper  e the zero.

erating small ???? ?       In f ?sin div Tab gro ran dim data by on cryp whi leng of com sch its i  ? ?   pro priv sign  ?  B.

ran The per pro the a se the serv retr orig (lin resu com gen que com  TABLE I.

Order Gro sub_1 2 sub_2 sub_3 sub_4 sub_5 sub_6 sub_7 4 sub_8 sub_9  figure 3 (b), th n2? ? c?s ?/ ided into 9 sm ble 1. To prot oup ids are ran nge query in mensional part a partition, a using Conden the hash of  yptographically ich takes a v gth output. Fo m and a stan  mputed by usi heme, each tup id (e.g., POI id  ? ?????????	? Mykletun et  oduct of indiv vate authentic nature as a Co  ???? ????		?? ?  ??? Query proces By using the  nge query resul e query proce rformed betwe ovider. First, th  periodic func et of small-gr query range (  ver (line 2). U rieves private ginal data set ne 5-8). Final ults by using t mpares the sig nerated signat ery results, t mpleteness of q   DATABASE  up id  here are 8 upp 2?/2 . So the mall-groups g tect the privac  ndomly assigne spatial data  tition for x and signature for nsed-RSA. An f the input y strong hash variable-length or an input mes ndard RSA s ing a  given f ple signature is d).

?? al.[6] define  vidual signatur cation index, ondensed-RSA  ???	??.

ssing with data authenticatio  lt is performed ssing with qu  een two partie he query user  ction, so that th roup ids where (line 1). Then,  Upon receiving authentication for the query ly, the user g the RSA key gnature with r ture is identic the user can query results.

E DEVIDED INTO 9  Range 0 ? x	 ? 0.7  0.740 ? x	 ? 2.475 ? x	 ? 3.808 ? x	 ? 5.543 ? x	 ? 7.119 ? x	 ? 8.526 ? x	 ? 1 10.324 ? x	 ? 11.730 ? x	 ?  per and lower p e dataset with g = {g1, g2,?, cy of partition ed to small-gro abase, we pe d y axes. Afte each small-gr n RSA signatu message. Le  h function (s h input and pr ssage m, h(m) signature on m formulation fr s generated by  ???  ed the Conde res in each g we generate  A of each data s    a indegrity au n index, the a d as illustrated  uery result inte es: a query us r encrypts a q he query rang e their coverin , the user issu g a query, the n index to retu (line 3-4) and  generates sign sent from the result signatur cal to the sig  verify the  9 GROUPS  2.475 3.808 5.543 7.119 8.526 10.324 11.730 ? 4?  peaks for???? hin a Gi will g9} as shown  ning informatio oups. To supp erform a mu er constructing oup is generat ure is comput  et h() denote such as SHA roduces a fixe denotes the ha  message m, a rom [19]. In t y using RSA w  (1)  ensed-RSA as group (2). In t  a small gro signature.

?2  diting authentication d in Algorithm egrity auditing ser and a serv query range w e is converted ng area overla es a query to t service provid  urn an encrypt d their signatu natures of que data owner, a  re (line 9-13).

gnature with t correctness a  ? ? be  n in on,  port ulti- g a ted ted  e a A-1)  ed- ash and this  with  s a the  oup  ?  of m 1.

g is vice with d to aps the der ted  ures ery and . If the and     A  I O /  t /  /   q  b M C u E d g  e t s o d r  A  a a i g p a i s b c T c  Algorithm 1: Ra  Input : Query ran Output : Query r /*query user*/ 1: encrypt query 2: request the  the query region; /*service provide 3: for each sub_ 4:       query resu 5: for each requ 6:       search sig 7:       S += sign 8: return R and  /*query user*/ 9: generate sign  10: compare RSA 11: if matches, 12:      select the r 13: else delete R  I We comp  query process [4] under diffe by using Win Microsoft Vi Core(TM) i5- used two diff East America datasets conta generated by u [20], while t experiments, w 0.02%, 0.04% 25*25, 50*50 the number o small groups.

of range quer different para results is used  A. Initial Con Figure 4  authentication authentication includes both groups (bucke proposed algo approach. Wh index, our me simple calcul bucket-based comparing its This is the rea compared to th  ange query() nge [low, upper), result set R, signa  y range with CK; server for all  er*/ _group range ?	qu ult += all data in t  uested sub_group gnature index nature d S,to the user  ature RSA(R) A(R) and S  result R

IV. EXPERIM pare the perfo sing algorithm ferent settings.

ndows 7 Ulti isual Studio 3470 CPU 2.3  ferent spatial a (NE)), unif aining 100,00 using Generat the NE datas we varied the q  %, 0.06% to 0 0, 75*75 to 10 of buckets wh The range qu  ry rectangle. W ameters and an d.

nstruction illustrates the  n index n as a functio  the time for p ets) and signa orithm requires hen inserting t ethod decides lation of poly  approach, th (x, y) coordin  ason why our he existing app  Encryption Key C ature set S  data whose sub  uery do the sub_group id do  MENTAL EVALU ormance of th  m with the buc The algorithm  imate K oper 2010 runnin  30 GHz with datasets: the r  form data (UN 00 point of in te Spatio Tem set contains 1 query window 0.08% and th 00*100. The b hen partitionin ery window e We performed n average val  e construction and existin  on of the buc partitioning a ature creation s less time tha the Point of in the bucket id  ynomial expr he bucket id  nates with buck r index has fas proach.

CK, RSA  b-group overlap  UATION he proposed  cket-based app ms are implem rating system  ng on an In 4GB of RAM real data (No NI). The syn nterests (POIs  mporal Data (G 119,898 POIs  w extent from 0 e bucket size  bucket size ref ng a database xtent mean th d 100 queries lue over 100  cost for pro ng bucket-  cket size. This database into time. In all  an the bucket- nterest (POI) d for each PO ression. In ca d is assigne ket partition v st construction  s  range proach mented m with ntel(R) M. We orthern nthetic s) are  GSTD) s. For 0.01%,  e from fers to e into  he area s with query  oposed -based s cost small cases,  -based to the  OIs by ase of ed by values.

n time  B.

ver and sign com   In t 0.0 Sin size and The exe is 5 ach wor the    Range Query We measured  rification time d proposed a nature re-con mparing the re  this experimen 1% to 0.08%  nce the results e, we only del d 100*100. Th e straight lin ecution time o 50*50 or 100* hieves the impr rk. For all cas query window  Fi  (a) Un  (b) Figure 5.

y Processing T d the query pro on both appro  algorithm. Th nstruction time constructed sig  nts, we varied and the bucke  s show similar livered the res  he experimenta ne at the bot of proposed ap 100. This show roved perform ses, the retriev w size is incre  igure 4.      Index  niform data varyi  Real data varying Query processin  Time with Verif ocessing time w oaches: bucket he verification e and the tim gnatures with  the query win et size from 25 r trends under sult from buck al results are sh ttom of the pproach where ws that the pro  mance compare val time is alm eased. For exa  construction time  ing query window  g query window s ng time with verifi  fication with query res t-based approa n time includ me required original ones.

ndow extent fro 5*25 to 100*10 r varying buck ket size of 50* hown in Figur plot shows t  e the bucket s oposed approa ed to the existi most constant  ample, in the r  e   w size  size fication time  sult ach des for     om 00.

ket  *50 re 5.

the  size ach ing t as real     d p t p  r b p c o w f q q d i p p s p d w n  a c g s g c q t t p p  t i  data distributi processing alg the  bucket- processing que  C. Size of fals We measu  result on bo bucketization providing a qu consider the fa of false-positiv we only deliv false positive query result s query process data is almost it is proved processing w positive data since our p partition by u data privacy which partitio number of dat  In this p authentication completeness grouping sche small groups group signatu completeness query to users that proposed terms of rang providing sim positive data.

As a futur to support var in spatial datab     Figure 6.

ion with buck gorithm requir based approa ery ranged 0.0  se-positive dat ured the size oth approache  is to minim uery result int  false-positive d ve data is show  vered the resul data is calcu  size from the ing. For all ca same for two that our me  while returning compared to t rivate authen  using periodic compared to  ons the datab ta.



V. C paper, we pr n which su  for users. A eme is design for generating ure is used of outsourced  s. Through per d method outp ge query proce milar performan  re work, we w riety of query t base.

Size of false-posi  ket size 50*50 res only 0.007 ach takes 0.0 08% of the wh  ta in query res of false posi  es Since the mize the data tegrity to user data size in qu wn in Figure 6 lt from NE da  ulated by subtr query result s ases, the size o approaches. B  ethod takes l g reasonable the existing m ntication inde c function, we  the bucket-b base with equ  CONCLUSION ropose a pr  upports data A periodic fu ned to partitio g a signature to check th  d data when rformance eva performs the essing time u nce in returni  will extend the types (e.g., k-N  itive data in query  0, our range 75 seconds wh 00272 second hole area.

sults itive data in primary go a disclosure rs, it is import uery result. Th 6. For the simp ata. The numb racting the ge set size acquir of the false po Based on this r ess time in number of  method. In add ex generates e provide enh ased authenti  ual-range or e  rivacy-aware correctness  function-based on a database of each group  he correctness answering a  aluation, it is s existing meth  up to 3 times ing number of  proposed algo NN, skyline q  y results (NE data  query hereas ds for  query oal of  while tant to he size plicity, ber of enuine red by ositive result, query false-  dition, data  hanced cation equal-    query and  d data e into p. The s and range  shown hod in  while f false  orithm queries)  pro (NR Tec Env imp  [1]  [2]  [3]  [4]  [5]  [6]  [7]  [8]  [9]  [10]  [11]  [12]  [13]  [14]  [15]  [16]  [17]  [18]  [19]  [20]   a)  This research ogram through RF) funded b chnology (gran vironmental S prove the reada  FIP Standard, Institute of Stan M. L. Yiu, G.

Private Spatial Conference on D S. Kerr, M. S.

protocol authe SIGSPATIAL GIS and LBS, 2 J. Wang et databases,? Con E. Mykletun, Immutability Symposium on E. Mykletun, integrity in ou Storage (TOS) T R.C. Merkle. ? 1989, Santa Bar M. Narasimha, signature aggre October?5 Nov D. Sacharidis, K Presence of Ex and Data Engin  ] Y. Yang, D. Pa Join Processing  ] D. Liu, S. Wang the ACM Con 2012.

] B. Hore et a outsourced data Bases, 21(3), Ju  ] S. Balpande et database,? Inter in Technology,  ] P. Devanbu, M publication ove  ] H. Hacigumus, encrypted data SIGMOD, Mad  ] Hore B, Mehro queries. VLDB,  ]  Wang J, Du X DAS,? APWeb,  ] C. Wang, W. K data broadcast e  ] R. Rivest, A. S Signatures and ACM, Vol. 21 (  ] Y, Theodoridis spatiotemporal Symposium  ACKNOWLE h was supporte  the National R by the Ministr nt number 20 ystems Resea ability of the p  REFER ?Advanced Enc  ndards and Techn Ghinita, C. S. Je l Data for Sea Data Engineering . Krkpatrick, E.

entication system International Wo  al., ?Bucket?ba  ncurrency and Co  M. Narasimha, for aggregated/ Research in Com M. Narasimha,  utsourced databas TOS, Vol. 2 Issue ?A certified digit rbara, CA, USA, G. Tsudik, ?Int  egation and chain vember 2005.

K. Mouratidis an  xternal Databases neering, 2010.

apadias, S. Papado g in Outsourced D g, ?Query encryp  nference on Com  al., ?Secure mu a,?  The Interna une 2012  al., ?Data integr rnational Confere (TCET) 2012  M. Gertz, C. Mar er the internet,? J  B. Iyer , C. Li, a in the databas dison, WI, U.S.A.

otra S, Tsudik G.

Toronto, Canada . ?A secure multi Shenyang, China  Ku, ?Efficient eva environments,? A  Shamir, L. Adlem Public-Key Cryp  (2), pages 120-12 , J. Silva, and M datasets,? In Pr on Large  EDGMENTS ed by Basic S Research Foun ry of Educati 13010099). Sa  arch Institute ( paper.

RENCES cryption Standard nology (NIST), 20 ensen and P. Kaln arch Services?, g, 2009.

Bertino, ?PEAR m,? Proceedings orkshop on Secu  sed authenticati omputation: Pract  G. Tsudik, ?S /condensed sign  mputer Security (E G. Tsudik, ?A  ses,? Journal AC e 2, May 2006 tal signature.? In August 1989 tegrity of outsou ning,? CIKM, Br  nd D. Papadias, ? ?, IEEE Transact  opoulos and P. K Databases?, ACM pted databases pra mputer and comm  ultidimensional r ational Journal o  rity and confiden ence & Worksho  rtel, S. Stubblebi J. of Comput. Sec  , S. Mehrotra, ?E se service provi , June 2002 A privacy-preser  a, 31 August?3, S i-dimensional par a, 26?28 April 20 aluation of skylin  ACM SIGSPATIA man, ?A Method f  ptosystems,? Com 26, 1978  M. Nascimento, ?O roceedings of th  Spatial D  Science Resear ndation of Kor on, Science a angho Kim fro ESRI) helped  d (AES)?, Natio 001.

nis, ?Outsourcing IEEE Internatio  R: a hardware ba of the 3rd AC  urity and Privacy  ion for outsour tical and Experien  Signature bouqu natures,? Europ  ESORICS), 2004 Authentiacation CM Transactions  n Proc. of CRYP  urced databases w remen, Germany,  ?k-Anonymity in tions on Knowle  Kalnis, ?Authentca SIGMOD, 2009.

actically?, In Proc munications secur  range queries o on Very Large D  ntiality in outsour op on Recent Tre  ine, ?Authentic d cur. 11(3), 291?3  Executing SQL o ider model.,? AC  rving index for ra eptember 2004.

rtition based index 008.

