Octilinear Layouts for Metro Map Visualization Pio Claudio

Abstract?Octilinear design has been a feature of metro maps since the last century. However, it is only recent that layout of metro maps has been automated. In this paper, we explore ways to automate the layout of metro maps. In addition, we review another trend of integrating annotations for aiding travelers, while maintaining the octilinear layout. Finally, as personal navigational devices and platforms emerge, we discuss dynamic applications of this design and its future direction.



I. INTRODUCTION  Schematic diagrams of metro maps has been used to guide commuters. Harry Beck introduced a map design where metro line edges only follow a horizontal, vertical or 45? diagonal orientation[2]. Otherwise would have been geographically represented, his city map scheme simplifies the view of the metro network, apt for quick glances of commuters. His design has become popular and has become the de facto aesthetic criteria in designing public transportation network maps all over the world [6]. Its use has gone beyond cartography such that works in visualization use the metro map metaphor in applying octilinear design in non-metro data[7], [4], [9]. In this paper we focus only on metro map applications.

As more map data have been captured beyond location names, for instance: geo-tagged photos, location reviews, and transportation routes, the data to be displayed has increased exponentially and changes dynamically. And as people get more used to mobile navigation devices with relatively small displays, it is becoming more important to provide meaningful and easily readable mapping schemes, by abstracting data. In terms of metro maps, automatic layouting is a solution for data abstraction and dynamic visualization.

For the rest of the paper, we explain about the approaches in making octilinear layout design of metro maps automatic (Sec.2). It is followed by layouting of labels and annotations (Sec.3), as extensions of the octilinear metro map algorithm.

Finally, we discuss applications of octilinear metro map lay- outs(Sec.4).



II. AUTOMATIC OCTILINEAR LAYOUTS  Generating automatic octilinear layouts of metro maps has been studied lately. As we find in the following works [3], [8], [5], the metro network is treated as a graph, featuring stations as vertices and connections between stations as edges.

To perform an optimization process computing positions of vertices, a set of criteria are defined, mostly based on the design principles popularized by Beck, but also from common features observed in various artist-made metro maps. These  Fig. 1. An automatic layout of the Busan Metro using the algorithm of Nollenburg et. al. [5]  criteria are turned into constraints, shaping the behavior of a given algorithm.

In this article we focus on explaining the work of optimizing layouts by mixed integer programming as demonstrated by Nollenburg et. al. [5]. This approach views the layout compu- tation as an optimization problem and employs a mixed integer programming (MIP) approach to find an globally optimized solution. Its results yield a strict compliance to octilinearity and feature almost uniform spacing (Fig.1).

To give more detailed explanations of this optimization, we enumerate the major constraints that shape the algorithm in below.

Octilinearity. As octilinearity is the goal design, edges are snapped to octilinear sectors. Octilinear constraints are defined for each edge such that the optimizer can relax the sectors to be able move within one sector direction if needed, as to satisfy other constraints like straightness and overlaps.

Edge Lengths. To keep edge lengths at minimum length and uniform, a minimum edge length value is defined for each edge to comply. The total sum of the length of edges is penalized as it uses higher length values. In effect, the resulting edge lengths are close to the defined minimum edge lengths.

Relative Positions. In the position placement of stations, any octilinear direction is allowed. However, original relative     station positions (original edge orientations) are preferred in order to maintain the geographical topology.

Line Bends. As observed in many artist-designed metro maps, lines bends are avoided. This makes the map easier to navigate for users. Each bend is penalized to minimize the total amount of bends.

Overlaps. Each edge has a constraint of not being over- lapped with other edges in their final positions. A user parameter edge spacing is given to dictate the separation value between edges.

A weighted sum of the edge lengths, relative positions, and line bends factors is minimized based on the MIP approaches, resulting in an optimized layout. Unfortunately, this MIP approach can be slow, since its running time depends on the number of constraints, which are generated for each vertex and edge. To ameliorate this issue, the original approach removes 2-degree vertices, and then reinserts those vertices after getting the result.



III. LABEL AND ANNOTATION LAYOUTS  Besides the metro station network graph explained in the prior section, labels and annotations have been included in the design of metro maps.

A. Label Placement  Text labels are as essential in navigation as the station network, such that they have been a part of metro layout research. There are two ways to approach label placement for automated metro layouts: 1) generate the octilinear layout and then affix labels within the layout, and 2) include the computation of the label positions in the optimization. As with the metro map process, several criteria are considered in label placement including: orientation, relative position, avoiding overlaps with edges, stations and other labels.

B. Annotation Placement  As metro maps have become an important tool for tourist navigation, it is only logical that annotations are placed together as supplemental information. These may be in the form of images or text. In a recent set of works, annotation placement for automated octilinear-layout metro maps has been explored. One approach put annotations externally, which are on the boundaries of the map[12]. On the other hand, annotations can be positioned internally, which are closer to the origin. Wu et. al. [11] demonstrates this, in addition to also making the connecting lines termed label leaders to be octilinear (Fig.2).

We look into the octilinear approach and enumerate its major criteria. Similar to the MIP approach for metro map layouts, MIP is used to produce annotation layouts, and similar constraints are defined. For example, leader lines are aligned to the horizontal, vertical and 45? diagonal axes. Total edge length is minimized. Leader bends are penalized. Overlap with edges, stations and other annotations are avoided.

Fig. 2. An example annotation layout generated using the algorithm of Wu et. al.[11].



IV. APPLICATIONS  On its own, static octilinearly laid-out metro maps including annotations are already useful, irrespective of whether it gets printed on a paper or displayed on screens of different sizes.

However, turning it into an interactive dynamic map brings a much more informative experience. In this section, we exam- ine two metro map applications: combining transportation and street maps, and highlighting metro routes.

A. Combined Transportation and Street Maps  Bottger et. al. [1] wanted to combine the schemes of an octilinear metro map, yet maintain the details of street maps.

Initially, they acquire an octilinearly laid-out metro network, and the geographic positions of metro stations. There is a one- to-one mapping of stations between the geographic map and the metro map. These stations will serve as control points in performing a map warping, which will deform the geographic map into the new metro map form.

Map warping is done by applying moving least squares method, essentially interpolating map positions given the con- trol points. The resulting warped map features an octilinear metro map while having detailed street maps though much deformed as to retain relative positions. A warping zoom function is also applied, such that upon zooming, the map is reduced of distortion until reaching a geographically-correct representation.

B. Metro Route Highlighting  Wang et. al. [10] formulates a fast method to compute an octilinear layout. In their case, source and destination stations are defined to determine the best route through a shortest path algorithm. The route is highlighted by enlarging edges     and giving full opacity. At the same time, it provides context by displaying the rest of the network with shorter edges and transparent colors.

One of its notable features is that it can accommodate variable aspect ratios. This is particularly useful for small displays such as in smartphones. Here, metro lines are bent around the screen boundaries, thus fitting the route and context in a cramped space without needing to zoom out.



V. CONCLUSION  In this paper we have explained two prior metro map visualization techniques: automatic octilinear layouts and la- bel/annotation layouts. In addition, we have discussed two possible applications.

Many interesting research directions lie ahead. The current MIP approaches are rather slow and thus are not widely used for interactive applications. We would like to design an efficient technique for octilinear layouts for metro maps.

