A Location-based Personalized News Recommendation

Abstract?Personalized news article recommendation provides interesting articles for a user based on the users? preference. With increasing use of hand-held devices the interests of users are reflected by their location. Therefore, we propose a novel method to incorporate the location into a user preference for the per- sonalized news recommendation. The proposed method, a topic model based on LDA, represents the user preference with not only the news articles read by user but the locations of the user. By representing the user preference differently over her location, it suggests the news articles which are appropriate the user location.

In the evaluation of the proposed method compared to the LDA, it outperforms in topic quality both quantitative and qualitative evaluation. In addition, the experimental result on news article recommendation shows that the location based user preference improves the performance of news article recommendation.



I. INTRODUCTION  These days news reading environment has changed greatly.

Web-based news reading services like Google News and Ya- hoo! News have become increasingly prevalent, as the Internet allows fast access to news articles. In addition, wide spread of hand-held devices such as a smart phone or a tablet PC enables people to read news articles everywhere. Under this circumstance, people read only news articles in which they are interested at the places that they want. Normally, they have their own topics that explain their interests. Thus, they usually select news articles that contain their topics. The choice of news articles does not depend only reader?s usual interest, but also her location. An ordinary person has her own spatial pattern in daily life. She gets up at her home and has brunch at a restaurant near her office; she is working at her office, since she works for a finance company; she often drinks at her favorite bar; lastly, she comes back home to take a rest.

Along with her locations, the type of news articles that she reads can be different. For example, she reads business articles at her office. This is because the articles are related with her work, even if she prefers entertainment news to business news.

Therefore, it is of importance to consider the location of a news reader as well as her content preference in news article recommendation.

Most recommender systems build user preferences and find well-fitted items to the preferences. In collaborative filtering, the user preference is obtained from a user-item matrix which consists of item consumption patterns of users. The preference of a user is extracted by the patterns of other users who have a similar pattern with the target user. On the other hand, content- based recommendation constructs a user preference by ana- lyzing the content of the items that the user consumes. Word  frequency has been widely used to represent user preference, when the content is a text. However, many recent studies employ topic modeling of user preference [8], [9], [10]. They are dominant methods even in news article recommendation, and there are a number of their variants [8], [9]. However, they paid no attention to the location of readers, even though location is one of most important elements that determine user preference.

This paper proposes a method for topical representation of user preference. The method models the geographical patterns of a news reader jointly with word co-occurrence pattern.

Many existing content-based news recommender systems take advantage of topic modeling. Topic models such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [1] provide a good description for document contents [12]. Thus, it is natural to exploit topic models to build user preference in news recommendation.

However, they miss one important element that affects user preference. Each article read by a user always has a cor- responding location at which the user is located. Therefore, topics of a news article should be generated from not only words but also a location stamp.

People spend most of their time on a few major spots.

Therefore, the locations of a news reader are likely to be somewhere around the spots. To reflect this phenomenon into a topic model, the proposed method parameterizes a Gaussian distribution over locations associated with each topic. In the topic modeling, a topic is generated by discovering a word co- occurrence pattern over documents. Since every article has an observable location stamp, each word in the article corresponds to the location stamp of the article. Therefore, only content- based word patterns do not contribute to generating topics, but the word clusters around a location stamp also contribute to it. When some words are observed strongly together around a certain spot and do not appear at other places, the topic for them is generated from a Gaussian distribution of the spot.

Since the spot is a small place, the Gaussian distribution for the spot has a small variance. On the other hand, if they co- occur at most spots, then the topic for them is generated from a Gaussian distribution with a broad variance. By combining locational patterns of a user and word co-occurrence patterns of the news articles, the topics generated by the proposed method become more personalized. That is, the trained topic model reflects the more personalized geographical viewpoint of the user. Therefore, the proposed method recommends news articles in higher quality according to both user?s contextual preference and location.

A series of experiments were conducted to verify both the quality of generated topics and the recommendation per- formance of the proposed method. In the experiments, we compare the proposed method with LDA. News articles that are read by a user are used to build user preference. They are collected by a smart phone whenever the user reads a news article. Thus, each article has a GPS tag. This GPS tag records the location in which an article is read. Then, a Korean news corpus mined from World Wide Web is used as recommendation candidates. According to our experimental results, the proposed method outperformed LDA in both topic quality and recommendation performance. These results prove that the reading preference of a user is influenced by her location and our method reflects this fact effectively.



II. RELATED WORK  Personalized news recommendation has been of interest for a long time. Several adaptive news recommendation services such as Google News and Yahoo! News provide the personal- ized news recommendation under the collaborative filtering [3].

Such a success of the collaborative filtering encouraged many studies to propose various enhanced collaborative filtering ap- proaches. Many of them augmented the collaborative filtering in the use of user profiles and news content properties. Liu et al. analyzed users click behavior and built profiles of a user on her news interests based on both her past click behavior and the contents that she read [5]. Then, they combined both user click behavior and user profile simultaneously under a Bayesian framework. Their method has been applied on Google News, and the improvement of the recommendation quality was shown over the existing collaborative filtering.

Chu et al. tried to consider dynamic content on the front page of Yahoo! News according to the passage of time [2].

For this, they constructed the general profile of user using demographic information, activities on relevant sites, and so on. In order to handle the associations between the dynamic contents and the general profiles, they proposed a machine learning approach, so-called a feature-based bilinear regression model, and showed that their method outperforms significantly six existing competitive approaches.

Apart from the commercial news recommendation services, a variety of personalized news recommendations also have been developed in academic communities [6], [8]. Li et al.

modeled the personalized recommendation of news articles as a contextual-bandit problem [6]. They select articles sequen- tially to serve users based on the contextual information, click behavior for users, and click through rates for articles. They verified their method by showing that their method provides personalized web service effectively on traffic of the front page of Yahoo! News. On the other hand, Li et al. proposed two-stage personalized news recommendation systems [8]. In order to deal with large volume of newly published news collections, they employ minhashing and locally sensitive hashing to reduce the number of comparisons in the first stage. In addition, they use a hierarchical clustering for further speeding up of news article selection. In the second stage, they recommend newly published articles by considering not only the contents of news articles but also the entity preferences such as people and events.

Recently many recommendation services try to incorporate  Fig. 1. Overall process of the news recommendation.

a user context into choosing interesting articles. Lin et al.

recommended news articles by incorporating three factors into a probabilistic matrix factorization [4]. The three factors considered are news content information, collaborative filter- ing, and information diffusion in virtual social network. In this work, the information from social networks is regarded as ?word of mouth? that can be used to help making a decision for unexperienced users. Li and Li also tried to reflect the user behavior and news content simultaneously for news recommendation [7]. In this study, they employed a unified graph-based approach to model multi-type objects such as event types, topics, and implicit relations in news reading community. They proved through an experiment on a data set collected from various news websites that their method handles the cold-start problem effectively.

Many previous studies have considered not just content preference but also some other factors such as user click behavior, entity preferences, and social relationship of users.

These studies have proven the effectiveness of those factors for personalized news recommendation. However, none of them consider the spatial context of users even though the interests of news change according to user location. That is, different user preferences can be discovered with respect to different user locations. Therefore, it is important to regard the spatial context as one of contexts for news recommendation. Then, the news recommendation can reflect the routine life of users, and derive high quality of news articles.



III. NEWS ARTICLE RECOMMENDATION WITH USER?S SPATIAL INFORMATION  Figure 1 describes the overall process of measuring how well a news article a is fitted to the user preference with her location l by Spatial Topical Preference Model (STPM). The news articles that a user had already read are assumed to be     given in advance, and all articles are geo-tagged. Here, the tag is from user location in which the user read the article.

We first need to know the user preference to recommend news articles. The topical representation of this preference is denoted as P in this figure. However, the user preference changes whenever the user changes her location, so that P should be changed according to user location. That is, the topical representation P from the locational information as well as the words is estimated using P and the current user location l.

Each article can be usually represented as a topic vector.

Thus, a new article a is also represented as a topic vector Ta.

Like location-dependent user preference, the topics of a are affected by the user location l. Thus, we modify it to Ta,l by incorporating the location into Ta. Then, the appropriateness of Ta,l to Pl is determined by a score function f(Pl, Ta,l).

Since both the user preference and the representation of a news article are represented as topic vectors, a simple vector similarity is used as the score function. That is, the score function f(Pl, Ta,l) is computed by  f(Pl, Ta,l) = Pl ? Ta,l  ? Pl ? ? ? Ta,l ? . (1)  Obviously the high scored article is more likely to be recom- mended to the user.



IV. SPATIAL TOPICAL PREFERENCE MODEL  Most existing content-based news recommender systems consider only words of articles. Thus, they employ a topic model to find hidden meanings among words. The discovered topics are used to represent a user preference. This is because the topics are generated from word co-occurrence patterns over news articles that were read by the target user. However, topic discovery is affected not only by word co-occurrences, and some previous works deal with other factors for topic discovery [11]. In case of constructing the user preference, the user?s spatial patterns of reading articles also affect the user preference. Thus, STPM reflects the patterns into news recommendation.

Figure 2 shows the graphical model of STPM. Every word is assumed to have its own location stamp. Then, all words are located in a geographical space. However, the number of locations in which a user is moving is not large. Normally a user is active on a few major spots. Therefore, the locations of words appearing in the articles that the user read are somewhere around the several spots. As a result, the topics discovered from the words have geographical patterns. Then, STPM can cluster words through the geographical patterns.

That is, the words can be clustered by their co-occurrences on their geographical locations as well as the co-occurrences in the articles.

We assume that these geographical patterns of topics are ruled by a Gaussian distribution. The distribution allows the topics STPM to be flexible, since it is continuous. Note that the location stamps for training STPM are sparse compared to po- tential locations of a user. By adapting a Gaussian distribution, STPM can avoid the sparsity of the locational information. In addition, since each word corresponds to location stamps, the  Fig. 2. The graphical model of STPM.

Gibbs sampling can be conveniently used to infer the posterior distribution of the topics.

Let ?z be a probability vector of words in a topic z, and ?1:T be a probability matrix of T topics and all words.

Under STPM model, the words and the locations arise from the following generative process with Dirichlet parameters ? and ?.

1. Draw topic proportion ?d | ? ? Dirichlet(?).

2. For each word and location,  (a) Draw a topic assignment of an article di by zdi | ?d ? Multinomial(?d).

(b) Draw words by wdi | zdi ,?1:T ? Multinomial(?zdi ).

(c) Draw locations by ldi | zdi , ?1:T ,?1:T ? Normal(?zdi ,?zdi ).

The posterior distribution P (?,?, z | w, l) should be inferred to train the model, where w is all words in the articles and l represents all possible locations. That is, since only words and location stamps are observed in the data set, all those latent variables should be estimated from them. However, the inference cannot be done exactly, since ?, ?, and {?,?} are coupled together in the summation over latent topics. As an alternative method, the Gibbs sampling is used. We sample first the assignments of words and locations to topics, and then ? and ? are integrated after topics are sampled. Therefore, the conditional posterior distribution for zdi is given by  P (zdi | w, z?di, l) ? P (wdi | w?di, z?di)P (ldi | l?di, z?di)P (z?di)  ? nzdiwdi + ?wdi ? 1?V v=1(n + ?v)? 1  (mdzdi + ?zdi ? 1)  ? 1 2?  ? |?zdi |  exp( ?(ldi ? ?zdi)T??1zdi(ldi ? ?zdi)  ),(2)  where z?di is the assignment of all words except wdi. In addition, nzv represents the number that a word v is assigned to a topic z, and mdz is the number that the words in an article d are assigned to a topic z. The Gaussian parameters for each topic are obtained by a maximum likelihood method [13].

A. User Preference Estimation over User Location  Like other previous studies [8], [9], a topic proportion ? of news articles that a user has read is used as the user preference. We call this preference as the usual preference of a user. However, this preference is not differentiated by     (a) Location A  (b) Location B  Fig. 3. Two different topic representations of the same news article by STPM at two different locations.

locations. Thus, the difference of STPM from the previous studies comes from the reflection of geographical information.

The conditional posterior distribution of the trained model given a user location l can be seen as the user preference at l. With this point of view, we define Pl, the user preference over l as follows.

Pl = ?E(?z1 | l), E(?z2 | l), . . . , E(?zT | l)?,  where E(?zk) is an expectation of ?zk and T is the number of topics. By the Bayes rule,  E(?zk | l) = P (zk | l) ? p(l | zk)P (zk).

P (zk) can be obtained from the usual preference. Then, Pl should be compared with a topic representation Ta,l of an article a by Equation (1). However, E(?zk | l)?s in P (l) are not a probability, while Ta,l is a topic proportion. Therefore, to make them be compared, they are normalized to a sum of one.

B. Topic Inference of News Articles with User Location  Topic representation Ta,l of a news article a with user location l can be obtained by computing a posterior distribution ? of {a, l}. Hence, we also conduct a sampling procedure for each word in {a, l} by Equation (2). Then, Ta,l is obtained by marginalizing those sampled topics. Since Ta,l is a topic  proportion of {a, l}, it is represented as a vector  Ta,l = ??{a,l}z1 , ? {a,l} z2 , . . . , ?  {a,l} zT ?.

Then, each topic-document distribution ?{a,l}zk is obtained by counting zk among sampled topics as follows.

?{a,l}zk = mazk + ??T  k=1 mazk + T? .

The current user location is used as a location for news recommendation. Therefore, even the same article is repre- sented as different topic vectors according to locations. As a result, a news article at different locations is considered to be different in our model. For instance, Figure 3 shows topic proportions of an article at two different locations. This figure is drawn for the topics of the user who reads Major League Baseball (MLB)-related articles mostly at the location B and reads general articles at the location A. Thus, when a new article about a MLB game is given, the topic proportion in Figure 3(a) is a little bit different from that in Figure 3(b).

Since the topic 5 is a MLB topic, it appears strongly at both locations. Note that the topic 18 is also relatively strong at the location A, since it is about overall sports. However, it does not appear at all at the location B, since the location B is a MLB-specific location. All probabilities for the topic 18 are reflected in the topic 5 at the location B. Since STPM reflects the difference of locations well into news recommendation, more sophisticate recommendation gets possible.



V. EXPERIMENTS  A. Experimental Settings  To evaluate our method, two collections of news articles are used. One is a collection of news articles that a user has read to train user preference, and the other is a news articles collection mined from the web. The second collection is used as a candidate set for recommendation. These data sets consist of 9 categories of politics, business, society, life/culture, world, IT/science, entertainment, weather, and sports. All of news articles are written in Korean and we use only nouns for interpreting topics.

Table I shows a simple statistics of our data set. For learning preference, we collected 293 news articles spanned 75 days. The collection has 7,013 unique words and 40,726 word tokens in total. This data set is collected using a smart phone with a GPS function. Thus, each news article is stamped with a GPS coordinates as soon as the article is read by a user. The spatial patterns of the user consist of three main spots of home, office, and food court. The recommendation collection consists of 8,921 news articles from August 18, 2013 to September 18, 2013. This collection contains 32,342 unique words and 1,513,603 word tokens.

The superiority of our method is given by comparing it with LDA in two ways. First, it is compared with LDA in the quality of discovered topics. Since the distinctness of topics represents their quality often [11], this is measured with KL-divergence to see how distinct the topics are one another. The second is the quality of news recommendation by STPM as a proof of its effectiveness. It is measured with NDCG@k which is broadly used to evaluate the performance of recommendation systems.

TABLE I. SIMPLE STATISTICS OF NEWS ARTICLE COLLECTIONS  Data set Time span The number of articles The number of unique words The number of tokens News articles for preference 2013/6/3 - 2013/8/17 293 7,013 40,726  News articles for recommendation 2013/8/18 - 2013/9/18 7,370 32,342 1,513,603  TABLE II. TOP TOPICS OF THE USER BY LDA AND STPM.

Model Spot Topics Words  STPM  Office Topic 19 (airplane accident) airline, open, accident, San Francisco, plan, ...Topic 5 (MLB) Hyun-Jin Ryu, manager, player, hit, Dodgers, ...

Food court Topic 15 (issues about politics) president, supervision, Snowden, government, exile, ...Topic 18 (general sports) match, competition, coach, player, referee, ...

Home Topic 14 (Samsung lions, baseball team) hit, homerun, Samsung, season, hitter, ...Topic 4 (national football team) match, player, national team, training, Sung-Yong Ki, ...

LDA  Topic 1 (general sports) championship, win, Wimbledon, golf, tour, ...

Topic 16 (Samsung lions, baseball team) homerun, hit, match, Samsung, season, ...

Topic 18 (Korean baseball league) manager, player, pitcher, baseball, Hee-Kwan Yoo, ...

Topic 7 (national football team) match, coach, player, Korea, football, ...

Topic 12 (accidents and incidents) police, afternoon, accident, Seoul, occurrence, ...

Topic 14 (miscellaneous) park, theme, broadcast, picture, mother, ...

(a) Office (b) Food court (c) Home  Fig. 4. Topic distributions of the user in the office, in the food court, and at home.

In all experiments, the number of topics is set to 20. Fixed symmetric Dirichlet distributions are used with ? = 1/T and ? = 0.01.

B. Experimental Results  We first describe the news reading characteristics of our test user briefly. He has major three routine spots, and he reads different kinds of news articles along with the spots. He likes sports so that he read the sports articles at all the three spots.

Especially, he read many articles associated with Korean MLB players around his office. On the other hand, the articles related with Korean baseballs such as ?Samsung lions? are read at his home. He is also interested in politics. Thus, he read many political articles, and did it especially at the food court.

Table II shows the topics of the user trained by STPM and LDA. It lists top two topics for each location in STPM, and top six topics in LDA. Sports are the dominant topics in STPM. The topic 5 at office, the topic 18 at food court, and the topics 14 and 4 at home are all sport-related topics.

On the other hand, the topics generated by LDA are different from those by STPM. Some topics such as ?Samsung lions? are shared by both LDA and STPM, but some other topics in STMP do not appear in LDA. For instance, the topic 15 which is a political topic does not appear in STMP. Nevertheless, the sports are slightly different one another. Figure 4 proves it.

The topic distributions of the user are definitely different one  another according to the locations, and thus they reflect the life pattern of the user.

The quality of topics also is measured numerically with KL-divergence. KL-divergence measures the average distance of word distributions of all pairs of topics. Thus, the larger KL-divergence between two topics is, the more distinct they are. In our experiments, the average KL-divergence in STPM is 16.375, while that in LDA is just 14.331. Therefore, it can be inferred that STPM learns more distinct topics, which implies higher quality of topics.

The recommendation results are shown in Figure 5. The experiments are conducted with three locations sampled from three major spots of the user. STPM is compared with LDA using NDCG@k. At all three locations, STPM outperforms LDA. STPM achieves average NDCG scores over k of 0.67 at office, 0.57 at both food court and home. However, LDA scores 0.39, 0.39, and 0.32 respectively. Since the user prefers sports to other categories, most articles recommended by LDA include the words associated with sports. Unfortunately, a lot of news articles about a TV show also contain words about playing sports games in our data set. These words are, however, generated from the topic 1 in LDA, where the topic 1 represents general sports. Since the user has no interests in TV shows, the performances of LDA at all three locations are all poor. On the other hand, STPM shows good performance for the locations. Although general sports is also one of the high     (a) Office (b) Food court (c) Home  Fig. 5. NDCG@k scores with various k in news article recommendation  proportional topics in STPM, it is not that significant. Instead, location-specific topics are dominant in the articles that the user read. Thus, the dominant topics are a MLB-related topic at the office, a political topic at the food court, and a Korean baseball topic at his home. Since STPM reflects these topics according to his location, its NDCG@k is always higher than that of LDA at all locations regardless of the size of k.



VI. CONCLUSION  This paper has proposed a personalized news article recom- mendation with the Spatial Topical Preference Model (STPM).

The spatial information of a user is used as valuable infor- mation to construct the user?s preference in STPM. People usually move along routine traces in their everyday life. Thus, it can be possible to discover their geographical patterns as their spatial context. STPM models the geographical patterns of the user jointly with the word patterns for news article recommendation. As a result, it finds out the different user preference for the different locations. This location-dependent user preference enables STPM to recommend the news articles that are more appropriate to user location. According to the experimental results, STPM constructs the preferences that are more specialized to user?s locational context, and the quality of the preference has been proven to be high quantitatively. STPM also outperformed LDA in the recommendation performance evaluation. These results show that the reading preference of a user is affected by her location and our method reflects this fact effectively.

