Inpainting for Big Data

Abstract? In the current day World with ever rising crime rate, it becomes evident to keep a watch on the secure authentication and retrieval of Human identities. Face Biometrics is a dedicated and one amongst the most popular arena which relies on the facial (biological) traits for unique identity retrieval. Real Time Applications of efficient identity retrieval using face biometric are posed by many hindrances in the form of occlusions/distortions which subsequently result in the drastic reduction of the system response time with the increase in database size. Efficient and error free Real Time face recognition demands the backup of a mammoth database with due considerations to the degrees of occlusion, age variations, distortions, background variations, lighting conditions, moods etc., which pose a major setback to maintain a balance between the Real Time system efficiency, its response time and optimum database size! This lacuna is addressed in the current Novel work of Research to tap the intra facial feature logical relationships to evolve the occluded/distorted facial boundary and features with precision and perfection and also cut short the size of the Real Time Identity Retrieval system database to a great extent!

Keywords?Inpainting; Big Data; Occlusion; Real Time Face Recognition; Identity Retrieval

I.  INTRODUCTION (Heading 1) Perpetual evolution in the Digital Communication  technology has predominantly signified the importance of Images which are categorized as the Complex information data types. The conventional databases which deal with textual and numerical information and finite number of images are no longer compatible with the Real Time Applications which need constant updations for the efficient performance portrayal.

With the advent of advanced computational tools and improved networking competences, vital contributory work towards the development of improvised techniques for the accomplishment of efficient storage and retrieval from mammoth collections of images is gaining impetus.

Data is a raw entity which merely has an existence, beyond which owns no perceivable significance. Data considered individually as an entity possesses no meaning. Data gets  elevated into Information when many related data entities are meaningfully connected. The appropriate grouping of information with the backdrop of a useful intent leads to a deterministic process, Knowledge. Understanding is the process by which one can make use of the existing knowledge and synthesize new knowledge from the previously held knowledge.

Wisdom is an extrapolative process. It beckons to give an understanding about which there has previously been no understanding of. It is the essence of philosophical probing [37].

Through the proposed algorithm, a humble beginning towards constricting the size of the database by inducing wisdom into the Real time identity retrieval system is initiated. The efficient and effective performance of an ideal Real Time System has to be mandatorily backed up by a full-fledged mammoth Database.

According to the United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2013) the World population as on 9th July 2013 equals 7,164,839,912[36]. The Huge and continuously increasing population of the World poses a threat towards the construction of an equally competent database because of the huge space required, maintenance, updations considering the aging variations, occlusions, lighting variations etc., Hence the realization of such a mammoth Real Time Database which is fully fledged indeed becomes an a herculean task!  But, trusted Recognition and Authentication at Real Time becomes evident in our World with proliferating crime rate!

This leads to a situation where it becomes evident to come up with a wise algorithm which maintains the balance between the Real Time System efficiency and the database size ingeniously!

Through the proposed work of Research a Novel Algorithm to competently tap the wisdom behind the mammoth Real Time database has been pioneered.

The Face Biometric is termed to be the most easily accessible amongst all the other biometrics (physiological or behavioral) [1]. Review of the Literature portrays innumerable contributions towards Face Recognition. Yet, the Real Time Face Recognition continues to be a scarcely explored area because of the presence of impediments in the form of occlusions (due to the presence of external objects in front of the face or due to artifacts on the face like spectacles, moustache, beard, and mask), variations in intensity across the face, heavy deformities in the face as an   DOI 10.1109/ICSIP.2014.14    DOI 10.1109/ICSIP.2014.14    DOI 10.1109/ICSIP.2014.14     accident after math, variations due to age etc., where the degree of occlusion/deformity cannot be precisely determined. The Facial Occlusions/deformities pose a major threat in the accomplishment of efficient identity retrieval and also to the uncontrollable increase in the database size. The proposed Inpainting for Big Data (IBD) Algorithm explores the realm of Image Inpainting to realize a convincible solution for the problem of Big Data. The currently available inpainting algorithms construct the occluded regions (holes) in the image by utilizing the information from the regions surrounding the depleted regions. An in depth survey of the literature till date reveals the fact that the work related to facial Image Inpainting considers only the predetermined occlusions of prime features like eyes, mouth, nose etc and the reconstruction is accomplished by reviewing the surrounding regions of the hole and the corresponding missing region is retrieved from the non occluded version of the same image stored in the database [2- 4][10][13][14][29-31]. But, this type of retrieval does not work efficiently for a Real Time system because of the following reasons viz., (i) the location or the measure of occlusion cannot be precisely determined before hand; (ii) Occlusion/Deformity will not always be oriented against the facial features; (iii) Face captured at Real time need not have a one to one match with the face stored in the database; Apart from these real time challenges, if the degree of occlusion/deformity across the face is beyond 50%, the task of face reconstruction with the help of currently available Inpainting algorithms becomes unviable. In the Proposed IBD Algorithm, the fundamental concept of Inpainting Algorithms which make use of the peripheral information of the occluded/depleted region for reconstruction is updated with modification to extract the logical relationships that exist between the different intra facial features (logical relationship which is shared amongst the visible and occluded features).

Extensive survey of the intra facial features confirms the existence of strong logical relationships amongst the features which is relied by painters and sculptors to render the realistic feel in their relevant work of art. Experimentation on an elaborate database has been carried out to prove the authenticity of the logical relations between the intra facial features. The proposed Algorithm IBD confidently puts forth the fact that by weaving in the Logical Inpainting Analytics into the Real Time Applications, the database size (there by the complexity) experiences a drastic dip with a corresponding increase in the system response time and efficiency! In other words, the IBD Algorithm is a step forward towards optimizing the three v?s of Big Data viz., Volume, Velocity and Variability.

The Research paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes related work. Section 3 describes the IBD Algorithm.

Section 4 discusses about the Data Set used and finally, Section 5 shows the Experimental Results and Section 6 Concludes the paper.



II. LITERATURE SURVEY In the article entitled ?The End of Theory? by Anderson [40] refers to the possible ways of generating more perceptive results with the help of big data, unlike the domain experts who carefully build the research approaches and hypothesis. The revolutionary statement put forth [40] has begun to materialize, be it in the research approaches of academics or the business bodies or administrative affairs. Mark Graham [41] refers to information (Big Data) about living and non living entities can expose many secrets about the respective entities synonymous to the way human beings interpret. Big Data is not only confined to efficient handling of data sets of astronomical size but also deals with handling the complexities accompanying the different data types! According to the published articles [38] and [39], as on 2012 the realized maximum size of the mammoth databases measured on the order of exabytes.  But, the data sets? growth in size is a continuous phenomenon. In a Real Time System the growth is drastic, since data is continuously amassed by the system. Compared to the numeric or alpha numeric data sets, the Real Time tracking datasets demand larger spaces since they amass images/videos; as a result of which the growth in space occupied by the data becomes exponential! As stated earlier, in today?s World with the improvisations in science and technology, there is a proportional increase in crime and the techniques relied upon to commit crime. This calls for secure identity retrieval for user identification and authentication at Real Time. To track and authenticate the innumerable World population at Real Time calls for a full fledged (continuously updating) database. Managing the size and complexity of the full fledged (ever increasing) database is to be rationally looked into.

The IBD Algorithm is an initiative towards the realization of a Big Data which is small by tapping the logical relationships existing amidst the intra facial features relying on the basics of Image Inpainting.

The Survey of the Image Inpainting related Literature till date shed light on the research work [2] through which the remarkable area of Image Inpainting was born. The contributions made by [2] paved the way for a brand new avenue - the realm of Image disocclusion/Reconstruction [3]. Image Inpainting is based on the technique of depleted region reconstruction by relying upon the image details or the isophotes at its periphery. The contributory work in [10] proposed a finding which used manual selection of the region to be disoccluded and with the help of PDE propagated the missing data in the isophotes direction and was successful in removing the minor scratches from the image. Since its birth in 2000, many researchers have contributed brilliant findings in the form of updations, modifications and new findings to the realm of Inpainting to achieve better results [4-7]. The methods proposed in [8-12] were successful in removing the occlusions/deformities, using Level lines. The research contributions in [13, 14] conceived the Curvature Driven Diffusion (CDD) which demonstrated its efficiency in     topologically complex Domains. Following which the prior models (Bayesian Inference of image objects) [9][13-19] were used for inpainting which carried the inability in capturing the principle of connectivity and also created visible errors in the output. The drawback of the prior models was predominantly removed by the level sets. Level sets help in the efficient segmentation of the objects? visible contour, but if the object of interest is occluded then the level sets render the false contour of the object. This lacuna was to an extent solved by [20] and [21].

The reconstruction system [20], [21] employing level sets expects regular deformities/occlusions! The underlying task which remains unsolved after looking into the different contributions till date is ? In any Real Time Applications the regularity in occlusion across the objects of interest cannot be precisely indicated in advance. In this context, fulfillment of information recovery under occlusion gains utmost importance.

The intricate survey of the literature exposes the fact that the currently available contributions give satisfactory results of restoration if and only if the object contour is not corrupted or corrupted with a predefined regularity by the occlusion.

Irregularity in the occlusion of the object contour makes the reconstruction task very intricate! The IBD algorithm considers face as the object of interest mainly because of the following challenges it holds out (a) Reconstruction of Occluded face cannot be realized by information retrieval from the hole boundary; (b) Appearance of the face of an individual varies with mood, expressions, makeup, age, disguise etc.,; (c)drastic variations in lighting conditions across the face; (d)Image degradation due to noise; (e)different degrees of occlusions; which need to be looked into convincingly.

Literatures dealing with disocclusion of face reveal the fact that occlusions can be broadly classified into two major categories (i) Sparse Occlusions (ii) Dense Occlusions. The face reconstruction algorithm in [22] uses patch guidance with reference to the database for depleted face retrieval. Lacuna with the patch guided inpainting is to maintain a fully fledged date database a must for real time applications! In [23], the guidance vector field learns iteratively and recovery is performed using the Poisson equation, guidance vector field and Dirichlet boundary conditions. Training the guidance vector field in [23] is overhead with the presumption that the deformed image sample is to be a distorted adaptation of the sample in the database. The overhead with [24][25]: with the increase in the occlusion degree there is a proportional increase in the number of iterations. [26] Achieves removal and reconstruction of facial structural component using apriori information fed from the database and [27] considers sparse occlusions on face.

The elaborate up to date survey of literature reveals that the available work deals with specific feature facial occlusions with reference to the information maintained in the database. But, as stated earlier the orientation of real time occlusion can never be determined with precision. For eg: As an effect of after math of an accident the deceased might have lost a major part of his face,  in cases of which it becomes a mandatory requirement to retrieve the identity of the person with precision. This afore mentioned situation demands evolution of the face contour before applying any identity retrieval techniques [32]. Evolving of the Face Contour using [28] becomes difficult if the occlusion is around 90%.

The current work is a humble beginning which deals with the logical relationships persisting between the intra facial features which are experimentally confirmed to efficiently reconstruct the occluded face contour and also aids in drastically cutting down the Real Time database size!



III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM The IBD algorithm in contrast with the existing Inpainting  techniques proposes to reconstruct the depleted face regions by extracting the persistent intra facial feature logical relations successfully. IBD Algorithm is a Novel and first of its kind step towards efficient reconstruction of heavily occluded images and also to drastically curtail the Real Time database size.

The IBD Algorithm evolves the vertical length and width of an individual whose face displays only 10% visibility oriented only towards the eyes (Fig 2). Misleading factors confronted in retrieving the exact identity of an individual efficiently are viz., (a) padding on the face within the mask (b) thick hair growth (c) turban (d) ear plugs etc which tend to mislead the Real Time Identity Retrieval System with reference to efficient extraction of individual identity. The misleading factors tend to highly influence the process of identity retrieval irrespective of the backup from a highly sophisticated database. The facial proportions presented by the golden ratio system is not used in the IBD Algorithm because of the factual evidence stipulated by [28] which strongly defends that human face structure does not always (in most of the cases) satisfy the golden ratio. The IBD Algorithm for reconstruction of the heavily occluded face includes: Input: Occluded Face with 10% visibility. (With only eyes of the individual visible)  Step 1: Skin Illumination Compensation Algorithm [33] is used to segment out the regions corresponding to the Face from the image.

Step 2: Features are extracted from the localized frontal face images of Step1. The facial features are extracted by using Strongest Corner U-SURF [34] (Upright-Speeded Up Robust Features). U-SURF is used because it provides scale invariant detectors and descriptors.

Step 3: Eyes are detected with the help of the Hybrid method proposed in [35] following which the plotting of the extracted feature (corner U-SURF) points on the face image is accomplished.

Step 4: For each of the eye detected, the distance between the U- SURF corner feature points is calculated to obtain the eye width.

The eye widths for an individual are equal with some very minor variation in some cases. The minor variations of the order of (10- 2) are because of the fact that the facial features need not necessarily strike an exact one to one match in reality.

Step 5: Horizontally across the eye line the calculated one eye width is repeated for five times which is experimentally found to be the facial width of the individual under consideration.

Step 6: The evolved face width is considered as the diameter of a circle. As the outcome of elaborate experimentation it is deduced that 1.5 times the face width results in the vertical facial length.

Fl = 1.5*(Fw)     (1) Where Fl = face length; Fw = face width;  The logical relationship portrayed by equation (1) has been proven to be true for an elaborate database consisting of 400 subjects with a success factor of over 98%. The 2% lag in the success rate of IBD is largely influenced by the fact that the eye widths individuals need not always strike a perfect match and for the computation of facial width the dimensions of only one eye is considered.

The proposed Algorithm portrays major benefits compared to the currently available algorithms namely: maintenance of a fully fledged, huge database is not required as a result of which a remarkable improvement in the Real Time system response time is realized!



IV. DATA SET FOR EXPERIMENTATION To prove the correctness and authenticity of the intra facial  Logical Relations proposed in the IBD Algorithm, a facial database has been personally created. The created face database is categorized into two broad categories, where the first category includes 10 occlusion variants plus the ground truth for each of the 300 individual considered (as shown in Fig1) and the second category consists of frontal face images of 100 different individuals collected from the world wide web. The frontal face samples collected in the category two are regarded as the ground truth and the 10 occlusion variants are artificially mapped on to the ground truths collected with the help of Photoshop. Summing up the total database size to 4000(400 ground truth images * 10 occlusion variants for each of the ground truth samples) face samples.

Random Selection Cross Validation is used for validating the database. For cross validating the database, the random selection of the face image samples from the dataset is carried out into the testing and training sections (for e.g. 60% training and 40% testing, 90% training and 10% testing etc). The ground truth image sample is neither considered for Training nor for Testing.

The Database is conceived using a Sony Digital Camera. The configuration of the camera used is as follows: Camera maker: Sony; Camera model: DSC-S1900;  Focal Length: 6mm; Max aperture: 3.4375; The Distance of the individuals from the camera is around 0.5 meter.

Fig 1: 10 different Occlusion variants plus Ground Truth for an individual

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS An elaborate comparative study amidst the ground truth and  the corresponding heavily occluded (90%) version for all the 400 subjects constituting the database volume confirms the facial width to be equivalent to 5 * eye width(Fig 2) with a commendable 98% success. Face Width corresponds to the horizontal facial measurement including the ear spread for the frontal viewpoint of the face. Considering the face width as the diameter a circle is sketched on the face (the point amidst the eyes taken as the centre of the circle). The IBD Algorithm designates the circle as Circle of Width (COW). The vertical length remaining above and and below the Circle of Width are found to be close to half of the radius of the Circle of Width with a precision approximately equal to 95%. An error of 5% is found in calculating the vertical face length is because of the variations perceived in the hairstyles. IBD algorithm experimented on individuals with no hairs (bald head) produces better results with errors of about 2%.

The Logical relations aid in drastically constraining the size of the Real Time Database. The different facial variations due to age, emotions, facial expressions, make up and disguise will not affect the Real Time System from efficiently retrieving the individual identity! Because of the efficiency portrayed by the IBD Algorithm, it could be confidently stated that by exploiting the Intra facial Logical Relationships, only a single frontal face sample of an individual would be sufficient (irrespective of the degree and orientation of occlusion) to be represented in the database for a Real Time Application!

Fig 2: Ground Truth Face, Occluded Face; Ground truth sample overlaid with eye width (5(eye width) = face width) and Circle of Width; Fl = 1.5*(Fw); where Fl =  face length; Fw = face width;

VI. CONCLUSION Through the IBD a humble and novel initiative has been  taken to efficiently extract the facial width and vertical length by exploiting the intra facial feature logical relations. The proposed IBD Algorithm opens the doorway to tamper the intra facial relations which paves the way for realizing a finitely sized Real Time database, in other words a small Big Data!

The success of the IBD Algorithm has motivated the authors to explore various such Logical relationships persisting amongst the facial features which would further aid to curtail the size of the Real Time Database.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors would like to extend their sincere thanks to  JSSRF for having provided us with the resources for carrying out our Research Work efficiently.

