Mining Websites Preferences on Web Events in Big Data Environment

Abstract?On the web, there are numerous websites pub- lishing webpages to cover the events occurring in society.

The web events data satisfies the well-accepted attributes of big data: Volume, Velocity, Variety and Value. As a great value of web events data, website preferences can help the followers of web events, e.g. peoples or organizations, to select the proper websites to follow their interested aspects of web events. However, the big volume, fast evolution speed, multi- source and unstructured data all together make the value of website preferences mining very challenging. In this paper, website preference is formally defined at first. Then, according to the hierarchical attribute of web events data, we propose a hierarchical network model to organize big data of a web event from different organizations, different areas and different nations at a given time stamp. With this hierarchical network structure in hand, two strategies are proposed to mine the value of websites preferences from web events data. The first straightforward strategy utilizes the communities of keyword- level network and the mapping relations between websites and keywords to unveil the Value in them. By taking the whole hierarchical network structure into consideration, an iterative algorithm is proposed in second strategy to refine the keyword communities like the first strategy. At last, an evaluation criteria of website preferences is designed to compare the performances of two proposed strategies. Experimental results show the proper combination of horizontal relations (each level network) with vertical relations (mapping relations between three level networks) can extract more value from web events data and then improve the efficiency on website preferences mining.

Keywords-web event; big data; website preferences; hierar- chical network

I. INTRODUCTION  In the modern times of information explosion, big data can be seen everywhere, for example, customer transactions data, sensor data, gene data, and so on. The coming of big data era brings much benefits for nations, organizations, companies and each individual. At the same time, it brings new challenges for researchers [1]?[3] from both academy and industry. Although there is still no well-accepted defi- nition of big data, some important attributes are commonly accepted, including: Volume, Velocity, Variety and Value.

Web events data is also a big data. A web event could be a hot news story, like a scandal, or the cover of a social event in the real world on the web, like an earthquake. For  example, ?phone-hacking of News of the World? and ?9-11? are two web events. Concerning and participating web events have become the routine lives of all the cyber citizens in each day (Velocity), which leads to the huge number of webpages, blogs and posts (Volume) from different kinds of media, like twitter, facebook, news websites, blog and forum (Variety).

With the development of Web, the number of websites also increase sharply. To the December of 2012, there are about 634 million websites on the web 1. Except aforementioned four attributes, web events data has its own special attributes, which express its special values, comparing gene data or customer transaction data. One is that the content of a web event is normally not stationary, but it will change with the evolution of this web event. This evolution may come from the development of a news story and the change of interests of its web followers. Another is that there is a hierarchical structure. Both of them are the knowledge of web events data with great values.

How are the big data attributes, Volume, Velocity and Variety, of web events formed? After the emergence of a web event, there will be numerous websites publishing webpages to cover it in each day (Volume). In these big volume of websites, each one has its own preference on this web event, because these websites may belong to different organizations, different areas or even different nations. For covering same web events, these websites with different preferences ?come together? to form the Variety attribute of web events data. Since the website preferences could be seen as the different compositions of aspects of a web event, websites generally focus on one or limited number of aspects of this web event, as shown in Fig. 1. Take ?phone- hacking of News of the World? as an example, a website, www2.canada.com2, mainly focuses on ?Impact on ethics of internet journalism? aspect of this web event. Meanwhile, another website, www.guardian.co.uk3, shows interests in the aspect, ?Criminal charges and convictions?, of this web event. By the way, these aspects will keep change with the evolution of a web event everyday or even everyhour  1http://royal.pingdom.com/2013/01/16/internet-2012-in-numbers/ 2http://www2.canada.com/story.html?id=5074391 3http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2005/apr/16/pressandpublishing.crime   DOI 10.1109/CSE.2013.152    DOI 10.1109/CSE.2013.152     Figure 1: Two webpages of web event ?Edward Snowden Leakage? from Google search engine. Two webpages express website preferences of two related websites on this web event: one is the ?college degree? and the other one is his ?girlfriend?.

(Velocity): some aspects may disappear, some aspects may be preserve and some new aspects may arise. These aspects and their temporal changes not only reflect the Variety and Velocity attributes of web events data, but also show the Value and its variation of web events data.

What are the Value of website preferences in web events data used for? The formation of preference of a website on web events is mainly for satisfying followers of this website.

The values of identifying them are: 1) instead of the most visited ones in a huge number of websites, the specified websites can be recommended to users or organizations who have the same interest with these websites. Then, users can follow their interested aspects of web events by following the recommended websites without consuming time and energy to follow all the websites or to search for the desired information from all the webpages, blogs and posts; 2) The advertisers can also benefit from website preferences.

Since web events can attract many people?s attentions, the companies can put their advertises of products or services to the proper websites for pushing up sales. Apparently, they should choose the websites which preferences on web events have big correlations with their products and services; 3) automatically identify the malicious websites which only publish malicious aspect of web events. If the slander information of a web event is only come from one website, it is possible that this website is spreading slander information with purpose. This is especially valuable for some administrations, like governments and organizations.

To summarize, web events data has the typical attributes of big data. 1) Volume: there are huge number of websites and webpages to cover them; 2) Velocity: as the routine lives of cyber citizen, the information of web events is updated every day or even every hour and minutes; 3) Variety: web events will be discussed on different media, like news websites, blogs, forums by different unstructured formats, like news webpages, blogs and posts; 4) Value: as one part of value expression, the website preferences have great value for nations, organizations, companies and individuals.

Except for these attributes, web events data has its own attributes: 1) the content of them will evolve with time. After a period of time, they may evolve to another brand new web event; 2) there is hierarchical structure hidden in the web events data. The top level is composed by different media, the middle level is composed by the webpages, posts and blogs from different media and the bottom level is composed by keywords contained in the items of second level. Since the website preferences can be represented as keywords of web events and these preferences should be exhibited by webpages, there are inter-dependency and inter-limitation relations between different levels.

The difficulties for the website preferences Value mining of web events data are mainly from its another three big data attributes. In this paper, we only focus on its Variety attribute to mine the value of website preferences. The difficulties lie on: 1) Lacking an organizing model for huge number of multi-source unstructured data; 2) Lacking of methods to utilize the hierarchical structure attribute of web events data.

Considering above mentioned difficulties of website pref- erences value mining and attributes of web events data, we firstly give a hierarchical model, three-level-network: website level network, webpage level network and key- word level network, to reveal and organize different level informations about a web event at one time stamp. Sec- ondly, we propose two strategies to automatically mine the website preferences based on three-level-network. The first strategy is a straightforward one. Keyword communities of keyword network, which unifies the different formates of information from different sources (from Variety attribute), of a given web event are considered as the different aspects of this web event. And by the mapping relation between websites and keywords in keyword network, the website preferences are computed. Based on the first strategy, the second strategy is proposed to incorporate the mapping relations between websites, webpages and keywords which are used to constrain the formation of keyword communities of keyword network. This mapping relations integrate the     influences from different materials coming from different sources which is just the one ignored by the first strategy.

At last, an evaluation metric is developed to compare the performances of two strategies. Experimental results show the proper combination of horizontal relations (each level network) with vertical relations (mapping relations between three level networks) can improve the efficiency on website preferences mining in web events data.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The formal question and basic idea of our work is given in the next section. In Section III, we review some related works.

Two strategies are detailedly introduced in Section IV and Section V, respectively. In Section VI, the evaluation metric is developed and experiment results are shown. Section VII concludes.



II. PROBLEM DEFINITION AND BASIC IDEA  A. Problem Definition  Definition 1 (Web Event): A web event is a hot story on the web, which is composed by some sub-topics.

e = {t0, t1, ? ? ? , tT?1} (1)  where ti is ith sub-topic of a web event e and T is the number of sub-topics of this web event. Different sub- topics will mainly express different aspects of this web event. Normally, a sub-topic has its own relative independent semantics of a web event,  ti =< wk0 , wk1 , ? ? ? , wkN?1 > (2)  where ki is the ith keyword of a web event, N is the number of all keywords in a web event and wki is the weight of keyword ki in this sub-topic. The sub-topics will change with time including the relative important status of them and the emergence of new sub-topics or the vanish of some sub-topics. These changes of sub-topics in a web event may come from getting or losing attentions of people on this web event and are also called evolution of this web event.

Definition 2 (Website Preference): The preference of a website on a given web event is a distribution of all sub-topic of this web event and can be represented as,  P es =< wt0 , wt1 , ? ? ? , wtT?1 >, wti ? [0, 1] (3)  where wti is the degree of website s concerning on the sub- topic ti of a web event e.

Normally, a website will only focus on limited number of sub-topics of web events except for the comprehensive websites. Take ?9-11? as the example again, the huge number of webpages are from a number of websites. As we talked former, a webpage could contain different sub-topics of this web event, it implies that a website can also concern on many sub-topics as well. However, a website generally has its own preference on a given web event. For example, a website in economy category has big probability to report  economy influence of ?9-11?, so the weight on economy sub-topic of this website will be bigger comparing other sub-topics. So, the distribution of weights on different sub- topics just reflect the preference of a website on a web event. However, due to the Variety attribute of web events data, the huge number of webpages and websites make this distribution of weights hard to uncover.

The final goal of this paper is to mine the website preferences on a given web event under the Variety attribute of web events data.

B. Construct three-level-networks to organize variety infor- mation of a web event  In this paper, the information of a web event is organized as three level networks: website level, webpage level and keyword level. At first, the keywords are mined by classical method, tf -idf , and linked by the co-occurrence relations between them,  rKki,kj = Dki,kj  D (4)  where K denotes the keyword level; rki,kj is the co- occurrence relation between two keywords ki and kj ; Dki,kj is the number of webpages which contains keywords ki and kj simultaneously; D is the number of all webpages.

Co-occurrence relation is a weak semantic relation between keywords, which implies the probability of two keywords showing in same webpage at the same time. Connecting all the keywords by their relations, we can get the keyword level network,  ALNK =  ? ????  rK0,0 r K 0,1 r  K 0,2 ? ? ? r  K 0,K?1  rK1,0 r K 1,1 r  K 1,2 ? ? ? r  K 1,K?1  ...

...

...

. . .

...

rKK?1,0 r  K K?1,1 r  K K?1,2 ? ? ? r  K K?1,K?1  ? ????  The same with webpage level and website level, we can get ALND and ALNS .

In order to filter out the noisy relations in each level network, the pruning method [4] is adopted to post-process all three level networks. Only the spanning tree and part of neighbors of the nodes in this tree are kept.

Some frequently used symbols in this paper are listed in Table I.

Table I: Notations used in this paper  Symbol Description e a web event s a website S the number of websites of a web event d a webpage D the number of webpages of a web event k a keyword K the number of keywords of a web event Ps preference of a website s     Figure 2: Three-level-network, website-webpage-keyword, of a web event e. A square point (red) denotes a website s, a triangle point (green) denotes a webpage p, with circle point (purple) denoting a keyword k. A website may contain many webpages, one of which may contain many keywords.

C. Basic Idea  Our idea to resolve the former problem, website prefer- ences mining from web events data with Variety attribute, is to use the three-level-network from special Hierarchical attribute of web events data. As shown in Fig. 2, a website may contain many webpages and a webpage may contain many keywords in a web event. In turn, a keyword could belong to many webpages and a webpage could also be published by many websites. Notice that a webpage is traditionally only published by one website. However, the two webpages with same content from two distinct websites are seen as one webpage from both these websites in this paper. So, we merge the webpages with similar content here.

The reason is that some webpages may be reprint of one webpage. As the first and significant step, we want to provide a unified model to organize all the information about a web event with whatever formate and from whatever sources.

There is interdependent relations between each levels. The preference on a given web event of a website needs to be expressed by its webpages and the aspects covered by a webpage about a web event need to be expressed by its keywords. In turn, the existence of keywords relies on the existence of webpages and the existence of webpages relies on the existence of websites. It is just mapping relations that gives us way to link the different level networks together and thereby link their values together. Then, we can mine the website preferences from web events data not only by its own webpages but also by all the webpages, websites and keywords. In the next sections, we will introduce different specific strategies to utilize this three-level-network for mining the preferences on web events of websites.



III. RELATED WORKS  There are two parts of works which have relations with our work, including the researches on websites and commu- nity detection in complex network.

A. Works on websites  The first part of researches on website is the website evaluation. Shanshan Qi [5] suggests that a website should be evaluated from three aspects: usefulness, service quality and physical accessibility. The qualities of content and structure of websites will impact on their usage preferences which means the efficiency of using these websites. The second part of researches on website is to generate website overview. A recommender system, Pharos, is proposed to help new users understand the contents of the website by giving a overview of the whole content-centered website [6].

For contextual advertising, Website hierarchies are learned by URL. Last part of researches on website is to com- pute similarity between websites. A new content sensitive method, STRank [7], is proposed to consider the semantic and time relevance of websites rather than considering link property. In this way, semantic relatedness is added to the similarity computation rather than only considering keyword match. Although some of them are content based analysis, they have not paid attentions on the preferences of different websites on the web events. Considering the huge number of websites covering web events, their preferences are of significance for user services.

B. Works on community detection  Recently, complex network is of significance to model the complex system which has been used in many fields, including biological area, physical area, information area, and so on. Community is a very important feature of complex network. A community is a subgraph of a network and a network can be seen as the union of different com- munities in turn. The basic principle to detect communities is to minimizing the number of links between different communities and maximizing the number of links in single community. Two classical strategies are: Aggregation and Division [8]. There are also some other methods, including spectral-based method, statistical method. More works about community detection is discussed in [9].



IV. INTUITIVE METHOD  In this paper, the communities of keyword level network are adopted to represent sub-topics of a given web event.

Since each keyword is a semantic unit of a web event, a community composed by a number of keywords which have relative close relations with each others can be seen as a sub-topic of a web event. This keyword network and communities unify the information of different formates and from different sources about a web event. By these keyword communities, each item about this web event and in this three-level-network can be represented using the same way.

After giving the definitions in Section II, the most straight- forward method to get the preferences of websites would be to detect the communities of keyword level network and then these detected communities could be seen as the different     Figure 3: Intuitive method to discover the preferences of websites. In this figure, there are three sample websites and related four communities in keyword level network. It is the keywords that connect the communities with websites.

sub-topics of a web event. The preferences of websites could be computed as the membership degrees on each community.

The procedure of this method can be described as,  1) Construct keyword network of a number of webpages published on a number of websites;  2) Do community detection on this keyword network; 3) compute the membership degree of each website on  the detected communities.

An example is given in Fig. 3. There are four communities in keyword level network of a given web event. Website S1 has relation with two communities C1 and C4, website S2 has relation with two communities C2 and C4 and Website S3 has relation with three communities C2, C3 and C4,  PS1 =< wC1 , wC4 >  PS2 =< wC2 , wC4 >  PS3 =< wC2 , wC3 , wC4 >  (5)  where wCi is the membership degree of each website on a community/sub-topic. The PSi is just the website preference value that we want to mine from web events data with Variety attribute. Because of the communities of keyword- level network, this method has considered the relations be- tween keywords and the website-keyword mapping relation.

However, the relations between keywords with webpages and websites with webpages are ignored.



V. ITERATIVE METHOD  The communities of keyword level network are only based on the keyword relations between each other, the horizontal relations in Fig. 2. These relations imply that the keywords, which have close association relations with each others, will be more likely to describe same sub-topic of a web event. Actually, the webpage level network will also influence the formation of communities at keyword level.

When all the keywords are in the same webpage by the mapping relations between keywords and webpages, it is also possible that they are talking the same sub-topic of  ALGORITHM 1: Iterative method website preferences mining Input: Three level networks: ALNK , ALND and ALNS Output: The communities of three level networks: {CKi },{C  D i }  and {CSi } set cong = max value; congnew = max value? 1; set {tCKi } = {C  K i } = communitydetection(ALNK);  while (cong ? congnew) > 0 do cong = congnew; for si = 0; si ? S ? 1 do  for sj = 0; sj ? S ? 1 do  ALNnewS [si][sj ] = cos( ?vC K  si , ?vC  K  sj );  end end ALNS = ?ALNS + (1? ?)ALN  new S ;  {CSi } = communitydetection(ALNS) ; for di = 0; di ? D ? 1 do  for dj = 0; dj ? D ? 1 do  ALNnewD [di][dj ] = cos( ?  vC S  di ,  ? vC  S  dj );  end end ALND = ?ALND + (1? ?)ALN  new D ;  {CDi } = communitydetection(ALND) ; for ki = 0; ki ? K ? 1 do  for kj = 0; kj ? K ? 1 do  ALNnewK [ki][kj ] = cos( ?  vC D  ki ,  ? vC  D  kj );  end end ALNK = ?ALNK + (1? ?)ALN  new K ;  {CKi } = communitydetection(ALNK) ; congnew = |{CKi } ? {tC  K i }|;  {tCKi } = {C K i };  end return {CKi },{C  D i } and {C  S i };  a web event. However, the relations in the keyword level network, ALNK , do not take the mapping relations into consideration, which only consider the statistical values of co-occurrence relations in all the webpages. For example, two keywords, ki and kj , have a small co-occurrence relation which means that they do not usually show in the webpages simultaneously. However, if two webpages which contain keywords, ki and kj , respectively and they are in the same community of webpage level network, keywords, ki and kj , also have big probability to talk about same sub-topic of a web event. Similarly, the communities of webpage level are also influenced by the mapping relations between webpages and websites. All in all, the information of different gran- ularities, different formates and even different sources all has close relations with each other, not only related in the each level network. These ?vertical? relations also contain great value for mining website preferences and should not be overlooked. Inspired by their inter-dependency and inter- limitation relations of websites, webapges and keywords, an iterative algorithm is proposed to optimize the formation of keyword communities/sub-topics, as shown in Algorithm 1.

At first, the communities of keyword level network,     CKi = {s}, s ? ALNK , are detected as initialization. Then, by the mapping relations between keywords with websites, each website is represented as a vector of communities of keyword level network, ?vCKsi =< ?CK0 , ?CK1 , . . . , ?CKnk?1 >, where nk is the number of communities of keyword level network and ?CK  i is indicator function that shows whether  this website si is in community CKi . If we consider all different media of a web event, each one can also be represented as above. This representation can unify the different media from Variety attribute of web events data.

The similarity between two websites which are represent- ed as keyword community vectors is computed by cosine method. This similarity considers the mapping relations between keywords and websites. So, based on these new mapping relations, a new website network, ALNnewS , is constructed and incorporated into ALNS ,  ALNS = (1? ?)ALNS + ?ALN new S (6)  where ? is the ratio of community-based website network ALNnewS . This combination can change the communities of this network. It can be seen from Equation 6 that the communities detected from ALNS are based on two kinds of relations between websites:  1) Co-occurrence relations 2) Mapping relations with keywords  Similar to the mapping relations between websites and keywords, there are also mapping relations between web- sites and webpages. So, the communities of webpage level network are also influenced by structure of website level network. Each webpage can also be represented as a vector of communities of website level network,  ?vC S  di =< ?CS  , ?CS  , . . . , ?CS  ns?1 >  where ns is the number of communities of website level network and ?CS  i is indicator function that shows whether  this webpage di is in community CSi . Then, the combination of new webpage network from the similarity of vector representation and original webpage network is,  ALND = (1? ?)ALND + ?ALN new D (7)  Similar with websites and webpages, a keyword can also be represented as,  ?vC D  ki =< ?CD  , ?CD  , . . . , ?CD  nk?1 >  where nk is the number of communities of website level network. Then, the combination of new keyword network from the similarity of vector representation and original keyword network is,  ALNK = (1? ?)ALNK + ?ALN new K  Apparently, this is an iterative procedure. The variation between communities of keyword level networks of two iterations is computed. When this variation does not reduce,  the stopping criteria is reached. Note that this condition can only make sure it reach the local optimization, which is enough from the experimental results.

This iterative procedure also show the way how each item in different levels affect each others, not only the items in the same level but also the items in different levels.

Think following scenario: a person want to express his knowledge (like opinions, criticisms, visions or founds) on a web event. He can publish on a news webpage on a website by (formally) cooperating with a journalist; he can write a blog to (semi-formally) express his own opinions; he can also have (informally) communications with other persons on his micro-blog. All of these information come from this person, so they must have relations with each others and this kind of relations should be considered.

Through the new added mapping relations, each item in the second level, which is webpage-level-network here, can make contribution to the website preferences value mining despite they may have different formates or different sources (due to Variety attribute of web events data) and the item could be any form not only webpage. At the same time, we can get the more accurate preferences for the sources in first level, which is website-level-network here. This refined accurateness cannot be captured by the single source alone.

Similarly, the sources could not only be website.

Finally, the communities of keyword network are con- sidered as different sub-topics like first strategy: Intuitive Method. The website preferences are computed by the map- ping relations between websites and keyword communities.



VI. EXPERIMENTS  A. Evaluation Criteria  In order to compare the performances of proposed meth- ods, an evaluation criteria is designed based on the char- acteristic of website preferences that is the preference of a website on a web event will be kept during the evolution of this web event. According to this characteristic, the average change of website preferences on a given web event during a period of time is used to compare the three methods.

Instead of change of preferences of a same website at two time stamps, the similarity between them Sims is computed by comparing the distribution of sub-topics at these two time stamps for computation convenience.

Sims =  Tend ? Tstart  Tend? ?=Tstart+1  ? (i,j)?T ??1?T ?  X?i,j  X?i,j =Sim(t ??1 i , t  ? j ) ?min{w  ??1 ti  , w?tj}  (8)  where Tstart and Tend are the start time and end time of a web event. T ? is the sub-topic number of web event at time ? and w?tj is the weight of website s on sub-topic tj at time     ?? ???????????	????? ????????????????????????????????????????? ?  ????  ???  ????  ??  ??	?  ??   ?? ?  ???  ????  ??? ?????????	? ?????  ?? ???????????	????? ????????????????????????????????????????? ???  ????  ??  ??	?  ??   ?? ?  ??? ???????????????  ?? ???????????	????? ????????????????????????????????????????? ???  ????  ??  ??	?  ??   ?? ?  ??? ??? ?????? ????????  ?? ???????????	????? ????????????????????????????????????????? ???  ????  ??  ??	?  ??   ?? ?  ??? ?????????????????  Figure 4: The Sims values of four different websites, www.chinavalue.net, www.huanquan.com, world.people.com.cn, news.xinhuanet.com, of web event, Japan Nuclear Leakage from our proposed methods with different ?.

? . Sim(t??1i , t ? j ) is the similarity between two sub-topics of  a web event at two different time stamps,  Sim(t??1i , t ? j ) =  2|t??1i ?  t?j |  |t??1i |+ |t ? j |  (9)  where |t??1i | is the keyword number at time ? ? 1 and t??1i  ? t?j is the number of common keywords at two time  stamps. The forms of Eq. 8 and 9 are used to make sure the maximum value of Sim(t??1i , t  ? j ) is 1.

B. Case Study  Next, a web event, ?Japan Nuclear Leakage?, is analyzed.

The webpages about this web event is crawled from the biggest Chinese search engine, ?Baidu?. It should be noticed that, although the webpages used here are Chinese, the proposed algorithms in this paper can be used for any language. The data we downloaded contains 35 days of this web event and average number of websites, webpages and keywords are 81, 99 (after merge the similar webpages) and 790, respectively. The community detection algorithm used in the experiment is VoltageClusterer of JUNG 4.

For comparing the two methods proposed in this paper for website preferences value mining , we compute the Sims of each website of this web event by two different methods. The bigger this value is, the more efficient the method is and the more value this method can extract from variety web events data. Since there is a param- eter, ?, in Iterative Method, we try different value of  4http://jung.sourceforge.net/  ?? ?????? ?????	 ????? ?????? ?????? ????? ?????? ?????? ?????? ?????? ???  ????  ??  ??	?  ??   ?? ?  ???  ?????????????????  ? ?? ??  Figure 5: The Sims of each website by different algorithms, including intuitive and iterative method with different ?.

? ? {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0}. The dif- ferent values of ? denote different ways of combination of network structures with mapping relations between them.

When ? = 0.0, Iterative Method (denoted as nw) becomes Intuitive Method (denoted as iw).

The Sims of all websites by both methods is computed through Eq. 8. The results of four websites are shown in Fig. 4, including www.chinavalue.net, www.huanquan.com, world.people.com.cn, news.xinhuanet.com. We can see from this figure that not all the ways of combination (?) of mapping relations with network structures can help to im- prove the performances of website preferences mining. The Iterative Method reaches its best on four websites with ? = 0.4. At this value, the website preferences can be preserved along the evolution of web events. Is this value of ? due to our websites selection? Then, we average over all the websites on different values of ?, shown in Fig.

5. It can be seen from this figure that Iterative Method still reaches its best on ? = 0.4. So, all the Sims of all the websites from Iterative method with ? = 0.4 and the Intuitive Method are given in Fig. 6. It means that ? = 0.4 is the perfect combination of network structures of three levels with their mapping relations for this web event. Under this combination, the value in the variety data can be extract most and the formated keyword communities with their weights can best represent the website preferences, which can give the most benefits for the nations, organizations, companies and individuals. Note that the absolute value of ? is also influenced by the evolution of a web event, which is an attribute of web events data as we discussed former. Since two methods are compared by the same web event, this kind of influence is removed. For some web events, the evolution between consecutive days is intense, then the value of ? tends to be small and vice verse.



VII. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER STUDY  In this paper, we have shown that web events data is also a big data, which satisfies the well-accepted four     ? ? ?? ?? 	? 	? ? ? ?? ?? ?? ?? ? ? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??? ??? ??? ??? ?	? ?	? ? ? ? ? ??? ??? ???  ??  ??   ???  ???  ??  ??!????"?  ? ?? ??  "??????#?????????$???% "??????#????????  Figure 6: Comparison of Intuitive method, the dark one, and Iterative method (the best one), the light one, of all websites on Sims.

attributes of big data: Volume, Velocity, Variety and Value.

At the same time, its own two specific attributes are also discussed. Among all the values of web events data, website preferences have been formally defined and focused here.

The practical usages of values of website preferences have also been shown. In order to mine website preference from web events data with multi-source and unstructured data (Variety), we have proposed a three-level-network model to organize different granularities of information of a web event. From top to bottom, this hierarchical model contains website-level, webpage-level and keyword-level. Then, two strategies have been given to mine the website preferences by the three-level-network. The first strategy has only con- sidered keyword network structure and website-keyword mapping relations. The second strategy has considered each level network structure and mapping relations between three level networks. Finally, the experiments show that the proper combination of network structures and mapping relations can help to improve the efficiency of website preferences value mining from web events data.

In the future, we will extend the data scale and study the different community detection algorithms to the efficiency of our method.

