

Today?s Big (data) Is Small Steve Pawlowski, Intel, Hillsboro, OR Mankind has never seen so much data as it is seeing today. The knowledge extracted from this (big) data via analytics is essential for both fundamental discoveries as well as businesses transformation, small and big. However, the challenges in extracting this knowledge are immense, both in terms of computational requirements and data intensity and they are breaking the standard model by which data has histor- ically been managed and analyzed. One of the most important real-world grand challenges is the understanding of complex biological systems.

New technologies have allowed the sequencing of genomes at unprecedented rates and volumes. The roughly 2000 sequencing instruments in labs and hospitals around the world can generate about 15 petabytes of compressed genetic data. Storing, analyzing, and sharing such vast quantities locally is an immense challenge.  This talk will use genomics as an example to illustrate how big data stresses today?s paradigms and technologies along with the key actions needed to address big data challenges and how the ?cloud? paradigm could be crucial to ensuring generalized solutions for most big data opportunities to achieve huge economies of scale.

Healthcare in the Big Data Era Yasunori Kimura, Fujitsu, Sunnyvale, CA With the recent advances of computing power, network speeds, and sensing technologies, we are now in the era where anything can potentially be connected; home appliances, cars, houses, etc. and most importantly the human.  If we take an example of Healthcare area, mHealth (mobile health) has become one of the promising infrastructures to improve medical systems and reduce its cost, which will benefit people.

In mHealth, human vital signs such as blood pressure, pulse, EKG, etc. are continuously monitored and measured, and are sent to the cloud via mobile devices i.e. smartphones. Then the gathered data is analyzed to exploit meaningful information which could contribute to making people?s life much more comfortable. But the size of the data becomes huge, it will be more than a few hundred MB of data if you measure the three of vital data above a day, for example, and where to store, how to represent, what to analyze, etc. are important issues to be solved.

In the talk, a stress monitoring system is presented as an example of mHealth. Some of the issues we've found out while doing the preliminary experiments and our implementations are discussed.  We argue the issues in terms of technology point of view, but also address issues such as security, privacy, and others.

Evolution of ARM Technology Towards the Data Center John Goodacre, ARM, Cambridge, UK Tomorrow?s data center needs to scale-out their performance significantly to satisfy the rapid growth from both the ever growing mobile mar- ket and the expected explosion in the connected internet of things.  Together their big-data requirements for storage and processing challenge significantly the need to lower the total cost of ownership of each data center, especially in terms of power efficiency and compute density.

Technology from ARM is being deployed within the consumer device and embedded terminal at a rate expect to exceed 10 Billion processors in the next 12 months, driven significantly by its power efficiency and small size.  This talk will look at some of the recent developments around the ARM technology, including ARM multiprocessing, virtualization and 64bit addressing capabilities that together make the ARM processor also technically suitable for the data center.  In addition, this talk will look into a potential future where using the current ARM technology, a system on chip design will be able to offer the data center servers all the key open-source frameworks on a fully scalable and energy-propor- tional compute platform, founded around the same power efficient and low power processors used at client.

Landheld Computing Luiz Andr? Barroso, Google, Mountain View, CA A few interesting phenomena arise in distributed systems when they go from very large to massively large. I will discuss two examples of such phenomena involving energy use and service level responsiveness in Google datacenters.

523DIGEST OF TECHNICAL PAPERS  ?  ES2: Data Centers to Support Tomorrow?s Cloud  ISSCC 2014 / EVENING SESSION / ES2 ISSCC 2014 / February 9, 2014 / 8:00 PM  With the rise of cloud computing and Big Data, data centers are an important counterpoint to rapid growth in the mobile market. ?Building cost-effective, efficient computing infrastructures is a challenge that starts with technologies that ISSCC knows so well (processors, I/O, memory, etc.), but also encompasses system and customer-centric issues such as cooling, power delivery, and total cost of ownership. ?An outlook on the future of data centers, including recent trends such as open source models, energy-proportional computing, disaggregation, and software-defined data centers, will be discussed as it pertains to the ISSCC community.

