A Flexible Data Model for Multi-Tenant  Databases for Software as a Service

Abstract? We study data models for multi-tenant databases for Software as a service (SaaS), which is important for emerging big data applications. In our study we consider the shared table architecture model of SaaS for its advantages over the shared machine and shared process models. Our goal is to further improve the processing time and space utilization of shared table model. For this, we introduce a new data model, called Index table layout and compare its performance with the Chunk table layout. Our model includes an additional 'index' column in the base table that cross-references via the index across supporting tables. Not needing nulls, the proposed model enjoys quick access of the values in a column. We evaluated the performance of our model, for which we crated randomly large data for Chunk table layout and from which we then constructed the tables for the Index table layout. We also compiled 3 types of queries used in our evaluation. Our results show that Index table layout is better than the Chunk table layout in terms of expressive power, space utilization, and query processing time.

Keywords: Database Design, Management, Performance

I. INTRODUCTION  Multi-tenancy is a software architecture principle in the realm of the Software as a Service business model. It is an optimization for hosted services, which improves utilization of resources by providing a uniform framework in which multiple clients, the ?tenants?, share the same application and database instance, hence allowing scalability and is cost effective. Aulbach and Jacobs [7] compare the three approaches for sharing storage, namely shared machine, shared process, and shared table.

Compared to the limitations and shortcomings of the other two approaches, the shared table approach is considered to be more desirable [13].

Figure 1 illustrates the shared table approach in which data from many clients is stored in the same table. A Tenant Id column is used to identify each tenant/client, i.e., the owner of each row. To allow clients to extend the base schema, each table is given a fixed set of additional  generic columns. While this approach is suitable for pooling resources, its ability to scale up is limited by the number of rows in the database. Despite this limitation, the shared table approach offers much improvement over the shared process approach [5]. Administrative operations can be executed in bulk simply by executing queries that range over the TenantId attribute, and since it uses a single database, clients can share connection pools.

Stefan and Jacobs in [13] discuss the various layouts  proposed for shared table architecture to support a multi- tenant scenario. They include Private tables, Extension tables, Sparse columns, Pivot tables, and Universal table.

They also propose a model, called the Chunk table layout, in which the metadata is divided among application-specific conventional tables and a large fixed set of generic structures, called Chunk tables. The proposed chunk table is complemented with the concept of Chunk folding introduced in [13] which results in vertically partitioning of logical tables into ?chunks?.

These ?chunks? are folded together into different physical multi-tenant tables as and when needed. In a follow up work [11], they focus on extensibility and versioning. Grund, et al. [9] introduce vertical partitioning technique in the case of insert-only queries.

Bezemer and Zaidman [5] proposed a column store approach, which significantly improves space utilization and overhead through compression.

As noted in [2, 3, 4, 5, 6], more work is required before an ideal SaaS system is developed. An ideal such system should provide a balance in memory consumption and query processing time. It is hence necessary to have a SaaS system that has a Data Definition Language (DDL) component explicitly for supporting schema extensions.

A desired database system should distribute data for many tenants across a farm of servers. The distribution should be tenant-aware rather than lumping all tenants into one large data set. In particular, the database should support multiple communication patterns for joins. Not to forget scalability, an ideal such system should be able to gracefully handle databases as they grow in data size.

The vertical storage structures of HBase and BigTable, which were used to implement Pivot Tables [13], are similar to column stores used for narrow operations over many rows. Such vertical structures may be made more   DOI 10.1109/CSE.2013.154    DOI 10.1109/CSE.2013.154     competitive for ?wide? operations by keeping the data in memory. This is because the cost of reassembling rows is dominated by the time to perform many reads from disk. Advancements in data storage technologies are gradually making main-memory databases more attractive.

An ideal model for SaaS applies equally well to main- memory databases. This vertical expansion of table helps improve the performance of analytics and RDF data [13].  We propose the Index table layout, which uses column-store feature for a Shared table, multi-tenant scenario.  It enjoys the advantages of column store databases such as compression, efficient query processing and space utilization. It also overcomes the limitations of the Chunk table layout for handling certain queries. It can be observed in [13] that having vertical structures like HBase is crucial to be more effective for wide operations.

This paper is organized as follows:  Section II covers the relevant literature and the background for this work.  Section III introduces the proposed Index Table Layout and its details.  Section IV presents the performance evaluation of the proposed model and finally Section V draws conclusions and advantages of the Index Table Layout.



II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK  Experiments reported in [9] show transformations needed to produce queries over Chunk tables by considering the basic case of Pivot Tables and evaluate the efficiency of the Chunk folding method.

The performance of Chunk tables is improved by mapping the most heavily-utilized parts of the logical schemas into the conventional tables and mapping the remaining parts into Chunk tables that match their structure as closely as possible. This method, however, is useful in case of partitioning data into heavily and non-heavily utilized parts.  Each of the models discussed in [14] is built from the private table model. In fact, these other models are representations of the private tables, however, it is not always easy to convert back these tables into the private tables.

This reverse mapping is helpful especially if one wants to automate the process of converting the data in a source schema to cloud database.

Let us consider the reverse-engineering process for existing schema-mapping techniques. In general, the base tables for the private table layout have fairly less complex schemas.

To describe the reverse process, we make our comparisons against the Chunk table.

Fig 1. Shared Table Architecture           Fig. 2. Private table layout         Fig. 3.  Addition of an extra column to the Private Table Account 17            TenantId Name Hospital No. of Beds  ... Dealers  17 Acme St.

Mary   17 Gump State 1042 35 Ball  42 Big Gump   65  Account 17  Aid Name Hospital No. of beds Apt  1 Acme St. Mary 135 4    2 Gump State 1042 3  Account 35  Aid Name  1 Ball  Account 42  Aid Name Dealers  1 Big 65  Account 17  Aid Name Hospital No. of Beds  1 Acme St. Mary 135  2 Gump State 1042  Account 35  Aid Name  1 Ball  Account 42  Aid Name Hospital Dealers  1 Big Gump 65     Though this kind of process is not always required, it may still lead to incorrect results.  For instance, when extra column of existing data type is inserted in the Private table [14], the corresponding update has to be done on the Chunk table layout. Figure 3 illustrates this update. If we were to include another column to Account 17 with a data type, e.g., ?int?, which already exists we should update the Chunk table, if used as the cloud data schema. Since, in the Chunk table Layout we have the data differentiated by their types, we have to place ?4? in the column ?int? with the corresponding entries being Tenant-0, Table-0, Row-0. It can be observed that the Chunk column of the Chunk table layout does not matter in this case as it determines to which of the Chunks it belongs. Note that the Chunks are determined by how heavily the tables are utilized    Figure 4: Updated Chunk table with extra column    Fig.  5. Extended Pivot Table      Note that when inserting 4 as a new value in column Int1, it can replace the entry 135, shown in Figure 4. Besides, the Str1 value corresponding to 4 is not provided.

Furthermore, columns Tenant, Table, and Row have the same values. As a result, if one wants to construct the Private Table afresh from this model, there will be a problem of ambiguity. In case of an automated process, this may lead to information loss, which is not acceptable.

In addition to the aforementioned problem, the Chunk table layout assumes that values of similar data types cannot be repeated. To illustrate this, consider the following query, taken from [13]:  SELECT Beds  FROM (SELECT Strl AS Hospital, Intl AS Beds  FROM Chunkintlstr WHERE Tenant = 17 AND  Table = 0 AND Chunk = 1) AS Accountl7  WHERE Hospita1=`State?;  Here, since both ?Name? and ?Hospital? are stored under column Str1, the condition Hospital = ?State? means looking for any entry in that column with value ?State?.

This results in incorrect query result if there were another value, say ?State?, under the column ?Name? in the Private table model (i.e., the corresponding entry would also be under the column Str1 in the Chunk table). This is a drawback of this model as we may have entries in a table with the same values under different attributes.

In this paper, we introduce a new data model that improves upon the Chunk table layout. A first step to address this problem, is to eliminate the Chunk column altogether and add a column, called ?Col?. This column pertains to the number of column of the private table in which the value is placed. Because of this change, there is a considerable change in the schema, as follows. Instead of having both columns Int1 and Str1 in the same column which will cause ambiguity, we just have one column Value for each entry in the table. Figure 5 shows the new table, called Extended Pivot table, which is a combination of Pivot and Chunk tables [14].

Hence with the coordinates being Col, Row, Table, and Tenant, it is straightforward to map the values from the Extended Pivot Table back to the Private Table.  There is now a one to one correspondence between every value in the Extended Pivot table and the private tables. Note that for every value in the table there is a metadata of four coordinate values.  This is a fairly simple model. The queries over this model are less expensive; they are over the Tenant column with a series of AND operations.

However it is not space efficient. In terms of space taken for the metadata, we perform almost the same. We can further improve the Extended Pivot model keeping in mind the query rewriting aspect. This is discussed next.

Chunk int|str  Tenant Table Col Row Value  17 0 0 0 1  17 0 1 0 Acme  17 0 2 0 St.

Mary    17 0 3 0 135  17 0 4 0 4  35 1 0 0 1  35 1 1 0 Ball  42 2 0 0 1  42 2 1 0 Big  42 2 2 0 65  Chunk int|str  Tenant Table Chunk Row Int1 Str1  17 0 0 0 1 Acme  17 0 3 0 135 St.

Mary  17 0 0 1 2 Gump  17 0 3 1 1042 State  17 0 3 0 4 ?

35 1 0 0 1 Ball  42 2 0 0 1 Big  42 2 2 0 65 -

III.  THE PROPOSED INDEX TABLE LAYOUT  The proposed Index table layout improves the performance in terms of processing time and space utilization. Figure 5 illustrates the Index table layout. The base table and the supporting tables in the queries are ext_base, ext_dealers, ext_hospital, and ext_beds. The proposed Index layout is illustrated in Figure 6. It includes a base table that contains all the columns that are common to all the individual multi- tenant tables (Private tables) with an additional column, called the ?Index?. The tuples in the schema are the tuples related to all the tenants. The index column is defined as NOT NULL and UNIQUE KEY, and is incremented automatically with insertion of each tuple. Hence in our example, the Index table layout would have the attributes Index, Tenant, Aid, and Name. Apart from the base tables, we have other supporting tables, each having two columns, one for the ?Index? and the other for the unique columns.

Fig. 6.  Index Table Layout  In other words, if there are n non-common columns among the private tables, we would have n supporting tables along with a base table. As a part of representation, only the valid and existing records go into the supporting tables and these rows have a matching ?Index? value from the base table. In Figure 2, for instance, when the index is 2, it means Tenant 17 has a value with Aid as 2, Name as ?Gump?, Hospital as ?St. Mary?, and the number of Beds ?1042.? Since there are no dealers for ?Gump? we totally avoid writing a Null value or reserving a place for it in the supporting table for dealers.

This will not only avoid the problem of sparsely populated tables but also enable writing only the values that are required.

This way, there is one to one correspondence between values in the Index Layout and the Private Table Layout.

.Hence, rewriting back the Index table layout to the Private table is possible when automated. In terms of queries, this layout can give faster results to queries with predicates on columns. An example would be: ?Give the names of all hospitals.? This is a select distinct operation over the supporting table for Hospitals. This would have otherwise been a complex query consisting of many AND operations over several conditions on columns Tenant, Row, Col, Int1, Str1 with values, each of which ranging and changing over many figures. Hence, with respect to both correctness and clarity, the Index Layout is an option over the Chunk tables, Pivot tables and Extended Pivot tables.  Addressing queries that are common over all the tenants are obviously queried upon the base table over the tenant id. So the queries are not complex. The worst case query would be the only query that has a join operation over all the tables with the predicate on the ?Index? value. Hence, the Index table layout improves both upon the space and query processing.

The advantages of the proposed Index table layout include better space utilization for not needing nulls, fast access of the values in a column, and indexing.  The worst case scenario would be when performing a join operation over all the supporting tables, which is expensive. Thus the number of joins is equal to the number of supporting columns for the worst case scenario.



IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS  We conducted experiments using MySQL Workbench 5.2 CE using an Intel Xeon Processor with 4 GB RAM. In order to simulate the test beds, the schema for the Private tables were first created. The schema for Chunk and Index table layouts are created next. The data is generated for all the layouts so as to maintain the equivalence of data between both the layouts. In order to do this, many scripts were written. Perl and Shell scripting was used for generation of data.  We first wrote scripts to randomly generate large data for the Chunk table layout and then constructed the individual tables and the tables for Index table layout from this data. Hence, there is a one to one correspondence between data in the private tables and the data in the index and Chunk table layouts.

The Database layout is an OLTP schema with one-to-many relationships. Individual users within a business (a tenant) are not modeled, but the same tenant may engage in several simultaneous sessions so data may be concurrently accessed. Every table in the schema has a tenant-id column so that it can be shared by multiple tenants.  Each of these tables contains about 20 columns, one of which is the  Base Table  Index Tenant Aid Name  1 17 1 Acme  2 17 2 Gump  3 42 1 Big  4 35 1 Ball  Index Number of Beds  1 135  2 1042  Index Hospital  1 St. Mary  2 State  3 Gump  Index Dealers  3 65     entity?s ID. Every table has a primary index on the entity ID and a unique compound index on the tenant ID and the entity ID. The experiments include CRUD operations and reporting tasks that simulate the daily activities of individual users. To facilitate the analysis of experimental results, the queries are grouped ranging from light weight actions to heavy actions. These can be seen in queries of Type 1. We first construct a Chunk table that has 104 rows and constructed the appropriate Private and Index tables.

We then keep increasing the number of tuples by multiples of ten. We compare the results of the Chunk tables with 104, 105, 106, 107, and 108 tuples and their corresponding tables represented in our Index model.

While we have considered all the queries that were used to test in the evaluation phase of [13], we also discuss a variety of other queries. We compare the two models based on expressivity and flexibility with which one can formulate queries, and on efficiency of query processing.

As mentioned earlier, the Chunk table is limited in its modeling capabilities. We also note that the Chunk table layout can be constructed from the Private table layout, but the reverse is not possible.

We considered different types of queries in performance evaluation of different data models. A classification of query types is as follows, together with an explanation of why such queries were considered.

Note that in all the graphs logarithmic scale is used to accommodate values.  This is because in most of the cases the execution times is a fraction of a second and hence the values fall below the axis.  For maintaining uniformity and to accommodate a large range of values (say, values from 0.1 to  90,000 seconds),  logarithmic scale has been used in all our graphs.  So, throughout this paper, for a bar graph showing execution times falling below the axis, it represents a fraction of a second.

Type 0: These are queries supported by Chunk table layout and our proposed Index table layout.

We observe that for Chunk table layout, it is not possible to pose a query that retrieves information for a predicate over two or more columns. Since queries require values of the columns from meta-data columns (like row, col, table) and the values of meta-data columns are usually not constant and there is clear ambiguity in values under different columns. Hence queries that can be posed both against the Chunk table and Index table layouts are simple select queries. It should be noted that most queries in SaaS are usually over single columns or involve simple predicates.

Comparison of fetch times between Chunk and Index table layouts is shown in Figure 8. It indicates that the fetch times of Index table layout improve upon the Chunk table layout by about a degree of magnitude.

Type 1: These are queries found and collected from the related literature.

In [12] the authors compare performance of Chunk table layout using different DBMSs. For this, they considered types of queries on attributes for various layouts such as Private and Extension layouts. The query types used in their experiments were Select 1, Select 50, Select 1000, Insert 1, Insert 50, Update 1, and Update 100 attributes, evaluated against different layouts. Figures 9 shows the comparison of fetch times between Chunk and We have only shown Type 1 for 104 tuples here. It can be observed that for Type 1 queries, the performance of Chunk table and Index table layouts are almost the same.

Type 2: These are queries supported by the Index table layout only.

A drawback of Chunk table layout is that queries including predicates on different columns are not possible to express.

This limits expressive power of the model, in that user and/or service provider cannot formulate a variety of queries. In our experiments, we have compiled a list of queries consisting those used in the experiments reported in [13] and additionally from ours. We record the fetch times for tables of tuple with size ranging from 104 to 108 tuples.

Appropriate configuration settings have been set in MySQL (my.ini in windows and my.cnf in linux) to support large tuple sized tables in the experiments. Figure 10 illustrates: Performances of different queries of Type 2 for tables of different tuple sizes.

We used the following queries in our experiments. They include the queries as defined and used in [13], and new ones as Type 2 queries we define in our context of this work. We remind that these queries could not be posed for the Chunk table layout.

Query1: Select distinct names of hospitals.

For the Index table layout, this query may be expressed as follows:  ?????????????	?? ???????????????????????????????  Formulating a corresponding query for the Chunk table layout is not possible. This is because we query over the column Str1 which accepts any value of the type String.

These entries need not necessarily be the entries corresponding to the same column in the Private table layout. Having predicates over the columns Chunk, row, table, and tenant do not help either.

Query 2: Find the number of entries for tenant 17.

Query formulation for the Index table layout would be:  ?????????? ??????????????????? !?????"?"?#$%?  For the Chunk table, this query could be expressed as follows:     ?????????? ????? ??????????????&"'??"????(? !??????"?"?#$%??  However, this does not return the result expected, explained as follows. The number of tuples in the Chunk table grows as the number of columns in Private table grows. In our running example, since each tuple is represented in two columns in the Chunk table, we cannot assume that the number of entries for Tenant 17 would be a multiple of a fixed number (2, in our case).

Query 3: List the hospitals and their number of beds.

For the Index table layout:  ??????????????)?"&*??(???+??  ?????????????????,? ???????+??? ?  ???????????-	"+??+?#???????+?-	"+?	+?.

?? ???????????-????????#?/?????/?? For Chunk table layout, this query could be expressed as:  ??????????"&*??(???+??????????  ??????????????????($?.?????????)	"?$?.????+??  ???????????&"'??"????(? !??????"?"??#?$%???  ??? !????????????#?0?????/??  Note a restriction here which assumes, by default, that State is assumed is of type Str1, which may not be true.

Query 4: Find the number of beds for Tenant 17.

For the Index table layout, this query is formulated as follows:  ???????????"&*??(???+???  ???????????????+?)???????????  ??? !??????????+?-	"+??+?#?????????-	"+?	+?? The above query could not be expressed for the  Chunk Table layout since selecting any value from the attribute ?Int1? would include values corresponding to other possible attributes of all the tenants.

Query 5:  Find details of tenant, aid, name, and hospitals.

For the Index table:  ????????????"?"?)???+)?"?*?)??????????  ?????????????????,? ?????????????? ?????  ????????????????????-	"+??+?#????????????-	"+?	+???  This query cannot be expressed over the Chunk Table layout.

Query 6: Find details of hospitals and beds for each tenant.

This query for the Index table layout can be expressed as follows, which includes two join operations over the common attributes among the tables, namely ext_base, ext_hospital, and ext_beds.

????????????"?"?)???+)?"?*?)????????)?"&*??(???+???  ???????????????????)????????????)???????+??  ??? !????????????-	"+??+?#????????????-	"+?	+??  ????????.

????????????????-	"+?	+?#???????+?-	"+??+?? This query is not possible to express for the Chunk Table layout. This is because in a Chunk table, data values of similar type are stored in one column, and hence having predicates over Tenant, Chunk, and row in the WHERE clause do not help in retrieving the right data.While queries of types 0, 1, and 2 measure expressivity of the schema, we also compare the Chunk table and Index table layouts based on their space requirements. In the Index table layout, common data among tenants is always stored in the base table. The supporting tables would only include necessary rows. This reduces the space utilization to a large extent. We hence compare the sizes of Chunk table and the Base table of the Index table layout. Figure 7 illustrates the results of this comparison.



V. CONCLUSION  We studied suitable date models for multi-tenant databases, which is important to manage big data in the context of cloud computing paradigm. We proposed a data model that improves chunk model in space utilization as well as query processing. The correctness of the proposed model was discussed and illustrated through various query types.

We note that in terms of space, the Index table layout takes almost two third of the space taken by the Chunk table layout. We observe that the query processing times of Index table layout for queries of Type 0 improve by an order of magnitude. We also observe that the query processing times for queries that can be posed both against the Chunk table and the Index table layout (Type 1) are almost the same. We compile an exhaustive set of queries as Type 2. These queries could not be supported by the Chunk table layout. This is due to the inflexibility of the Chunk table layout and poor design. Since the Index table layout is a vertically partitioned schema, we can take advantage of column store features. This is an advantage as most of the queries for SaaS are posed on individual columns.

The index column of the base table can be further indexed, sorted or even hashed if the application demands.  This is useful in case the schema has to be     further extended to a data warehouse like application scenario as many CUBE operations involve individual columns. The result of our experiments and  analyses indicate that our proposed Index layout is more expressive than the Chunk table layout, and results in much improvement in performance in terms of space utilization through compression and is more expressive for supporting a wider range of query types. Its vertical partitioning and its column-store like design leads to significant increase in query processing performance. Other advantage of the Index table layout is that the mapping step of the Index table is much less complicated than that of Chunk Folding.

