

Abstract? Genotype data is very important for many purposes since it contains such information of living organism.Unfortunately it is very hard to get the data. To get the data, it is needed a long and difficult chemical process. The purpose of this research is to develop a predictive gene sequence scheme in order to minimize the producing of the data.  The scheme is made by finding the pattern of data correlation to perform a rule. The association rule mining method is used to build the rules andit can be used for genotype prediction. The prediction will be evaluated by the training and non training data on the experiment. The result of the experiment is an accuracy score of the predictive genotype. The accuracy of the training data is about 90% and the non training data is about 40%.



I. INTRODUCTION are many type of genotypes data that are used in bioinformatics research. Microarray and gene sequence are some of those type of genotype data.

Producingthose microarray and gene sequence requires such difficult chemical process which must bed done by an expert. So, the purpose of this research is to build a system that can predict the data. The rules of phenotype and genotype are use in the system.

Phenotype is a physical characteristic of an organism and genotype is a gene sequence of organism [5]. The genotype shows the pattern of the phenotype data.  The purpose of the research is to find out the correlation between the data that can be made by building the tha association rule between them [1].

The result of this research can be used to predictthe genotype data based on the rule. It can be as a proposed solution to overcome the problem is faced by any bioinformatics researches which need both of data while actually they have no phenotype data.

In this study, it is used anAssociation rule mining (ARM) to build the genotype-phenotype rules. The ARM method can perform a rule data that use many feature data. One of the ARM algorithms is Classification base on Predictive Association Rules (CPAR) that is developed by Yin (2003). The CPARable to perform a rule base on a big data, so that it appropriate to bioinformatics research.



II. RELATED WORKS  A. ARM Classified method on ARM is a data mining approach whichits main purpose is to classifythe variable correlation [5]. Fig 1 shows the framework of ARM.

The feature selection is done by the rules mining generating, while the classifier training is divided into two main steps: association rules and evaluating the relative weight of rules. The final step of ARM frameworks is the rules testing.

Fig. 1.  ARM framework  B. CPAR The CPAR algorithm is developed by Yin (2003)  and the basic theory of CPAR is a correlation rule making which it performed by counting the frequency of the data [2]. The accuracy of the rules is measured by the support value and confidence value that got from the parameter of CPAR [2] [4].

The data is separated between a positive class (P) and a negative class (N), the member of the P is declared as p and the member of N is declared as n.

The  NP Array is used to note the weight of each class member. N? and P? is a variable to save the tuple of P and N.Illustration below is the algorithm of CPAR [2] [3]: Input: Data training: P U N Declaration a set empty array R to save the rule, Rule R {} empty  1. Set a weight for each sample is 1 totalWeight ?.TotalWeight(P) A  compute PNArray from D  2. If TotalWeight (P) >?.totalWeight N?  N, P? P, A? A rule  r  empty rule Find  best literal p  according to A? If gain(p) >min_gain break  Ranny1,2, Ito Wasito1, Mujiono Sadikin1, and Teny Handhayani1 Faculty of Computer Science, Universitas Indonesia1  Faculty of Information and Communication Technology, Universitas Multimedia Nusantara2  Email: ranny@umn.ac.id, ito.wasito@cs.ui.ac.id, mujiono.sadikin@yahoo.com  Predictive Genotype Based on Phenotype Using The Association Rules Mining  T  ICACSIS 2013 ISBN: 978-979-1421-19-5          Training (built rule)  Testing (predictive)  Gen predictive  data  else Append p to r  For each sample t in P? U N? not satisfying r?s body:  Remove t form P? or N? Change A? according to  the removal of t R R U {r} For each sample t in P satisfying r?s  body: t.weight  ? * t.weight Change A according to the weight  decreased Return R Else Return R   C. Data Structure The implemented data structure that in this research  is based on LUCS-KDD research. The LUCS-KDD research develops an implementation in two dimension array on CPAR [3]. The previous research shows that the using of two dimension array able toreduce the memory space. The number of two dimension array in this research aretwo. The first dimension of the first array records the attributes of the rule whilethe second dimension records the frequency of the attribute from P and N. The second array is notedas the gain of each attribute on P.



III. PREDICTIVE GENOTYPE SCHEME The genotype predictionprocess is divided into two  steps: the training process and the testing process. In the training process, it is built the rule that is used to predict genoptype data in testing process. The result of the testing process is gen prediction.The accuracy of this prediction will be counted based on the database.

The similarity between the prediction resultsand the database contain is the accuracy score. The scheme of the predictive genotype prediction can be showed at the Fig 2.

Fig.2.Predictive genotype scheme  A. Training Process The training process is needed to make the rules.

CPAR has three main steps: rule generation, rule evaluation and classification [7]. In this research the rule generation step is in the training process while the rule evaluation and classification are in the testing process. The data structure that is implemented by this  algorithm is an array data structure. It is used two dimension arrays which make it possible to reduce the space of memory in generating of the rule [3].

In rule generation, the rule is built by counting a weight of gen sample. Inthe beginning of the rule generation, the weight of each gen sample is equal because each of the gen has a same probability toselectedas the first main gen predictor. Afterward, the counting the number of negative and positive samples is needed. The next step is to increase the amount of the feature gain by finding the gain of class positive sample. The increasement is continued until the number of features gen more than a threshold that defined by user. In the finding gen process it is also recordsthe correlation between the phenotype from the target and the genotype sample. The gain of positive class is defined (1) [2]:  ( ) = | ?|(log | ?|| ?| + | ?| log | || | + | |)   (1) | |And| |are the numbers of positive and negative class samples. | ?| And | ?| are the numbers of positive and negative from new rule?s body.

B. Testing process The purpose of the testing process is to test the rule  that has been made in the training process. The testing phenotype data will be as the input of the proscess.

Then the genotype data will be predicted based on the rule. The input of the testing data is the value of the phenotype which its genotype data is required to be predicted. The similarity of the value of input phenotype and the value of rule phenotype will be counted by using the equation(2).

= | ? ? ? | (2) C. Data The data set used in this research is downloaded  from http://gscan.well.ox.ac.uk/. The data use mice as their experiments object. The mice experiments note the value of mice phenotype. The phenotype is showing the symptom of anxiety, diabetes mellitus II and asthma. The treatments are given to the mice to generating the symptom of the three diseases and it is recorded as the mice phenotype. The genotype data is got randomly based on id mice. So, the pre-processing data is needed to make the id data on the phenotype and genotype is equal.  The genotype data note the sequence of the gen on 13 chromosomes from each mouse.

D. Evaluation the predictive genotype To evaluate the predicted genotype, the accuracy of  the predicted is counted by (3). The NumScoreis a number of predicted letters of gene sequence that similar to the letter of gene sequence on the  ICACSIS 2013 ISBN: 978-979-1421-19-5          rules.ThenumberSequence is a length of the rules gene sequence.

= ? 100%   (3)

IV. EXPERIMENTS This study performs pre-experiment which is done  before the real experiment. The purpose of the pre- experiment is to make an easier checking of the correctness of the code. So, the pre-experiment is done by a part of real data.  The per-experiment only use the first letter of the genotype data because it make the experiment process faster, but for the real experiment the rule is built by the all sequence of genotype data.

Table Ishows the part of real data that used in the pre- experiment.

TABLE I  PART OF REAL DATA G 685.39 357.26 1.99 358.8 G 1610.76 336.37 2.83 336.18 A 813.12 382.08 1.85 401.47 G 938.98 386.4 2.49 392.59 G 1084.32 359.58 2.23 363.25 G 1333.52 385.93 2.64 389.88 G 1018.15 389.83 2.16 392.3 G 865.96 378.94 2.57 381.82 G 1512.47 360.71 3.11 361.42   The first column on the Table 1 is a genotype data. It is the first letter of the sequence gen of the mice. The third and so on columns are the phenotype data of the mice. The number is a level of  chemical of mice phenotype that show the The data is taken from first nine mice on database base on the mice id. Table II shows the output of the pre-experiment.

TABLE II OUTPUT OF THE PRE-EXPERIMENT  Atributes Value Frequency  A 401 813  G      Fig. 3.  Tuple data     Fig. 4.  Rules of pre-experiments   Fig 3shows the frequency of the G and A attribute  from each value of phenotype before the generate rule, while the result after generating the rule is shownin Fig4. The difference of frequency between tuple data and rules indicates thatthe CPAR able to classify the phenotype based on the rule.

The real experiment uses the all parts of genotype data on the first chromosome. The length of the sequence gene is 696 letters for each mouse. The letter consists of A, C, G and T as the gen. The number of the phenotype on this experiment are 21. The accuracy scores are counted by (3).

Fig. 5.Accuracy of training data   Fig 5shows the training result of genotype  prediction that use the training data. It shows that the highest accuracy is 92.3 %. The figure 5 shows the training result using non-training data and the highest accuracy is 43.7 %.

The next experiment use one phenotype only and the result of this experiment is illustrated asFig 6. The   0 1000 2000F re  qu en  cy  Phentoype  Data  G  A   0 500 1000 1500  Fr eq  ue nc  y Phenotype  RULES  G  A     1 6 11 16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61  A cc  ur ac  y  th data  Training data  ICACSIS 2013 ISBN: 978-979-1421-19-5          purpose of this experiment is to find the correlation between the phenotype number and the accuracy.

Fig. 6.  Accuracy of non training data    Fig. 7.  Comparison of the accuracy base on the number of phenotypes   Thr accuracy of training data as ilustrated in Fig 7  shows that the highest accuracy is 35.34 % and it is lower than the highest score on 21 phenotypes. The lowest score of 1 phenotype is 16.23 % and of21 phenotypes is 0 %.This number indicatesthat it is esier to predict the 1 phenotype than the 21 phenotypes even the score is lower.



V. CONCLUSIONS The results of the experiment show that the CPAR  on this research able to achive about 90 % accuracy inprediction of the genotype data with training data.

For the non-training data, the predictionaccuracy is about 40%. The accuracy score shows that the CPAR is more effective to predict genotype with the training data than the non-training data based on the genotype- phenotype rules. The experiment on phenotype number shows that the less number of phenotypes will make the loweraccuracy.



VI. REFERENCES [1]  Xhemali, Daniela; Hinde, Christopher J; Stone, Roger G.

Domain-Independent Genotype to Phenotype Mapping through XML Rules. International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol  7, Issue 3 No 6 May 2010  [2]  Yin, Xiaoxin; Han, Jiawei. Classification based on Predictive Association Rule Mining. Proc SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM ?03), 2003, 331-335.

[3]  Coenen, F. The LUCS-KDD Implementations of CPAR.The University of Liverpool.

[4]  Han J. and Kamber M., Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques, 2nd ed., San Francisco, Morgan Kauffmann Publishers,2001.

[5] MacDonald, J, N and Beiko, G, R. ?Efficient Learning of Microbila Genotype-Phenotype Association Rules?.

Bioinformatics.vol 26. p. 1834-1840. 2010.

[6]  Agrawal,R. ?Mining association rules between sets of items in large databases.? In SIGMOD ?93: Proceedings of the Management Of Data. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 207?216.

1993.

