A Real-Time Intelligent Abnormity Diagnosis

Abstract?With the rapid development of smart grid,  intelligent electric meters can be seen in most of the households,  and the volume of electric energy data is in a rapid growth. This  paper mainly aims at introducing an abnormity diagnosis  platform in electric power system. It is used to distinguish the  abnormal point according to the historical data and expert  experience, and put forward some resolving scheme to ensure the  high reliability and stability of power grid. In our approach, we  use distributed technologies to process big electric energy data.

Specifically, distributed fie system (HDFS) and distributed  database (HBase) are applied to data storage, and distributed  computing technology (MapReduce) is applied to constructing  knowledge base and computing. In the inference engine, we use  Hidden Semi-Markov Model. This model can auto-get and  modify knowledge in knowledge base, achieve a better real time  phenomenon? through self-learning function and machine as  well as interacting between human?The results show that this abnormity intelligent diagnoses platform is effective and faster.

Keywords? Abnormity Intelligent Diagnosis, Distributed Storage, Distributed Computing, Hidden Markov Model

I. INTRODUCTION  t present, it has entered the digital, information age in  the whole world. The advancements of information and  communication technology (ICT) have enhanced our  capability of collecting data, so does the electric power  industry in China. For example, the intelligent electric meters  upload electro-data every 15 minutes, then the number of  electro-data in one day is 96?N, where N is the number of  electric power users which is usually more than 700million.

The big data in electric power system can bring us big  optunities. On one hand, the development of electric power  industry and society are closely linked, effective application of  big data in electric power system is the impetus of rapid  development of society. On the other hand, a new study from  University of Texas ([1]) shows that a minimal effort to  improve data usability can have a massive impact on revenue.

If there is a 10% improvement in data quality, electric service  will have the largest improvement of ROE (Rate of Return on  Common Stockholder?s Equity). In other words, effective use  of big data in electric power system can promote operation  efficiency and profit ability dramatically.

Along with the rapid development of smart grid, the amount  of data in electric industry is increasing too. Take only one  province as example, we have known that there is a big  electro-data, even the number of abnormal information of  consumer equipment in one day is more than ten millions. It is  difficult to storage and compute these big data with traditional  technologies.

In this paper, we mainly aims at analysing the large  amounts of abnormal electro-data and introducing an  intelligent abnormity diagnosis platform applied in electric  power system. The abnormal electro-data includes the  abnormal information of metrical equipment, acquisition  equipment and electric power consumption of customer. This  platform can distinguish the abnormal point according to the  history data and expert experience, and put forward some  resolving scheme to ensure the high reliability and stability of  power network, therefore provide the directive function to  operation and maintenance staffs.

The structure of this paper is as follows: Section II  introduces the whole architecture and the advantages of  distributed technologies (including distributed storage and  computing technology) applied in the intelligent abnormity  diagnosis platform. Section III applies expert system to  diagnose the abnormal information of consumer equipment,  the knowledge base and inference engine are emphatically  introduced. Section IV presents the results of experiments and  the running state of platform. Finally, we provide a conclusion  and offer an outlook of future work in Section V.



II. PLATFORM ARCHITECTURE  There is a rapid development of ICT and electric power  industry, the combination of both two technologies makes us  be faced with the challenge of explosive growth of big data in  electric power system, especially the electro-data and  abnormal information of electric equipment.

Being aims at solving the problem caused by the big data,  we give some analysis, and apply distributed technologies to  construct the platform. This section introduces the technology  architecture of intelligent abnormity diagnosis platform.

A. Technology Architecture  Figure 1 shows the technology architecture of intelligent  abnormity diagnosis platform. The detailed description of  each module are as follows:  Data import: The main function of this module is data  transforming, from relational database (Oracle). Sqoop is used  A  ISBN 978-89-968650-3-2 83 February 16~19, 2014 ICACT2014    in this model, as it is a powerful Extraction-Transformation-  Loading tool, especially at data transforming between  comprehensive database and knowledge.

Storage: The main function of this module is storing and  updating the knowledge from relational database and  experts.

Distributed file system (HDFS) and distributed storage  (HBase) are used in this module.

Computing: This module executs algorithms to allocate the  reason for abnormalities according to the knowledges.

Distributed computing technology (Mapreduce) is applied.

Data export: This module transfers diagnosis results to the  database, and make a backup in HBase. Sqoop is also hired  here.

Data Import?Sqoop?  Distributed Storage?HDFS?HBase?  Distributed Computting?MapReduce?  Construction of  Knowledge Base  Abnormity  Diagnosis  Data Export?Sqoop?  Intelligent  Abnormity  diagnosis  platform   Figure 1.  The technology architecture of intelligent abnormity diagnosis  platform    Figure 2.  The comparision of efficiency of distributed technology and traditional technology  In order to compare the efficiency of distributed technology  and traditional technology, we compute the statistical  characters (mean, variance) of abnormal case by using Oracle  and Hive (a data warehouse infrastructure built on top of  Hadoop). Figure 2 shows the elapse time of two technologies.

The data was collected from a county in China. Figure 2  suggests following conclusion:  1) Comparing to traditional technologies, distributed  technologies increase computing speed observably, especially  as data gets bigger.

2) The computing efficiency of distributed technology and  traditional technology are not significantly different over  small data.



III. EXPERT SYSTEM  Aiming at distinguishing the abnormal point of the  consumer equipment and consumer, expert system is applied  to do this work. This section mainly introduces the basic  working principle of expert system, knowledge base and  inference engine.

A. Basic Principle  The expert system is applied to distinguish the abnormal  point according to the history abnormal electro-data and  expert experience. In the intelligent abnormity diagnosis  platform, expert system is composed of four parts: human  machine interface, comprehensive database, knowledge base  and inference engine, and the last two parts are the most  important parts in the system. Figure 3 shows the structure  graph of expert system. The arrows represent the direction of data flow.

In the platform, an abnormal case is composed of some  abnormal phenomenon and a corresponding reason of such  phenomenon. The abnormal phenomenon are obtained from  electricity information acquisition system, and the reason of  abnormity (professional knowledge/experience of experts) is  obtained from experts. Experts are the operation and  maintenance staffs, and they are also the users of platform.

The functions of each part in the platform are given as  follows:  Human Machine Interface  Knowledge Base  ?Knowledge Acquisition? Attribute Reduction,  Update?  Comprehensive Database  Inference Engine  Professional  Knowledge  Operation and Maintenance  Staff (Experts)  Real-Time  Data  Electricity Information  Acquisition Sytem  Electricity Customers  Historical  Data   Figure 3.  The structure graph of expert system in intelligent abnormal  dignosis platform  1) Human machine interface is applied to show the possible  results of diagnosis and get the reason of abnormities from the  experts/users.

2) Comprehensive database is applied to storage the real-  time data and historical data, including the occurrence time  and location of abnormal case, the abnormal phenomenon,  reason of abnormity, power curve, name of abnormal  equipment and others.

3) Knowledge base is applied to storage the abnormal  phenomenon of abnormal case and the reason of such  phenomenon. Knowledge base is required to have four basic  functions: knowledge acquisition, knowledge storage,  attributes reduction and knowledge base update. Knowledge  base can realize its value through inference engine.

4) Inference Engine is applied to compute the abnormal  point according to the real-time data (abnormal phenomenon)  0 17 72        629 986 1262  979.8 19.2  595.2 1766.4  3475.2       E T  L  D  A Y  M  O N  T H  M  O N  T H  M  O N  T H  M  O N  T H   M O  N T  H  Oracle?Sec? Hive?Sec? Number of records(10?  ISBN 978-89-968650-3-2 84 February 16~19, 2014 ICACT2014    and the knowledge in knowledge base. The algorithm we used  in inference engine is Hidden Semi- Markov Model.

TABLE 1. AN EXAMPLE OF DECISION TABLE  Number Reason of  Abnormity Anomaly Type  Abnormal Phenomenon Occurrence  Number Phenomenon   Phenomenon   Phenomenon   Phenomenon  ??  1 Reason 1 Metric Equipment 1 1 0 0 ?? N1  2 Reason 2 Acquisition 1 1 0 0 ?? N2  3 Reason 3 Metric Equipment 0 0 1 1 ?? N3  4 Reason 4 Acquisition 0 0 1 1 ?? N4  5 Reason 5 Abnormal in Using  Electricity 0 1 0 0 ?? N5  ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??    Knowledge base and inference engine are the most  important parts in the expert system.

B.  Knowledge Base  There are three kinds of anomaly types, including abnormal  information of metric equipment, acquisition and electric  power consumption of customer. TABLE 1 shows an example  of decision table which includes Reason of Abnormities,  anomaly types, and abnormal phenomena.

The functions of knowledge base are given as follows:  1) Knowledge acquisition  In the platform, knowledge in the knowledge base means  Reason of Abnormities and abnormal phenomena of abnormal  case which are obtained from operation and maintenance staff  and electricity information acquisition system respectively.

Sqoop is applied to transform the data (abnormal  phenomenon) from comprehensive database to knowledge  base.

2) Knowledge storage  Decision table is the core of knowledge base. TABLE 1  shows an example of decision table. Take province Ningxia as  example, by analyzing the abnormal electro-data, we find that  there are rN  reason of abnormities, pN  abnormal  phenomenon. Let iR  be the ith Reason of Abnormity, jP  be  the jth abnormal phenomenon, where 1, 2,3, , ri N?  and  1,2,3, , pj N? .

All the abnormal case in decision table should apply with  the rule as  1: p l  iNC P P R? ? ? ,   (1)  where lC  is the lth abnormal case in decision table. This  rule has the following meaning: in the abnormal case lC ,  reason iR  is the cause of phenomenon 1 kP P? ? . Take a real  abnormal case as example. Let 1P  is the phenomenon ? no  voltage curve in the terminal?, 1R  is the corresponding reason  ? failure in data transfer?, 2R  is the another corresponding  reason ?no voltage curve in the electric energy meter?.

Actually, 1P  can be caused by 1R  or 2R . In one word, the  same phenomenon can be caused by different reasons,  conversely, the same reason can lead to different phenomenon.

We did not storage all the abnormal cases in the decision  table, the occurrence number of each kind of abnormal case is  listed in the last column. This kind of decision table can help  the platform saving search time in the progress of attribute  reduction and knowledge base update.

3) Attribute reduction  Rough set theory is a new mathematical tool to deal with  vagueness and uncertainty.

In the real data, some abnormal phenomenon tend to appear  in the same time, so it is not necessary to list all the  phenomenon in the decision table. Furthermore, by analyzing  the characters of abnormal case, we can see that the initial  decision table based on raw data is an inconsistent decision  table, then the traditional reduction method is not suitable to  analyse the abnormal data in electric system. So we apply a  high efficient algorithm based on ? -reduction to solve this  problem.

The work is conducted in 5 steps as follows:  Firstly, establish the initial decision table according to the  raw data mentioned above.

Secondly, compute the decision vector B? .

The decision table can also be defined as  { , , }DT U B D f? ? , where  1 2( , , , )cNU C C C?  1 2{ , , , }pNB P P P?  1 2{ , , , }rND R R R?  According to the initial decision table, it is easy to obtain  1 2/ { , , , }nU B B B B? and 1 2/ { , , , }mU D D D D? . x U? ? ,  the decision vector can be defined as  1( ( ), , ( )) [ ] [ ]  m B  B B  DD D D  x x ? ? ,  where | [ ] |  ( ) [ ] | [ ] |  i i B  B B  D D x D  x x  ? ? .

Thirdly, compute the fuzzy equivalent relation matrix TS? .

,x y U? ? , 1( ) ( , , )B nx x x? ? ?? , 1( ) ( , , )B ny y y? ? ?? ,  then the fuzzy equivalent relation matrix is defined as  {( , ) | ( , ) }TS x y U U TS x y? ?? ? ? ? , where kTS S? ,  | |k U? , and  ISBN 978-89-968650-3-2 85 February 16~19, 2014 ICACT2014     2 2  1 1  S( , )  n  i i  i  n n  i i  i i  x y  x y  x y  ? ?  ? ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ?  ?  ?  ? ?    Fourthly, compute the ? -reduction.

/U TS?  can be obtained in the above three steps, then we  can compute the ? -reduction by using the heuristic algorithm  based on sorting proposed by [2].

We can see that ? -reduction is the best attribute reduction.

4) Knowledge base Update  As time went by, the best attribute reduction is not  invariable because abnormal cases are changing. The  knowledge base needs to be able to add new abnormal case in  time. If the new abnormal case exists in the decision table, add  one to the occurrence time, and if the new abnormal case does  not exist in the decision table, add a row, and the occurrence  time is one.

C. Inference Engine  The Algorithm of abnormity diagnosis is the core in  inference engine. Hidden Semi-Markov Model (HSMM) is  applied to diagnose the abnormal reason of equipment and  abnormity in using electricity.

A HSMM is a statistical model with the same structure as  semi-Markov rather than Markov. This means that the  probability of there being a change in the hidden state depends  on the amount of time that has elapsed since entre into the  current state.

The parameter set of HSMM is denoted as  ( , , , , , )r pN N A B P? ?? . Figure 3 shows the progress of  diagnosis in inference engine in detail. We aims at finding the  most suitable HSMM according to the known knowledge.

1) rN  is the number of states in the state set R ,  1 2{ , ,..., }pNR R R R? , it is the abnormal reason set in the paper.

2) pN  is the number of observation sequence (output  sequence), 1 2{ , , , }pNP P P P? . We see the abnormal  phenomenon as output sequence.

3) ? is the initial state probability. 1 2{ , }rN? ? ? ?? ? ? ,  where i?  is the probability when the initial state is i ,  1: ( )i P q i? ? ?  with 1i? ?? .

4) [ ]  r rij N N A a ??  is the state transition probability matrix  (STPM). Considering the first order Markov Chain, the  current state iq  only depends on the previous state 1iq ? , that is  1( | )ij i j i ia P q S q S?? ? ? .

5) [ ( )] p pj N N  B b k ??  is the state output probability  distribution. In our paper, , ,A B?  are unknown parameters.

Abnormal  Reason 1  Abnormal  Reason Nr  Abnormal  Reason 2 ??  ??  ??  Knowledge Knowledge Knowledge  HSMM1 HSMM2 HSMMNr  Training  Real Data (Abnormal phenomenon)  P(O|model)1 P(O|model)2?? P(O|model)Nr  Diagnose  Abnormal Reason  (Biggest probability)    Figure 4.  The progress of diagnosis in inference  engine  6) 1 2{ ( ), ( ) ,..., ( )}nsP P d P d P d?  is the set of state duration  probability. ( )iP d  is the probability of duration time the in  state i ,  1 2 1( ) : ( , , , | , )i t d t d t t tP d P q j q j q j q j q i? ? ? ? ?? ? ? ? ? ? .

Assuming that the ith  state duration distribution are given  by Gaussian density function with mean ?  and variance ? .

( ) ( | , )iP d N d ? ??  ?  and ?  are estimated with mean value pt  and  __   ( ) / ( 1)  pN  i p  i  pt pt N  ?  ? ?? .

Baum-Welch algorithm (also known as Forward-Backward  algorithm) is used to find the most suitable HSMM.



IV. EXPERIMENTS  In this section, we intend to show the efficiency of the  abnormity intelligent diagnosis platform over some  experiments. The data was collected from a county in China.

Period of time is 1 month, 2 months, ??, and 12 months (1 year), obviously, the amounts of abnormal case increases as  the period changes.

Figure 5.  The result of abnormity intelligent diagnosis platform  Figure 5 shows the correctness of our platform, and the  correctness is expressed by = /t tR N N , where tR  is the  88.10%88.30% 88.90%  90.00% 91.00%  92.10% 93.30%  94.60% 95.70%  96.30% 96.80%97.00%  82.00%  84.00%  86.00%  88.00%  90.00%  92.00%  94.00%  96.00%  98.00%  ISBN 978-89-968650-3-2 86 February 16~19, 2014 ICACT2014    correct rate, tN  is the number of diagnosis, and N  is the  number of abnormal case we need to diagnose. From Figure 5,  we have the following conclusions:  1) The interval of correct rate is [88.1%, 97.3%], so the  experiment results are satisfied;  2) With the increase in the amount of historical data, the  correctness increase too. However, the rate of increase is not  invariable. At first, tR  increase slowly, then there is a  relatively rapid increase, at last, the speed of increase turns  slower again.



V. CONCLUSIONS  In this paper, we mainly aims at describing the abnormity  intelligent diagnosis platform constructed in electric power  system. In the platform, distributed technologies and tools are  applied to solve the problem of big data storage and  computing, expert system is applied to analyze the  characteristic of big data and identify abnormal points  according to the historical data and expert experience, and put  forward some resolving scheme to ensure the high reliability  and stability of power grid. Finally, the experiment shows a  high efficiency and accuracy of the platform. In the power  system, this is the first approach of constructing an abnormity  intelligent diagnosis platform based on distributed  technologies and expert system which helps in dealing with  big data. Our future work focus more on abnormal electro-  data analysis and set up an update mechanism of this platform.

