Document-oriented Database-based Privacy Data  Protection Architecture

Abstract?NoSQL database has been popular in cloud storage and document-oriented database also has attracted much attention as a kind of NoSQL database. This paper introduces document-oriented database-based privacy data protection architecture. This architecture maintains the feature as scheme-free and nested document of document- oriented database, and protects tenants? privacy through split value and confused key. To prevent the attacker recombining the split value, we provide the theory of matching degree, and give related definition and algorithm to decrease the possibility of exposing tenants? privacy data. Finally the experiment proves that our architecture is practical and efficient.

Keywords-  Cloud,  NoSQL,  Privacy Protection, Big Data

I.  INTRODUCTION It is more and more difficult to deal with big data and  high concurrency data for traditional RDBMS in cloud storage. NoSQL database [1] has been popular in cloud storage, and document-oriented database also has attracted much attention as a kind of NoSQL database. More and more organizations and enterprises deploy their data in document- oriented database [2].

Compared with a traditional RDBMS, a document- oriented database deals with high concurrency reading and writing very well, enables storage, accesses big data, and has high scalability and availability. Document-oriented database adopts agile document replacing the concept of tuple. The method of document-oriented embeds document or array in it and expresses the complex logical structures among data in a record. Furthermore, document-oriented database is schema-free database. The keys of document are not required and the orders of the keys are not fixed. The schema-free provides more operability for the data.

With the wide application of document-oriented database in the cloud storage, data security issues also emerge. Cloud data leakage occurs frequently in recent years, which makes the cloud storage providers lose credibility and increase the worry of the tenant about their data?s security. Cloud data leakage is generally divided into two cases, which are internal leakage and external leakage. Internal leakage refers to the cloud storage provider?s staff stealing the tenant?s data  and selling it to the attacker to gain an advantage. External leakage refers to the attacker obtaining tenant?s data through various channels, including attacks on the cloud servers and bribing the internal staff.

It is the research emphasis to prevent the tenants? privacy data leakage in cloud data security. There have been some mature solutions to preserving privacy such as data encryption [3, 4], anonymity [5, 6, 7] and data fragment [8, 9], etc. Data encryption can effectively prevent the leakage of privacy data, but the efficiency of the ciphertext processing is low; Anonymity protects privacy data through generalization. The generalization has acceptable processing efficiency, but it may result in data loss. Data fragment separates attributes which would leak tenants? privacy together into distinct table and hide the relation among the tables. Data fragment doesn?t loss data, whose executing efficiency is better than data encryption, but it is not applicable for the structure of document.

Considering the traditional methods can?t protect tenants? privacy data while guaranteeing efficiency, we present a document-oriented database-based privacy data protection architecture which protects tenants? privacy through split value and confused key. To prevent the attacker recombining the split value, we provide the theory of matching degree, and give related definition  and algorithm to decrease the possibility of exposing tenants? privacy data. Our architecture can protect tenant?s data from internal leakage and external leakage and maintain the properties as scheme- free and nested document of document-oriented database.

Finally we test and verify our architecture is practical.

In section we present the basic method to protect privacy data. In section  we discuss how to oppose the attacker. In section  we introduce our document-oriented database privacy data protection architecture. Finally the experiment testifies the architecture is high-efficiency.



II. BASIC METHOD  A. Split Value and Confused Key Firstly we definite basic methods for protecting private  data as split value and confused key.

2013 10th Web Information System and Application Conference  DOI 10.1109/WISA.2013.12   2013 10th Web Information System and Application Conference  DOI 10.1109/WISA.2013.12   2013 10th Web Information System and Application Conference  DOI 10.1109/WISA.2013.12   2013 10th Web Information System and Application Conference  DOI 10.1109/WISA.2013.12   2013 10th Web Information System and Application Conference  DOI 10.1109/WISA.2013.12     Definition 1. Split Value and Confused Key, split value means segmenting the value of the attribute which needs protect. V? {Vr? Vr? ? . Vr?}. Confused key is concurrent with split value, then we would rename every key of split value and out of order of the keys, K? {Kr? Kr? ? . Kr?}.

We can insure accuracy of every key-value pair and existing constraints  Kr? ? Vr? , while the order of confused key {Kr? Kr? ? Kr?}  is the privacy protecting method.

Scheme-free is a feature of document-oriented database, which means the order of the keys and the length of values are not fixed. We assume the attributes which need protect have a maximum length and a minimum length. We would determine the number of confused key by the maximum length when we achieve the privacy protecting method, while the large data is not considered in this paper.

We need know split granularity when we split value and confuse key. The split granularity would determine the level of the privacy protection. We named this split granularity as split factor. The bigger of the split factor, the lower of the privacy protection level. If the split factor is 1, then we can regard our method as a special encryption algorithm. We would verify the efficiency of our architecture with different split factor.

B. 3.2 Nested Document Nested Document is regarding a document as a value of  another document. Nested document structure is a feature of document-oriented database, which makes the data organize more naturally and more accurately. We must consider how to protect the data in nested document carefully when we protect the privacy data in document-oriented database.

To protect the data in nested document, we need grasp the structure information of the full-document. Therefore, we generate document-tree. The root of the document-tree is the record, while we build hierarchical relationship of the tree as the document structure?s hierarchical relationship. The document which contains value would become leaf node; there is a leaf node as successor for every leaf node. And we don?t care the orders of the key in document, in other words our document-tree supports scheme-free. There contains three extra-properties for every leaf node, the type of the value (0: numerical value, 1: string value), the maximum length and the minimum length. Attribute age is a numerical value and the min length is 1 and the max length is 3. The type of value and min length are used in compute matching degree which are mentioned in next section, and the max attribute is used to determine the number of renamed key in confused key.

We can obtain the path of the document through document-tree.Privacy method would hold the path when we split an attribute.



III. MATCHING DEGREE We have defined the basic privacy data protection method for document-oriented database. The attacker can?t obtain tenants? privacy data directly after split value and  confused key, but they still could get tenants? privacy information through piece together and specialized knowledge. For example, although it has split attribute SSN, if the attacker has already known the value of the first two field, they only need try two possible way that must contains tenants? privacy data. The specialized knowledge reduces the level of tenants? privacy data protection very much.

Therefore, we present the definition of matching degree.

A. The Knowledge of Attacker We give the definition of the knowledge of attacker:  Definition 2, Awareness Expression(AE), express the knowledge of the attacker for a certain attribute,  AE = (Vr? ? Vr?  ? ? ? Vr? ) ? (Vr?	?  ? ? Vr?	? ? ?  ? Vr? ?)     (0 ? j < k ? n ? 1)  , where item Vr?	  represents the segmentation that attacker knows the location of it that we denominate as known segmentation; item Vr??  represents the location of a segmentation that attacker cannot ensure that we denominate as suspicious segmentation. The knowledge of the attacker is the combination of all the known segmentation and a certain suspicious segmentation.

Take the phone number as an example, The top numbers usually signify the regions; it is easy to distinguish through the yellow pages. The attacker could position the order of the early segmentations by the knowledge of phone number and these segmentations are known as segmentation. The segmentations which other attackers can?t make sure their order are suspicious segmentation.

After defining the knowledge of the attacker we can define privacy leakage exponent. Privacy leakage exponent is the indicator to measure the level of the privacy protection of our architecture.

Definition 3, Privacy Leakage Exponent (PLE),  PLE = ?|Vr	| + 1  ?|Vr	| + ?|Vr?| ? 100  , the lower the PLE is, the harder for attacker to achieve tenants? privacy data.

B. The Definition of Matching Degree Definition 4, Match Degree (MD), expresses the  closeness degree of two attribute. For matching attribute ? and matched attribute ?,  MD = (T? ? T?) l?  l? ?  , ? is privacy attribute of tenant, T expresses the type of the attribute, then we assume only two types of the attributes which are number and string; ?  expresses the minimum length of the attribute. Attributes can only match with the same type and the MD of attributes with different types are     zero. The lengthier the matching attribute than the matched attribute, the higher MD. E.g. the MD of attributes SSN and firstname is 0.

Definition 5, Matching Split Policy, for the attribute ? of tenant, find attribute ?  with max MD, and split ?  and ? together, get n and m segmentations were the matching split policy.

The matching split policy can ensure the PLE less than ???(???)  ????(?	?)? if the attacker only have the knowledge of one  attribute.

Prove, assume attacker has specialized knowledge of an attribute of tenants, if we split this attribute to n segmentations, and split the matching attribute to m segmentations, then according to the definition of AE, the attacker could mostly certain n-2 known segmentations, in other words, there are less than m+2 suspicious segmentations. According to the definition of MD, the max PLE of tenant is ???(???)  ?	? . As m = ?MD ? n?, so the PLE of  tenant is less than ???(???) ????(?	?)?  .

There are two method of split value, split fixed length and split fixed segmentation number. Split fixed length means the segmentations length were same for a certain attribute. Split fixed segmentation number means the segmentations number were same for all the attributes. We adopt fixed length split in our architecture because it can produce the best possible results within matching degree.

C. Matching Policy Algorithm We have present matching degree and matching spilt  policy which can reduce the possibility of the leakage of tenants? data. We present algorithm about achieve matching policy. This algorithm can get the optimum matching attribute of the protected attribute.

We compute the matching degree of attributes through document tree. For the attribute that need achieve matching attribute, the algorithm traverse all leaf node from it and compute the matching degree with it. The attribute with max matching degree will be found and we will hide the name of the two attributes and send their path in matching policy. The algorithm would traverse the document tree twice and the time complexity is O(n).

TABLE I.  MATCHING POLICY ALGORITHM  Algorithm input: Document Tree(DT) privacy attribute A output: privacy policy 1.  find privacy attribute A in DT 2.  IF can?t find A THEN 3.     RETURN 4.  END IF 5.  FOR EACH node in DT 6.     compute Matching Degree with A 7.  END FOR  8.  find maximum Matching Degree attribute B 9.  IF B has hided THEN 10.    KA splitValue(A); 11.    save A?s fullname in KA 12.    anonymity A?name in DT 13.    RETURN KA 14. ELSE 15.   KA splitValue(A);KB splitValue(B); 16.    save A and B?s fullname in KA and KB 17.   anonymity A and B?name in DT 18.   RETURN KA and KB 19.END IF  The attribute is anonymous when it is split in the algorithm because the document tree is public, but the location and name of the protected attributes are private. We don?t hide other properties of attribute when an attribute is anonymous.

It is possible that the protected attribute is the matching attribute of other attribute, or the found matching attribute has been becoming matching attribute of other attributes. We call these scenarios as multi-matching and the algorithm only needs split the attribute not anonymous.



IV. PRIVACY PROTECT ARCHITECTURE The early chapters describe the method to achieve  privacy protection policy, and the policy itself also becomes a sensitive data. Especially it has fatalness of leakage when the privacy policy and the protected data are saved together.

We present document-oriented database privacy protection architecture to prevent that.

The architecture has two types of servers: P-server and S- servers. S-servers store protected data only, whereas P-server stores tenants? policy, receives incoming operations, and verifies the tenant?s identity and translates the operation according to the policy. P-server can only receive and translate tenants? operation request, and cannot send operation request itself.

Translate Module  Policy Store Module  Identity Verify Module    Figure 1.  Privacy Protect Architecture  Tenants only interact with P-server and the encrypted policy of tenants is stored in P-server. Tenants own the secret key and would send the secret key at the request of the operation. P-server deciphers tenant?s policy through the secret key. All of these are in memory and are not persistent.

When tenants want to insert data, they will send the request which contains tenant?s identity information ID(T), tenant?s secret key PK and the saved operation request     op(< K?, V? >< K?, V? >< K?, V? >) . The P-server verifies tenant?s identity, then gets tenant?s policy K?[K?!?, K?!? ? ], K?[K?!?, K?!? ? ]  through deciphering function D("#,#) , and translates module split the data to op(< K?!?, V!? > < K?!?, V!? > ? , < K?!?, V!? ><  K?!?, V!? > ? , < K?, V? >)  and sends it to S-server. S- servers receive the operation request and save the data.



V. EXPERIMENT  A. Experiment Environment The experiment compares the efficiency of CRUD  operation when using architecture with not using it. Besides, it verifies the query efficiency with different split factor. We use mongoDB 2.2[10] as the test database and deploy it on three servers with two 1.80GHz quad-core CPU, 8GB memory and 1TB storage space. The operation system is Red Hat Enterprise Linux6.2. The scale of the test dataset is 100w.

It is possible that the protected attribute is the matching attribute of other attribute, or the found matching attribute has been becoming matching attribute of other attributes. We call these scenarios as multi-matching and the algorithm only needs split the attribute not anonymous.

B. Efficiency of CRUD Operation The experiment has built three database. Database A  stores raw data; database B protects attribute data_date and the coll_time becomes matching attribute; database C protects attributes data_date and coll_time and coll_time becomes the multi-matching attribute. All the operation of the three databases is same in the experiment. The results are shown as figure 2.

Figure 2.  CRUD Operation (ms)  For the insert operation, we insert same 100w records into the database respectively and we could observe that no more than 5% is affected by our architecture. For the query operation, the three database return same result set, but the efficiency of operation would go lower along with the number of protected attribute. The operation time of database C has almost increased 20% compared with the time of database A. While for the update and delete operation, the architecture almost does not affect their effiency.

C. Split Factor The experiment has verified the query efficiency with  different split factor and has built three databases. Database A stores the raw data; database B and D protect attribute data_date and the coll_time becomes matching attribute.

Database B split the attribute with 4 bytes a key or rather split factor is 4 and database D?s split factor is 8. All the  operation of the three databases is same in the experiment.

The results are shown as figure 3.

Figure 3.  Efficiency of Split Factor ms  We can see from the result of experiment that the split factor has affected on insert and query operation. Especially for the select operation, the operation time of database D has almost increased 25% compared with the time of database A, while for the insert operation the effect is less than 10%. We need consider the executing efficiency and the protection level in product environment.

