Visualizing The Impact of Time Series Data for Predicting User Interactions

Abstract?In recent years the importance of user interactions  has been recognized in a variety of research contexts. There is a variety of algorithms for modeling these in social graphs; in particular, we distinguish static and dynamic relations. In contrast to static graphs in which the networks do not change over time, the underlying relation is changing frequently in various contexts. This should be reflected by a time dependent social neighborhood of users. In this paper, we present a new and intuitive visualization concept for the histories of user interactions. We derive association rules and visualize these using heatmaps. We demonstrate the impact of the presented approach by several examples utilizing real-world data ? using the well known twitter dump of 2009.



I. INTRODUCTION  There is a large number of analysis tasks for social graph based algorithms ranging from clustering and community detection over link prediction [4] to diffusion. In this con- text, there is a wide range of static networks with a time invariant set of edges forming the social neighborhood. For many application contexts, the time-invariant assumption is reasonable: ties that were created and not explicitly destroyed should in general be thought of as relatively stable. But in the case of user interactions that happen only at distinct points in time the question of the lifespan of the corresponding edge arises naturally. It seems reasonable to assume that links in co- authorship or scientific citation networks are stable for several years[5].

However, the assumption does not hold for all application contexts, for example, for the follower relation in twitter. In [2] for example, the phenomenon of unfollowing - the breaking of the follow relation by a user - has been researched and reasons for this behavior have been identified. Furthermore, recent research like [1] analyze feedback effects of user simi- larity and interactions in Wikipedia, such as communications, edits and others. We present a new visualization concept for time series data based on frequent pattern mining which is easy to interpret. This concept allows us to get an intuitive understanding of how users interact with each other along a temporal dimension.

In the following, we first describe the applied dataset.

After that, we present the visualization concept for detecting important patterns in the data. We discuss its application using exemplary heatmaps.



II. DATASET  For the evaluation of our approach we used a twitter dump from the second half (approximately 32 weeks) of 2009, containing 476,553,560 tweets from over 17,069,982 users.

For each tweet the timestamp and the author is given. The possibility to mention another user is given by highlighting the user name with a preceding ?@?. Every tweet mentioning a user is prominently displayed within the users Twitter GUI, so he or she does not miss any reference to his or her profile.

From the given data we derived for every pair of users (u, v) a history Hu,v = (b1, . . . , b32) of mentions in form of a histogram with 32 buckets. Bucket i contains bi mentions, iff u mentioned v exactly bi times during week i. So each bi measures activity during one of the 32 weeks that are contained in our data set. The time series capturing interactions between u and v is hereby given as a histogram. Since seasonal effects have been proven within Twitter and we want to produce results of high generality, we use sliding window techniques to overcome this issue: out of each histogram (b1, . . . , b32) we create 24 histograms hiu,v = (b1, . . . , b9) with i = 1, . . . , 24, each covering a time span of nine weeks. We will now further investigate the set H = {hiu,v | u, v ? U, 1 ? i ? 24} where U is the set of all users.



III. ANALYSIS  We present a new visualization tool which uses frequent itemset mining to detect important patterns within the data.

The results are plotted as exemplary heatmaps which pro- vide an easy to understand view on the implications that can be derived given some knowledge about the user ac- tivity B = {b1, . . . , b9} of u and v during some weeks W = {1, . . . , 9} in the histogram hiu,v ? H . In the following we will encode the elements of H as frequent itemsets from which we derive association rules. The confidence of each rule can be visualized within a heatmap. The presented plots will show that the history of mentions between two users are an important feature for the task of predicting the stability of user ties. According to the binary nature of features used in frequent itemset mining we encode a given history (b1, . . . , b9) ? H as the following itemset L:  L = {itemij | j ? {20, . . . 210} ? bi ? j.} (?) Applying the Top-k-PFPGrowth [3] results in all closed item- sets. We want to demonstrate how much information we gain by considering a reasonable size of time series data aggregation the history of user interactions. We represent a   1477ASONAM'13, August 25-29, 2013, Niagara, Ontario, CAN  Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2240-9 /13/08 ...$15.00    Fig. 1. Six heatmaps representing communication patterns: the given knowledge (premises of the association rules) is marked as the gray cells/bars. The values within the heatmaps represent the confidence of the appropriate assoziation rule.

history in form of a histogram with 9 buckets (b1, . . . , b9), e. g., ( , , , , , 1, , 2, ). In this case, the activity during weeks 6 and 8 is known. We define I = {i1, . . . , ik} ? W as the set of indexes of the buckets which we have knowledge about. The concrete mention counts of those weeks are given by C = {bi1 , . . . , bik} ? B respectively. This is represented by the itemset:  S = {itemi1bi1 , . . . , item ik bik  } Based on the support of S and all of its supersets S?R we can calculate the confidence for all association rules S ? R, with the premises S which represents our given knowledge. The conclusion R and its confidence p = support(S?R)support(S) represents the inferable knowledge. In the first plot of Figure 1, for example, the given knowledge is captured by S = {item11} while the derived knowledge represented by the confidence in the adjacent cell of the heatmap can be calculated using S ? R = {item11, item21}. This can be interpreted as follows: if u mentions v once in week 1 then the probability that u will mention v once more is its confidence p. We visualize the resulting patterns with a heatmap representing a 9?10 matrix M , where m10?i,j = p, iff p is the maximum confidence of all association rules containing itemj2i .

In Figure 1 we present some of the produced results. In the first plot the bottom-left cell (row 11, column 1)is marked as knowledge. This can be interpreted as the knowledge that during the first week of the history of interest one user mentioned another once. The value 0.09 in the adjacent field is interpreted as the probability of one mention in the second week given the knowledge in week one. We can see that the inferred probabilities for the next 8 weeks (in the subsequent cells in the same row) are 4 to 6 times lower than in the  second, fifth or sixth plot where we got the knowledge of only one more mention in a different week. The effect is even more impressive when comparing plot three and four: knowing that about 256 mentions are happening within one week (see column 1) has less impact on the observed confidences for our derived knowledge than 40 mentions within 2 weeks (32 + 8 for week 1 and week 5, respectively).

The decrease of the support from Figures 2 to 5 and 6 also confirms the observation that conversations or user ties of lower lifespan happen more often than ones of longer durations. The longer a conversation is the less there random spikes of activity. This is reflected by the increased height of the ?heated area? of figure 5 and especially 6. Although all histograms have a summed mention count of 2, the probabil- ities of high activity differs alot in each szenario. This kind of visualization not only gives evidence about the importance of time series data for the task of predicting activity, but also gives an intuitive representation of how and when users interact with each other.

