Application of Fuzzy Set Theory in Emergency  Decision-making of Sudden Water Pollution Accident

Abstract?Environment problem such as the frequent water pollution accidents has become one of the most notable emergency management problems for our government. When there is an emergency water pollution event, it is important to make an effective emergency decision according to the information of real-time event and the appropriate response can mitigate the environment pollution and costs. Because decisions may need to be taken very quickly and with limited information, the need for decision-making skills increases dramatically in emergencies. This paper primarily based on the fuzzy set theory and used the method to make a decision in complex situation of sudden water pollution accidents. The fuzzy set theory is used to represent the evaluation ratings of candidate items because of the information available can?t be numerical. The approach can be used to help the decision maker choose the best emergency decisions. An example of choosing an effective emergency plan of water pollution accident is used to illustrate the method.

Keywords-environment pollution, water pollution accident, emergency decision, fuzzy set theory

I. INTRODUCTION (HEADING 1) After decades of rapid growth of economic, China is now  facing acute environment problems and the increasingly worsening water pollution as well as frequent water pollution incidents has become one of the most notable environmental problems. The severe water pollution accidents occurring one after another and their associated costs were striking reflections of the weakness of the environmental emergency prevention and response system in China. Although China has implemented many policy measures (such as ?The Decision on Implementing the Scientific Concept of Development and Stepping up Environmental Protection? and the ?National Plan for Environmental Emergency Response?) to prevent and control water pollution, water pollution has not been contained effectively on the whole, and the problem is still serious.

Including the Songhua River Water Pollution Incident, a high number of sudden water pollution accidents had taken place in recent years. Once there is a water pollution accident occurred, the impacts on the human health, environment and society will become more difficult and more costly to control. If the emergency response is not appropriate, it could have cross- boundary effects such as the domino effect[1-3].

In the process of emergency rescue, bad decisions can have very serious consequences. This stems from the inherently unstable nature of emergencies. But decisions must be taken as  soon as possible in limited time, incomplete information and decision pressure of real-time situation. The need for decision- making skills increases dramatically in water pollution emergencies. There are three constraints which pose particular problems for managers in emergencies. The first of these is the time constraint, the second one is limited information on which decisions have to be taken and the third is the decision load constraint, which springs from the very large number of decisions which emergency managers have to take[4].

The emergency decision-making of a sudden water pollution accident is a multi-criteria decision making problem, experts of each department of safety engineering are needed.

The amount of emergency management objectives in a sudden water pollution accident is large, the items of emergency decisions and their relationships are shown in figure 1. In such a multi-criteria decision making with group decision problems generally there arise situations of conflict and agreement among the experts as each expert has his own opinion or estimated rating under each criterion for each alternative.

Hence, finding a group consensus function of aggregating these estimated ratings to represent a common opinion is an important issue.

The purpose of this paper is to introduce a method of combining the individual opinions to form an emergency decision of sudden water pollution accident[5]. Since the subjectivity, imprecision and vagueness in the estimates of a given quantity enter into multi-criteria decision making problems of a sudden water pollution accident, fuzzy set theory is helpful in dealing with the fuzziness of human judgement quantitatively[6-8]. In this article, the fuzzy group decision theory was used to make effective emergency decisions of a sudden water pollution accident.

Figure 1. Emergency decision items in a sudden water pollution accident.



II. MAKING EMERGENCY DECISIONS OF WATER POLLUTION ACCIDENT BASED ON FUZZY SET THEORY  This method used here is presented by Juite Wanga[5] and it had been much simplified to be used in emergency  Supported by State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment Harbin Institute of Technology(No.ES201112) Scientific Research Foundation of senior professionals, Jiangsu University(No.1281370014).

Emergency decision of a water pollution accident  Alarm and communica  tion  Deal with emergency  Control and rescue  action  ?Guarantee of rescue  action  Establish leading group  Later disposal  ___________________________________    management. The main idea of the method in reference 5 is briefly described as below.

Let A be a set of n candidate items under evaluation by m experts, according to a set C of q criteria. Let Gt(a)=[g1t(a), g2t(a), , gqt(a)] be the evaluation result of candidate item a A by expert et T, where the function gtk(a) represents its rating for criterion ck C. The objective of this research is to develop an approach to assist decision makers in selecting a proper set of candidate items. Figure 2 shows the process of choosing emergency decision items of a sudden water pollution accident.

Figure 2. The procedure of making emergency decisions of sudden water pollution accident  The rating of each criterion is described by some linguistic terms, which provide a more natural way to express the rating for assessing candidate items. These linguistic terms can be manipulated with fuzzy set theory and they can be interpreted as specific fuzzy numbers that allow us to perform the trade off analysis among various criteria. An example of a linguistic scale consisting of five linguistic values {?very little?, ?little?, ?medium?, ?big?, ?very big?} is shown in Fig. 3. The strongest agreement for a criterion is given the highest (lowest) linguistic value ?very big? (?very little?) in the scale.

Figure 3. The linguistic scale for rating candidate decisions  Fuzzy set theory has been applied in the group decision- making problems for a long time[9]. Most of fuzzy group decision-making models developed in the literature were based on the fuzzy preference relations that can be obtained by pair wise comparison between various alternatives by experts. The fuzzy preference relation is defined next.

A fuzzy preference relation R on a set X is a fuzzy set on the product X X. Let P(a,b) R be the fuzzy preference relation between a and b, where a;b X. Then P(a,b) and P(b,a) are reciprocal, i.e.,  ( , ) ( , ) 1P a b P b a? ? a,b X   (1)  Let A be a set of candidate items and a,b A. P(a,b)=1 indicates the maximum degree of preference of item a over b.

P(a,b) (0.5,1) indicates a definite preference of alternative a to b with the intensity of preference corresponding to the value of P(a,b). Note that the higher value means a stronger intensity of preference. P(a,b)=0.5 indicates the indifference between candidate items a and b.

The proposed methodology is divided into two stages, one is the construction of fuzzy preference relations between candidate items and the second is the determination of a partial order or a complete order of items under evaluation [10,11].

Let a and b be two fuzzy numbers. The fuzzy preference relations P(a,b) and P(b,a) are defined as follows:  ( , ) ( ,0)( , ) ( ,0) ( ,0)  D a b D a bP a b D a D b  ? ? ?  ? (2)  ( , ) ( ,0)( , ) ( ,0) ( ,0)  D b a D a bP b a D a D b  ? ? ?  ? (3)  Let rkt(a;b) be the fuzzy preference relation between candidate items a and b with respect to criterion ck for expert et and be calculated according to (2):  ( , ) ( ( ), ( ))t t tk k kr a b P g a g b? (4)  The fuzzy preference relation between candidate items a and b for expert et can be obtained by the weighted sum of rkt(a;b) over all criteria    ( , ) ( , ) q  t t k k  k r a b w r a b  ?  ? ??    (5)  Where  1 2  ( , ,..., ), 1 q  k k k  w w w w w ?  ? ?? ,  1 2 ... kw w w? ? ?  Then the dominance degree to which an expert et supports the candidate item a can be determined by the average of rt(a; b) for b A and b a:  ; ( , )  ( )  t  b A b at  r a b f a  n ? 	? ?  (6)  The OWA operator is used to aggregate the dominance degree of a candidate item for all experts. The definition of OWA operator is introduced as follows.

An OWA operator of dimension n is a mapping F: In I (where I=[0,1]) that has an associated weighting vector V=(v1,v2, ,vn)T, such as  (a)  [0,1],1 ,iv i n?  and  (b) 1 1 n  ii v  ? ??  1 2 1 1 2 2( , ,..., )n n nF a a a v b v b v b? ? ? ?L  (7)  where bj is the jth largest element in the collection (a1,a2,?,an)  1.0  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Very little Little Medium Big Very big  Orders of candidate items  Ratings of candidate items  Rank candidate items by the group decision making model  Emergency decisions  A set of emergency candidate items  Evaluate candidate items by experts in evaluation criteria  Choosing decisions    Then the group dominance degree to which ?the majority of? experts support a candidate item a can be determined as  1 2( ) ( ( ), ( ),..., ( ))mQf a F f a f a f a?                  (8)  In addition to the complete order of candidate items, we also develop an approach to determine the partial order among them. Based on the obtained fuzzy preference relations between pairs of candidate items, we first determine the fuzzy group preference relation by aggregating rt(a,b) for all experts using the OWA operator, for all a, b A:  1 2( , ) ( ( , ), ( , ),..., ( , )),mQR a b F r a b r a b r a b?    (9) From the above equation, we can build a matrix of fuzzy  group preference relations between all pairs of candidate items.



III. ILLUSTRATED EXAMPLE Sudden water pollution accidents are common disasters of  chemical industrial park nearby the rivers and lakes. The types of sudden water pollution accidents are various, such as drainage of accidents caused by chemical industry, wastewater treatment plants and warehouse of dangerous chemicals. When there is an emergency event of a sudden water pollution accident which took place in chemical industry, the real-time situation is very complex and it is keep changing. It is very important to make emergency decisions according to the on- sight situation of the event. For the three constraints which pose particular problems for managers in emergencies: time constraint, limited information and decision load constraint, it is hard for the decision maker to choose the best plans among several candidate items. So it is valuable of using simple and shortcut methods to help the decision maker.

An example of making an emergency decision of a sudden water pollution accident is used to illustrate the method. There are many items in decision-making of the accident such as ?establish leading group?, ?alarm and communication?, ?Control and rescue action? et al. We suppose that there are four experts, six candidate plans and the items of each plan are ten.

The linguistic scales for relative important of evaluation criteria are ?very important?, ?rather important?, ?important?, ?less important? and ?unimportant?.  The quantitative scales are range from 5 to 1. As shown in table I.

TABLE I. THE LINGUISTIC SCALE FOR RELATIVE IMPORTANT OF EVALUATION CRITERIA  Linguistic scale Quantitative scale Very important  Rather important Important  Less important unimportant   Evaluated by the experts, we got the normalized weights for the ten criteria which were shown in table II.

TABLE II. NORMALIZED WEIGHTS FOR THE TEN CRITERIA  Criterion Weight Normalized weight  1.Basic circumstances 2.Hazard objective of the event  3. Establish leading group 4.Alarm and communication 5. Control and rescue action 6. Separation of hazard area 7. deal with an emergency  8. Guarantee of rescue action 9. Response of event  10. Later disposal   0.050 0.075 0.050 0.075 0.125 0.075 0.125 0.100 0.075 0.025  For there are four experts and six candidate items, the six candidate items are C1,C2,C3,C4,C5,C6.The fuzzy preference relations between pairs of candidate items for experts can be obtained through (4) and (5). At last, we got the ranking of the candidate items through this method.



IV. CONCLUSION In this paper, a method of making an effective emergency  decision of a sudden water pollution accident was presented.

The method primarily based on the fuzzy set theory and theory of emergency management. Because of the information available can?t be numerical, the fuzzy set theory is used to represent the evaluation ratings of candidate items in emergency decision. Through construct fuzzy preference relations, a multi-criteria group decision-making model for selecting candidate items was given. An example of a choosing emergency plans in emergency is used to illustrate the method.

The method discussed in the papers is much simplified, it is not fully mature yet and further research work for improvement still need to be carried out.

