Short Paper: Sensors Data Fusion for Smart Cities with KNIME: A Real Experience in the

Abstract?Big Data is conceived as the powerful tool to exploit all the potential of the Internet of Things and the Smart Cities.

A new dimension of understanding about the human behaviours is expected to be reached through all the gathered data in the emerging smart environment. This work analyses the data from the European Project SmartSantander. This work has correlated the traffic behaviour with respect to the temperature in the Santander City. This has been presented as the evolution of both flows present a similar behaviour. Specifically, they present a fine grain correlation of over the 57%. Finally, it has been also presented as the traffic distribution, aggregated by temperature bins, follows up a Poisson distribution model. Thereby, allowing interpolate and predict complex behaviours based on simple measures such as the temperature.

Index Terms?Big Data; Data Fusion; Internet of Things; Smart Cities; KNIME.



I. INTRODUCTION  The concept of Smart City has gained popularity in Europe during the last years, however it was coined at the beginning of 90s [1].

The goal of promoting the use of innovative technologies from the ICT area is to satisfy the challenges of the cities in terms of sustainability (e.g., water, gas, energy), to the social demand for real time information (e.g., parking, pub- lic transport, weather) and to the emergence of the Future Internet-related technologies, such as wearable computing, mobile devices, cloud computing, and the Internet of Things (IoT).

The Internet of Things (IoT) has enabled to record vast amounts of data that need to be analyzed in order to reveal interesting relationships. Methods, techniques and tools from diverse disciplines have been combined to help analyse such data sets [2].

Specifically, the approach carried out for this work is based on applying insights from one domain (Big Data algorithms) to data from Smart cities, Mobile and IoT.

The benefits of big data for smart cities include real-time systems monitoring, management, and optimization. Some of the areas where this benefits can be applied include flow of traffic, gas, water, and electricity; monitoring the condition of pipes and bridges; planning new public transport routes and  grids for utility distribution systems; monitoring public health; and managing emergency response.

For this purpose, several cities around the world are deploy- ing a wide range of stationary and mobile sensors.

This work is focused on the SmartSantander testbed [3], which is a port city in the north of Spain. Santander is the most data-intensive city in Europe. Santander has some 18000 stationary and mobile sensors of various types thought the municipality of around 180000 residents. These sensors monitor air pollution, noise, traffic, temperature, and other environmental conditions.

The data from the deployed Smart Cities present a challenge for the researchers and smart cities promoter, since we need to exploit the new potential of these infrastructures, and build new services that define a clear return of investment, and benefit for the society.

The challenge is not to build a complex general climate model based on the temperature and humidity values from the hundreds of sensors deployed in the Santander City, it is not either to build a complex model about the transportation, pollution, noise levels, etc. The challenge is to combine all of them together to build a good predictive model, which are data-driven solutions that allow us to understand much better the dynamics of the society, and the most important, to provide back all this data converted into knowledge to the citizens in order to enhance their behaviours and help them to enhance their quality of life.

This work has carried out the data analytics of the traffic and temperature, in addition to carry out the correlation of the traffic and temperature.



II. DATA FUSION AND CORRELATION  SmartSantander offers a total of 38 traffic sensors. These sensors have been allocated in the center of the city, specifi- cally in the main two nerves of the city. On the one hand, 22 sensors around S-10 high-way, and on the other had, 16 sensors around S-20 high-way. The deployment covers multiple lanes in each direction.

The data from the traffic has been aggregated for each highway (S-10 and S-20), offering the mean value of the traffic  2014 IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)     Fig. 1. First week of August plot of mean temperature, and mean traffic (normalized).

Fig. 2. Histogram of traffic aggregated by temperature bins during the first week of August 2013.

in S-10 and the traffic in S-20 for each minute. In addition, since both highways presented a very similar behaviour, they were aggregated in meanGlobal; the global traffic from the city.

The Figure 1 presents the plot of the mean temperature during the first week of August, in conjunction with the mean traffic of the S-10 and S-20 highways. Both flows present a very similar behaviour, in particular they have presented a correlation of 57,4%.

In addition, we can see in the Figure 2, that the correlation between the temperature and the traffic, presents as several of the human behaviours a Poisson distribution model [4].

The Poisson distribution model allows us to determinate the quantity of traffic through the interpolation of the ? value.

For example, for this specific case, we have that ? = 22, i.e., the maximum traffic happens at 22 degrees. Knowing that the distribution is Poisson, and ? = 22 for August. Then, the level of traffic for the rest of temperatures can be interpolated for that period of time.



III. CONCLUSIONS AND ONGOING WORK This work has presented the potential of the data, from the  Internet of Things in smart environments such as smart cities,  for determining human behaviours through Big Data analysis.

This has presented the correlations figured out through  the Big Data processing over the data gathered from the SmartSantander Testbed. In particular, relevant correlations between variables such as traffic and temperature are found.

The ongoing work is focused on the validation of these correlations, in particular, the current works are exploring it during other periods of the year, finding that the Poisson distribution model is not always valid. Human behaviours fit better with bursts of rapidly occupancy events separated by high times of inactivities [5]. For that reason, the limits of the behaviours in terms of Poisson model are being analysed. The new understanding of the behaviours will be analysed from the human dynamics point view. New models that represent better this burst/inactive occurrence are expected to be reached.

Thereby, an evolution of the Poisson-based models will be carried out, towards new data-driven models that represent and understand better the behaviours of our society.

