Big Data Application to the Vegetable Production  and Distribution System

Abstract? The new paradigm of Big Data and its multiple benefits have being used in the novel nutrition-based vegetable production and distribution system in order to generate a healthy food recommendation to the end user and to provide different analytics to improve the system efficiency. As next step in this study, the new paradigm Internet of Things (IoT) is included in the Big Data approach of the system to use its benefits, particularly automation, to add much more precise data to the system to provide to the user a much richer experience. The IoT paradigm is bridging the real world with its virtual image, where devices located in different areas could exchange information each other without any type of supervision or control. But, spite of all the benefits that IoT could bring to society, the security of the information as well as privacy must be strongly enforced and managed in this new environment with unique characteristics. In our project we make a particular approach and security assessment of the use of IoT to provide automatic data to the system.

Index Terms?Big Data, Computer Science, Data systems, IoT, Data Analysis.



I. INTRODUCTION Although there is no a common agreement regarding the  IoT definition, we could express it as the seamlessly integration of internet-based sensors and devices in a wide network area that interact with a much more advanced Personal Area Network, allowing us to recognize, in a much more richer and detail manner, the environment surrounding us and interchanging information with this environment in an automatic manner. The impact of the research outcome will be strong from the user point of view, due that the different potential applications like: domotics, health, agriculture, intelligent services, etc.

IoT research is still in its infancy but since its beginnings it represents a challenging research scenario due to many issues from the technical area (wireless communications) to a much more philosophical one about applicable law and ethics.

Different organizations around the world have released efforts towards the standardization of IoT, Table 1 shows some of them together with some of its characteristics, some being more successful than other but in the wide spectrum, there is no general consensus towards a one single IoT approach [31-35].



II. SECURITY IN IOT As IoT is in its infancy, the same happens with the issue of  securing the exchanged information in the wireless networks that represent the core concept of IoT. In Table 1 we observed several approaches made by different worldwide organizations towards the development of a standards to be used under the unique characteristics that represents the wireless networks in IoT. But standardization could not include securing the exchanged information. IoT, because of its wireless nature, is extremely vulnerable to different attacks, specially eavesdropping in addition to the physical security issue, due that some devices could be most of the time unattended after installation.

For the objectives of our project is necessary to secure the exchanged information in order to ensure users will not resist to use our system, moreover to accept and use the automation and constant automatic updates provided by the IoT environment.



III. PROJECT DESCRIPTION The Novel nutrition-based vegetable production and  distribution system is a project being developed under the found of New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) in Japan, that is the Governmental Organization in charge of the promotion of addressing energy and global environmental problems, and the enhancement of Japan?s Industrial competitiveness, through research and development, not only in Japanese territory but also abroad.

[22]. The project is based on the following objectives:  ? To provide a healthy suggestion to the user ? To use local vegetables producers food inventory as  reference for the suggestion system ? To help local vegetable producers to locate their  products in a more efficient manner ? The healthy suggestion provided to the user will be  based on: fresh vegetables or a meal prepared using these vegetables by a local restaurant  ? To deliver the suggestion (fresh vegetables or meal) to the end user through a local transportation company  2014 IEEE 10th International Colloquium on Signal Processing & its Applications (CSPA2014), 7 - 9 Mac. 2014, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia     Table 1. Characteristics of the most important standardization efforts   Standard Objective Comm.

Range  (m)  Data rate  (Kbps)  ZigBee  Based on the IEEE 802.15 Standard, designed to deliver a low cost, low data rate, long battery life communications under a reliable network.

10 ~ 100 ~ 102  GRIFS Support action project founded by the EU to maximize the interoperability of RFID  ~ 1 ~ 102  EPCglobal RFID technology integration into the electronic product code (EPC) framework  ~ 1 ~ 102  6LoWPAN Low power IEEE 802.15.4 devices integration into the IPv6 networks  10 ~ 100 ~ 102  Wireless Hart  Developed as a multi-vendor, interoperable wireless standard, WirelessHART was defined for the requirements of process field device networks.

10 ~ 100 ~ 102       Figure 1. Simplified project information flow overview  The project uses a Big Data approach in order to correlate  the different databases needed to generate the healthy food suggestion to the end user [project papers]. The result of the project represents a new approach towards the creation of a sustainable system where the main objective is to provide healthy food (vegetables) or a healthy meal to the user according to a pre-defined questionnaire the user will fill [1-3].

The system has the following members: 1. The Final User 2. Local Vegetable Producers 3. Restaurants (who use the vegetables from the local  producers) 4. The System itself which main component is the Big  Data store unit and analysis capabilities Figure 1, shows a simplified flowchart in which the  information flow among the members is shown.

The blue lines indicate the information the system will  receive, like: 1. From the vegetable producer, the system will receive  periodic product availability updates 2. From the user, the system will receive, through a web  app, the different symptoms the user has 3. From the restaurants, the system will receive the  available daily menu based on the vegetables produced locally  The red lines indicate the information the system will provide to the different members:  1. To the vegetable producer, the system will send an order (if the user decides so) to deliver the vegetables to the user  2. To the restaurants, the system will send an order to deliver the meal based on the vegetables produced locally  3. To the user, the system will send first, the recommendation for the healthy food based on the symptoms previously introduced, (vegetables or meal) and then the order confirmation  The green line represents the transportation of the product to the user, whichever is the option requested.

The system functions are: 1. To gathered the following information: vegetable  producer availability, restaurant menu availability, interact with and store all the information (symptoms) the user will provide, generate an acute food/meal recommendation.

2. To stored all the transaction information 3. Perform specific Big Data Analysis based on the data  at rest and in movement 4. Through the results interpretation, improve the  accuracy and effectiveness of the system Using an IoT approach the system will become much more  efficient in terms to predict other factors in addition to the suggestion itself. Figure 2 shows the IoT approach for the purposes of the project based on the information exchanged figure previously mentioned. Some of the IoT benefits are:  ? Tracking of the product (vegetable or meals) ? Automatic inventory updates ? Automatic menu updates ? Real time data available to the system and users ? Checking on the vegetab1e status, for the system only We are taking in consideration the most used IoT devices  currently available in order to use them into our project, more devices/network could be included in the future according the project will require.



IV. SECURITY DEFINITIONS For the project objectives, a general security IoT approach  analyzed in order to provide guidelines necessary for the proper implementation of the IoT approach in the system. The definitions are shown in Table 2.

2014 IEEE 10th International Colloquium on Signal Processing & its Applications (CSPA2014), 7 - 9 Mac. 2014, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia         Figure 2. Information exchanged by the project actors from the IoT point  of view   Table 2. System Security Definitions   From To Security requirement  Vegetable producer System  Remote Access User identification and authentication Device identification and authentication  System Vegetable Producer  Remote Access Device identification and authentication  Restaurant System  Remote Access User identification and authentication Device identification and authentication  System Restaurant Remote Access Device identification and authentication  User System Remote Access User identification and authentication  System User Communication integrity   As we could observe most of the system needs to be authenticated in order to provide a reliable information exchange. Using current technologies these requirements could be achievable but further analysis and research is required in the area of IoT security in order to provide a solid approach towards a secure information exchange.



V. POSSIBLE THREATS AGAINST IOT For the specific purposes or the project we focus on the  security analysis on two main aspects: authentication and data integrity.

Authentication and data integrity are two of the major problems related to IoT. Authentication is difficult in IoT due to its infrastructure requirements and servers that perform the authentication process through the information exchange with other nodes. In an IoT environment this could result not  practical due to that RFID tags cannot exchange too many messages with the authentication servers because their issues related to energy management and messages standardization, this issue applies as well to sensor networks. Energy issues are one of the most difficult to overcome in RFID networks as well as sensor networks, due that there are scattered over a wide area and sometimes unmonitored, energy management is a key factor in order to ensure a long device life as well as usability.

In the same manner, some authentication protocols could not be used due to their lack of standardization.

In this context, several approaches were developed for sensor networks [78 reference paper]. In these cases gateways that are part of the sensor networks are required to provide connection to the Internet. In the IoT scenario sensor nodes must be seen as nodes in the Internet, therefore authentication is required in order to differentiate them from sensors in the same area but not belonging to the same network.

In the case of RFID several approaches were presented, but most of them have serious issues, some of them mentioned in [30].

The ?Man in the middle? attack is considered one of the biggest threats against wireless networks as well to IoT networks. Data integrity solutions should guarantee that the data in transaction cannot be modified and the system must be able to detect this situation. Data integrity as a issue has been extensively studied for standard network applications and communication systems and early results are related to sensor networks [29]. But, when a RFID networks with their own unique characteristics are included in the current internet paradigm, different problems arise as well as unforeseen problems related to their use. Several approaches are developed or under research to solve the different new RFID related issues i.e. EPCGlobal Class-1 Generastion-2 and ISO/IEC 18000-3, both of them working in different process to protect the device memory. These approaches also consume large amount of the resources in encryption processes needed. The main used resources are: energy and bandwidth, both of them in the destination. Therefore, even using these approaches specific related problems with RFID still remain.



VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK Farmers have been facing some difficulties regarding their  business because of weather change, price instability and constant financial problems due to foreign competition.

Therefore, an expensive service like this could be only available to big producers in which case, markets are completely ensured long time contracts.

Academic and Company based research initiatives haven shown different issues that jeopardized their continuity which affects directly to the farmer. Being the biggest issue in academic research: budget and availability of multidisciplinary human resources needed for the correct project development; and in the case of company based research, their cost, which could not be affordable by the farmer.

The current participation of specialized members for each of the tasks related to the project increases its competitive  2014 IEEE 10th International Colloquium on Signal Processing & its Applications (CSPA2014), 7 - 9 Mac. 2014, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia     advantage without creating any issue to farmers the moment they will use the system.

Big Data analytics allowed us to have a better understanding of the user needs and requirements regarding the project objectives.

The new IoT parading is becoming a part of the current and future Internet. The current internet paradigm will drastically change into a much more personalized experienced with our surroundings that will lead to much more richer experience.

In the case of applications, is necessary to make a deep analysis of the requirements needed to be implemented, in order to specifically use what could result much more beneficial for a specific project purpose.

In the case of our project, IoT could bring not only automatic updates regarding key issues of the project, but allow us to drastically improve the user experience through different new services.

IoT Security as a new paradigm and new potentially useful research area must address its security concerns in order to show a more reliable platform for the user that, currently, could resist a functional initiative. Due that a single security incident could damage permanently the infinite benefits IoT could bring to the society.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported by New Energy and Industrial  Technology Development Organization (NEDO) in ?IT Integration-based New Social System Development and Demonstration Projects?, Grant No. 12102069.

