Cardea: Cloud Based Employee Health and Wellness

Abstract?This paper discusses an experimental integrated wellness application that syncs with a wearable device and with a human capital management database to provide a full picture of health and wellness. Wellness is measured at the individual level as well as at the group level. This application uses domain specific algorithms, which are based on scientific research and analysis of biometric data. We investigate the effect of this application on user behavior and wellness habits.

We also look for correlations between companies? policies, culture, management practices, and wellness.

Keywords?Wearable Computing, Integrated Wellness Application, Big Data, HR, Human Resources, Quantified Self

I. Introduction Wearable computing is trending, it is becoming  increasingly ubiquitous, in part because people are beginning to value quantified self knowledge as a means to health and wellness. A growing number of individuals are using fitness devices, pedometers on their mobile phones, smart watches, wrist bands, and other wearable devices. These fitness devices track users? movement, activity levels, sleep, calories burned, heart rate, pulse, and other parameters. This trend is part of the ?Quantified Self? movement which focuses on self knowledge from direct quantifiable measurements. Self tracking gives users the ability to understand and improve their behavior in order to live a healthier lifestyle. At the same time, Human Resource Departments are increasingly focused on health and wellness and providing tools for their employees to lead a healthy life.

We created an integrated wellness application, which syncs with a wearable device as well as with the HCM (Human Capital Management) data store, in order to explore the convergence of these trends. This application utilizes proprietary algorithms which measure activity levels, stress levels, sedentary levels, and analyze sleep. Using the wealth of data in the HCM data store along with the data from the wearable device, we can readily get the full picture of an individual?s health and wellness. For instance, we can correlate a user?s project type with their sleep levels or determine which organizations have employees with the highest stress levels.

We can look at an aggregation of the data for full analysis, e.g.

activity levels for specific job titles.   Overall, we analyze the effect on users and managers of teams and whether the quantified information provided by the application enables  behavior modification in the workplace and thus improves health and wellness (see Fig. 1. Wellness Feedback Loop).

Fig. 1. Wellness Feedback Loop  The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 outlines the background and prior research on this topic. Section 3 details the Resources, Methods, and Architecture,  providing information on the full functionality of the integrated application. Section 4 provides the Realization and Results, the technologies used and the results found. Section 5 is the Discussion Section which is an analysis of the results. Section 6 is the Conclusion, and the References are given in Section 7.



II. Background Activity Tracking and applications have been gaining a lot  of attention recently. The practice of applying data analytics to get quantified feedback and thus change behavior has become widespread over many different work regions. This is partly driven by the ?Quantified Self? movement which uses technology to collect data from a person?s daily life, followed by visualization, cross-referencing, and discovering correlations.1  This is also driven by the employers? increasing support for the ?workplace wellness,? which aims to improve the health outcomes of employees.2  These two factors are fueling the growth of the related applications which are illustrated below.

More and more devices focusing on personal health and wellness tracking have been emerging on the market. Wearable devices use sensors such as accelerometers, which measure the change in velocity, and enable us to determine device  2014 IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)     positions, speed of movement, and distance moved.  Activity levels can be detected using the accelerometer, as well as sleep, since small movements can be used to detect that the human body is at rest.  Pedometers are also used, which may be a separate sensor or integrated with the accelerometer.

Pedometers measure the number of steps by looking at the change in position without respect to speed or intensity.  Also, these devices use heart rate sensors, which contain LED?s emiting light in pulses and use the reflection of light on the skin to detect blood flow and therefore heart rate.

Popular fitness trackers include the Fitbit Flex, Nike Fuel Band, and the Jawbone Up. These devices provide richer and richer APIs for developers to build applications on top of their platforms.

Companies are taking advantage of the popularity of these devices. San Francisco-based Appirio created CloudFit, an internal program to help employees to live a more active lifestyle. The program includes distributing Jawbone Up fitness bands to employees so they can track fitness and sleep patterns.3 Citizen, a mobile technology firm based in Portland, Oregon, created a service called HealthGraph, which analyzes data gathered from personal activity trackers like Fitbit and RunKeeper. This service has a project management and time tracking system and also has an employee mood tracking service used to gain insights on employee behavior.4  Additionally, in physical working areas, companies are analyzing the data from wearable devices to help improve efficiency and work safety. For instance, in Tesco?s distribution center in Ireland, workers wear armbands that track the orders they are fulfilling, which improves productivity and helps management gain insights.5  Fatigue-monitoring sensors help improve workers? personal safety in the case of equipment operation or work on the production line. Tesco is seeing positive improvements in safety and productivity.

It is still the early days for wearable computing, especially for consumer devices. For example, Tesco does not use low cost consumer devices, as these are not continuously connected to the network; however, we anticipate those devices are forthcoming, putting them on the Internet of Things.

In time, both management and employees in many types of companies will embrace the opportunities wearable devices bring to improve their productivity, safety, and wellness.



III. Resources, Methods, and Architecture Cardea is an exploratory integrated application that  combines data from users? wearable devices as well as data from the HCM data store and then stores the data in a semantic graph. Reasoning, or algorithmic analysis, is then performed over the stored semantic data. Users can then use this data to evaluate their behavior and perhaps use it to improve their physical well being. Cardea?s analytical scenarios, those presented to users or used for reasoning over the semantic data are described in the following sections. Section 3.A describes activity level scenarios. Section 3.B shows sedentary lifestyle analysis scenarios. Section 3.C discusses scenarios for stress level analysis.  Section 3.D explains sleep quality scenarios.

Section 3.E provides an optimal bed calculation. Section 3.F  looks at correlating factors for sleep quality scenarios and finally Section 3.G explores a travel tracker scenario.

A. Activity Level Scenarios Activity Levels are calculated using number of daily steps,  time spent highly active, time spent moderately active, logged activities, calories burned, and distance traveled.

This scenario enables users to make comparisons between their fitness level and others of the same age, gender, geographic location, and BMI.  By looking at an aggregation of the data as well as input data from NIH and other scientific studies, we can identify trends.6  We also correlate activity levels with salary range, project type, job title, and organization. This is done on a group level (organization, team, company) as well as on an individual level (see Fig. 2. Activity Levels).

Fig. 2. Activity Levels  Tools such as leader boards and comparative statistics also allow users to compete with one another. For instance, several different teams might have a competition or users might look at the company leader board to see how they compare to others at the company (see Fig. 3. Activity Levels Leader Board).

Fig. 3.  Activity Levels Leader Board    2014 IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)     B. Sedentary Lifestyle Scenario An individual leads a sedentary lifestyle based on their  calories burned, daily steps, time spent in moderate or vigorous activity, and distance moved. Our algorithm uses these parameters and outputs a sedentary lifestyle score for each day that a given user wears a fitness device. We calculate the percentage of time the user is sedentary and determine the most active days of the week/month and the least active days of the week/month.

We also calculate customized recommendations to show how the user can improve. Some users may be sedentary due to lack of moderate or high levels of activity. Others may be sedentary due to a low number of daily steps. We determine the specific reason that a given user is sedentary and output recommendations based on this.

In order to fully evaluate the data related to sedentary lifestyle we need to look for correlations between users who are sedentary and their age, gender, geographic location, working hours, job title, occupation, project types, organization, and other HR criteria. Similar to the other scenarios, the data is analyzed at the individual and group level (see Fig. 4. Sedentary Lifestyle Analysis).

Fig. 4.  Sedentary Lifestyle Analysis  C. Stress Level Calculations Our stress level algorithm outputs a score for stress level  and is based on industry research. It uses heart rate, pulse, activity levels, sleeplessness, and awakenings during sleep to provide a stress level score. The stress level is calculated on a score from 0 to 100 with 0 being the lowest level of stress and 100 being the highest level of stress. A low stress level would be in the range 0 to 39, medium stress would be in the range 40 ? 60, and a high level of stress would be in the range 61-100.

Users? stress levels are analyzed over time and correlations are made between stress level and personal data/other HR data to get the full picture of health and wellness (see Fig. 5. Stress Analysis).

Fig. 5. Stress Analysis  D. Sleep Quality Calculations The applications calculates each user?s sleep quality and  displays the trends for the user. Visualizing time in bed, time slept, and the time they wake up makes it very easy for users to track their sleep. The sleep quality is measured by sleep score on a scale of 0 to 100. The sleep score is calculated using data including overall sleep time, time to fall asleep, bed time, sleep efficiency, and the total numbers of times the person woke up at night.

If the sleep score is greater than or equal to 90, the sleep quality is high. If it is lower than 70, the quality is poor and the application will display a warning to the user. If the sleep score is between 70 and 90, the quality is medium. Cardea compares sleep quality across week days and provides data by outputting the days of the week with best sleep quality as well as the days of the week with the worst sleep quality (see Fig. 6. Sleep Quality Analysis).

Fig. 6.  Sleep Quality Analysis  E. Optimal Bed Time Calculator It is important for users to know when he/she should go to bed and this tool provides a convenient way to calculate bedtime. The tool first computes the sleep deficit over the last seven days based on the recommended amount of sleep the user needs.  Next, the user enters the time that they would like to wake up and the duration of time they want to sleep. The application calculates the best bed time using the following steps:  2014 IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)     1)  If, and only if, it is the weekend, the tool will compensate for 25% of the user?s sleep deficit over the last 7 days.

2) Predict the user?s total time in bed using the sleep duration and the sleep efficiency as well as the time it typically takes the user to fall asleep.

3) Calculate the time to go to bed given the above information.

An example is shown in Fig. 7. Bed Time Calculator.

Fig. 7.  Bed Time Calculator  F. Correlating Factors With Sleep Quality The application analyzes the different factors that affect the  users? sleep. Some of these factors include stress level, calories consumed, activity level, and caffeine intake. The analysis finds the strong or weak correlation between sleep and these factors by calculating the correlation coefficient. A sample finding is illustrated in Fig. 8. Correlating Factors With Sleep.

Cardea also looks at the correlation between sleep and the employees? performance. This is offered as an individual and manager view, which can help management gain insights about improving employees? performance and perhaps improve with active coaching. (see Fig. 9. Correlating Sleep With Performance for a sample analysis).

In addition, Cardea compares sleep quality of employees? working on different project types so that management can gain insights on employees? behavior and make adjustments when assigning projects. This will also help the individual determine which projects impact their sleep patterns (see Fig.

10. Project Comparator in Relation to Sleep).

Fig. 8. Correlating Factors With Sleep    Fig. 9. Correlating Sleep with Performance   Fig. 10.  Project Comparator in Relation to Sleep  G. Travel Tracker Scenario Here the user can track and view their sleep quality at  different locations that he/she has traveled to. The tool analyzes all the sleep data and provides information for both individuals and managers. For the manager view, data is shown anonymously. The sleep data is ranked, with the place where the individual had the best quality sleep first, followed by the place of the second best quality, etc. Ranking is done overall and also by the day of the week so the user can see where they sleep best on a Monday, for example. Fig. 11. Travel Tracker with Sleep Information is a visualization of this scenario.

Fig. 11.  Travel Tracker with Sleep Information  2014 IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)

IV. Realization and Result This section gives a very high-level de  technologies used to implement Cardea and th results.

A. Realization We implemented the application using te  Oracle. The Cardea user interface is implem based interface, the analytics are all performe Reasoning Engine while the data for the analy using the Cardea Connector Framework. The and Connectors are part of an internal library.

The Cardea Reasoning Engine uses O business objects and their relations and prov that allow for sophisticated semantic analysis o  Cardea Connectors pull data from vario write it to an RDF store defined by business ob our various calculations. For example, we from Oracle Fusion Project (a cloud-based pro application) to determine who is on what pr This also tells us the types of tasks they are a Similar connectors import user activity data type basis. For example, one uses the FitBit Ja  These technologies are bundled and d experimental Cardea Web Application.

B. Results After implementing the Cardea application  people in our organization to voluntarily p experiment. Volunteers spent about $100 to p and use it for a week. They only had 5 day tracker. We collected the user data and then m to the users in Cardea, asking them to use the a this, we asked the users to fill out a su experience. Despite the initial costs, the urge time commitment, 8% of the people volunteere  Use of the wearable device and the ap significant impact on activity levels (measu burned and number of daily steps). For 28% o an overall increase in activity levels, for 67% was no increase or decrease, and for 6% of us overall decrease in activity levels (see  Fig. 12 Activity Levels).

Fig. 12. Change In User Activity Levels  ts escription of the hen discusses our  echnologies from mented as a web ed by the Cardea ytics are gathered e Cardea Engine  OWL to define vides ?reasoners? of these objects.

ous sources (and bjects) to support pull information  oject management roject and when.

asked to perform.

on a per device ava API.

delivered as the  n, we asked ~250 participate in our purchase a tracker ys to acquire the made it available application. After urvey about the ent deadline, and ed (19 total).

pplication had a ured by calories  of users there was % of users there sers there was an  2. Change in User    Another interesting finding is th reported that use of the wearable behavior. 29% reported no change Self Reported Change in User Behav  Fig. 13. Self Reported Change in Us  During set up, we found a corre to share data and the age of the use Option 1 was easy, but required da more time consuming, but was mo 83% of users chose Option 1, and 17% of users chose Option 2 and This implies that older users are les (see Fig. 14. User Setup Data Sharin  Fig. 14. User Setup Data Sharing  Fig. 15. User Results Data Sharing  hat 71% of users surveyed device has changed their  e in behavior (see Fig. 13.

vior) .

ser Behavior  elation between willingness er. There were two options.

ata sharing.  Option 2 was ore private. We found that these users were age 20+.

these users were age 40+.

s willing to share their data  ng).

2014 IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT)     The majority of users were willing to share their wellness data.  We found that 59% users were willing to share the screen shots of their information on the application.  41% were not willing to share these (see Fig. 15. User Results Data Sharing).

Everyone who has seen the application has been exceptionally positive and encouraging; therefore, our next step will be to broaden the user base to hundreds of people and support for a larger set of wearable devices. We expect to use the information to validate our initial results and to garner feedback on the existing set of use cases and suggestions for more ways to integrate wearable devices with the data available via enterprise software applications.



V. Discussion There are many more scenarios and analytics that can be  unlocked when we blend data from enterprise systems with that from wearable devices. A subset of our users felt that   privacy is a significant concern. Initially, the device wearer/user could see data about themselves, and no information about other people who are using the system. Users can follow other users, who can opt to share information with followers. Sharing to managers is perhaps trickier; therefore, we posit that they should not be allowed to see information about their direct reports unless it has been made anonymous and/or aggregated to a group level such that individuals cannot be identified.

If information is not readily available to managers, what value does Cardea have to a company? We argue (and our results and feedback support this) that employees who participate will be actively improving wellness which will lead to lower health insurance premiums. Insurance companies will have a wealth of data, and will therefore be able to manage risk.  While these savings may not apply to all global companies, happier and healthier employees are more likely to stay at their jobs, miss fewer days of work, and be more productive overall. A wellness program that incorporates Cardea can send a powerful message that the company cares about employees? wellness and work/life balance and that message that should be well received.



VI. Conclusion We find that combining wearable device information with  the abundance of data in an HCM data store and performing analysis on this data gives a rich picture of health and wellness.

We find the results to be useful for employees, human resource professionals, and managers, both at an individual and group level. An integrated wellness application has great potential in the workforce, especially as wearable devices advance technologically and gain more and more popularity.



VII. Next Steps Follow-on research will focus on determining the  interaction of the various independent metrics that activity tracking devices monitor.

We will formalize our model as a system of systems and look at how independently measured systems influence each other. For example, the monitoring of steps and the measure of time asleep are independently measured. We would like to know if, and how, these measures interact to influence user behaviors. Do users who begin to sleep longer also take more or less steps? Similarly, the better you eat, is it easier to move and/or sleep?

Wearable devices measure a large number of variables so we will use design of experiment (DoE) techniques to determine an optimal set of experiments for further research. 7  We will also increase our user base and look for analytics and scenarios that incorporate more of the user?s work place information into the application. We would like to further break down which factors related to the work place effect the user?s activity levels, which factors effect the user?s sleep patterns, and which factors effect the user?s diet and nutrition.

By determining the relationship between the formalized inputs and outputs of our measurable systems, we hope to learn how to best effect change in the overall wellness of users and to provide useful tools for managers.

