Bwasw-Cloud: Efficient Sequence Alignment Algorithm for Two Big Data with MapReduce

Abstract?The recent next-generation sequencing machines generate sequences at an unprecedented rate, and a sequence is not short any more called read. The reference sequences which are aligned reads against are also increasingly large. Efficiently mapping large number of long sequences with big reference sequences poses a new challenge to sequence alignment. Sequence alignment algorithms become to match on two big data. To address the above problem, we propose a new parallel sequence alignment algorithm called Bwasw-Cloud, optimized for aligning long reads against a large sequence data (e.g. the human genome).

It is modeled after the widely used BWA-SW algorithm and uses the open-source Hadoop implementation of MapReduce. The results show that Bwasw-Cloud can effectively and quickly match two big data in common cluster.



I. INTRODUCTION  Sequence alignment lies at heart for almost biological applications such as single nucleotide polymorphisms detec- tion, and the small ribonucleic acid discovery. When new generation technology machines generated millions of short sequence (<100bp) at a lower cost, a variety of sequence alignment algorithms were developed, including SOAP , MAQ, BWA, Bowtie, and BLAST et al. While further development of this technology, such as Roche/454 sequencing technol- ogy, has already produced reads more than 400bp, long read mapping algorithms have been explored, such as BLAT [1], SSAHA2 [2], Smith-Waterman-like dynamic programming [3], BWA-SW [4] et al. They are most single-processor sequence alignment algorithms. However, next-generation technology (NGS) machines generate sequence data at an unprecedented rate. As reads growing traditional single-processor sequence alignment algorithms will take an increasing amount of time to align reads against reference sequences. Such traditional single-processor sequence alignment algorithms are struggling to quickly deal with reads.

Cloud computing has been widely used to accommodate storage and provide computing services [5]. In particular, there are some initiatives towards this trend of using cloud computing to accelerate sequence alignment such as Cloud- Burst [6], CloudAligner [7], BlastReduce [8], Crossbow [9] and SepMapreduce [10]. These algorithms can provide better performance and web-based interface than the command line interface of many existing short read alignment tools. Like single-processor sequence alignment algorithms, they follow seed-and-extend technique. These algorithms for a m bp read with at most k differences must contain at least n = m/(k+1)  bp consecutive subsequence as seed. And the number of seeds is expected to occur M ?m/4k times. However, as the number of mismaches increases, the length of the seeds will decrease, and thus the number of seeds will increase as well as the total execution time. It is expensive to map long reads with reference allowing large differences by these existing cloud- based algorithms.

