Modeling Photovo M

Abstract? This paper proposes accurate simulate different types of commercial p modules. The main component of the new channel enhancement-mode MOSFET. Th simplifies the I-V output equation of PV modu exponential term exists in the well-known dio provides the ability to represent the whole PV one MOSFET which decreases the simulatio run a big system. Fast, simple and accur proposed based on the new circuit model. The validated with experimental data of co crystalline silicon, poly-crystalline silicon an diselenide (CIS) PV modules. The obtained I-V accuracy of the new N-MOSFET Model.



I. INTRODUCTION Solar cells are represented using diode  Figs. 1-3; single diode model [1]-[3], two dio and three diode model [9]. In general, singl the most used model as it offers a good com simplicity and accuracy compared to the ot In the two diode model, extra diode is used effect of the recombination of carriers. A thr used to take into account the influence of and large leakage current through the characteristic of PV cell is described by no that is complicated to be solved by the ordin methods.

In this work a new approach is propos simulate PV modules at different tempera enhancement-mode MOSFET is used to output equation of PV module. The new m number of unknowns needed to be calculated and   simplifies the   modeling   algorithm   b exponential term. Fast and accurate algorith find the missing parameters of the quadra using the three key points which are commercial modules datasheets: open circu maximum power point, and short circuit cur these three points, the method finds the best the N-channel MOSFET PV model and w  oltaic Modules Using  N MOS Transistor    partment Soliman A. M  Electrical and Electronics E University of  Sharjah, U Solimanm@sh     circuit model to photovoltaic (PV)  model is the N- he new approach ule by avoiding the ode model. Also it V module by only  on time needed to rate algorithm is e proposed work is ommercial mono- nd copper indium V curves prove the  models show in ode model [4]-[8] le diode model is  mpromise between ther models [10].

d to represent the ree diode model is  grain boundaries peripheries. I-V  onlinear equation nary mathematical  sed to model and atures. N-channel simplify the I-V  model reduces the d in diode models by   avoiding   the hm is proposed to atic I-V equation provided by all uit voltage point, rrent point. Given t I-V equation for  warranties that the  maximum power of the model mat power of the real module.

Figure1. Single diode model  Figure2. Two diode model o  Figure3. Three diode model o  This paper is organized as follow proposed modeling approach by pr model and explaining the mathem find the best I-V equation to sim section III, the simulation results obt proposed approach with experimen Kyocera KC200GT and Shell S presented. Finally, conclusions are st  N-Channel  Mahmoud Engineering Department f Sharjah UAE  harjah.ac.ae  tches with the maximum   of solar cell.

of solar cell.

of solar cell.

ws. Section II details the resenting the new circuit  matical algorithm used to mulate a PV module. In tained from validating the ntal data of Shell SP70, T40 solar modules are tated in section IV.



II. PROPOSED APPROACH Although that the diode models p  preceeding section are the best translations solar cells, it?s difficult to propose a fast and algorithm that can give accurate results for modules at different temperaturs. This is  du of the exponential term and the big numbe parameters needed to be calculated. In ad there is no accurate method to define coefficient of (a) for each type of PV mod come this problem, this work proposes new simulate photovoltaic modules easily and acc  A. N-MOSFET Circuit Model The basic component of the new model s  the N-channel enhancement-mode MOSFE gate and drain terminals. The threshold 0.25?m CMOS technology used in this work which is too small to simulate a PV module.

to body bias (Vsb) is used to increase the range of the I-V output characteristic based PV module I-V carves provided by manufact  Figure4. N-MOSFET model of PV m  Due to non-ideality of the practical PV source resistance (Rds) is used to increase th new circuit model. Fig. 5 shows norma characteristic of a PV module modeled wit Rds (solid line) and with the existence of R  Figure5. Normalized I-V characteristic of ideal and p  B. Modeling Algorithm To simulate a PV module, the behavior o  model should be analyzed and understood.

the gate terminals of the N-MOSFET transistor will be ON in the saturation mode the new approach represented in Fig.

Ideal PV Module  H presented in the  of the physics of d simple modeling r the different PV ue to the existance er of the missing ddition, currently e a temperature  dule [11]. To over w circuit model to curately.

shown in Fig. 4 is ET with shorted voltage (VT) of  rk is around 0.5 V . Thus, the source obtained voltage  d on the modeled turing datasheet.

module.

modules, drain to he accuracy of the alized I-V output th the absence of Rds (dashed line).

practical PV modules.

of the new circuit As the drain and are shorted, the e only. By testing  4 in modeling  commercial PV modules, it was dem value of Rds to 100 ? is a suitable ap accurate results and simplifies the proposed approach depends on the key points of the PV module. At point of the PV module, the transist model can be redrawn as shown in can be related to the other param following equation.

1sc V  II +=  Figure6. N-MOSFET model of PV modul  For the maximum power and points, the transistor is passing curre It?s important to approximate the val at which the N-MOSFET of the ne ON. Based on the proposed approach of a commercial PV module was transistor starts working approxim shown in Fig. 7. Thus, the equa saturation drain current can be appro  ( ) ,  sbgd VV  kI ?=  Where Id is the N-MOSFET drain cu transconductance parameter.

Figure7. I-V curve of PV module plo  Equation (3) can be extracted from analysis. The value of I from (1) ca shown in (4) and then the value of th (Id) can be calculated. Equations (2) maximum power and the open circui with two equations and two unknow (6). Thus, the value of Vsb can b consequently the value of I can be de  monstrated that setting the pproximation which gives modeling algorithm. The  e availability of the three the short circuit current  tor is OFF and the circuit n Fig. 6. It?s clear that Isc meters as shown in the  sbV .                               (1)   le at short circuit current point.

the open circuit voltage ent in the saturation mode.

ue of the gate voltage (Vg)  ew circuit model becomes h, the output characteristic s traced to find that the ately when Vg > Vsb as  ation of the N-MOSFET ximated as follows:  )( Tsb VV >>                   (2)  urrent and k is device   otted with normalized Vsb.

Fig. 4 by applying nodal an be substituted in (3) as he transistor drain current and (4) can be used at the it voltage points to end up wns as shown in (5) and be easily calculated and emonstrated from (1).

sbo  do VV  III ?++=                            (3)  Where Io is the output current of the PV module and Vo is the  output voltage of the PV module.

o  dosc V  III ++=                               (4)  ( ) )(,  Tsbsbm  m msc VVVV  kVII >>?=??           (5)  ( ) )(,  Tsbsboc  oc sc VVVV  kVI >>?=?               (6)  As the drain current equation of MOSFET is quadratic, two solutions will be available for Vsb. The smaller solution must be chosen because the value of Vsb should be smaller than the value of the maximum power point voltage.

C. Curve Fitting The proposed algorithm tends to use the minimum  channel length (L) of the used technology in order to minimize the required width (W) needed to simulate the PV module. It?s known that the value of the material transconductance parameter (k?) is provided by manufacturing datasheet; however, this value can be slightly affected according to the number of LEVEL used in the simulator.

Thus, to add more accuracy to the proposed algorithm, curve fitting is used as shown in Fig. 8 to demonstrate the value of W that?s suitable to simulate the PV module.

Figure8. I-V curves plotted for different values of W.



III. VALIDATING THE MODEL The new circuit model presented in Fig. 4 was validated  using PSPICE. Commercial poly-crystalline silicon, mono- crystalline silicon and Copper Indium Diselenide (CIS) PV modules were simulated based on the proposed approach to validate their output characteristics with the ones mentioned in manufacturing datasheets. N94S MOSFET model provided by TSMC (0.25 micron) [12] was used for all simulated modules.

A. Ploy-Crystalline Silicon PV Module KC200GT is a highly efficient poly-crystalline PV  module. It consists of 54 series connected solar cells.

Manufacturing datasheets [13] provide I-V curves at different  temperatures. Fig. 9 shows the simulated I-V curves of the KC200GT solar module plotted with the experimental data.

The circular markers in the graphs represent experimental (V,I) points extracted from the datasheet. It?s clear that the proposed model is exact at the key points and sufficiently accurate for other points. For this module, the model proposed in this paper is compared with the modeling methods of [1] and [2] at two different temperatures. The errors presented by the three models are plotted on the same graph. It?s clear from Figs. 10 and 11 that the maximum absolute error for the proposed PV model is approximatly equal to the results obtained by [1] at T = 25oC (5.4% of Isc) and it?s reduced at T = 75oC (2.9% of Isc).

Figure9. I?V model curves and experimental data of the KC200GT solar  module at different temperatures, AM1.5, 1000 W/m2.

Figure10. Absolute errors of the model proposed in this paper (curve A),  computed with the work given in [1] (curve B) and in [2] (curve C) for the Kyocera KC200GT solar array at STC.

Figure11. Absolute errors of the model proposed in this paper (curve A),  computed with the work given in [1] (curve B) and in [2] (curve C) for the Kyocera KC 200GT solar array at 75 ?C, AM1.5,  1000 W/m2.

B. Mono-Crystalline Silicon PV Module Shell SP70 PV module contains 36 series connected mono  crystalline silicon solar cells [14]. Fig. 12 shows the I- V curves of Shell SP70 module obtained based on the proposed approach plotted with the experimental data at four different temperature conditions. TABLE I summarizes the calculated values of Vsb and W for Shell SP70 solar module at different temperatures.

Figure12. I?V model curves and experimental data of Shell SP70 solar  module at different temperatures, AM1.5, 1000 W/m2.

C. CIS PV Module The proposed approach given in this paper was validated  for Shell ST40 solar module. This module is composed of a monolithic structure of series CIS based solar cells [15].

Fig. 13 shows the I-V curves obtained from modeling Shell ST40 solar module plotted with the experimental data at four different temperatures. It?s clear that the proposed model results match accurately the commercial datasheet points presented by the circular markers.

Figure13. I?V model curves and experimental data of Shell ST40 solar  module at different temperatures, AM1.5, 1000 W/m2.

TABLE I. PROPOSED MODEL PARAMETERS OF SHELL SP70 SOLAR MODULE AT SOLAR IRRADIATION = 1000 W/M2, AM1.5.

Temperature 30 oC 40 oC 50 oC 60 oC  Vsb (V) 14.4 13.6 12.73 11.9 W (?m) 144 151 153 159

IV. CONCLUSION This paper has proposed a novel circuit model to represent  PV modules. The basic component of the new model is the N-channel MOSFET. The new approach simplifies the modeling algorithm used to be followed in diode models. Fast and accurate modeling algorithm has been proposed to solve for the missing parameters (I and Vsb) in the new circuit approach. Then, curve fitting is used to find the best value of W needed to model the PV module. The new circuit model presented in this work was validated for Shell SP70, Kyocera KC200GT and Shell ST40 PV modules at different temperatures to prove the accuracy of the proposed approach.

