Supporting Decision Making in Situational Crime  Prevention using Fuzzy Association Rule

Abstract? Crime happens everywhere including in our house and is always related with human life. It will make a country lose valuable assets and properties. Most crimes will take place only if there is an opportunity to do crime. To curb this problem, the IT field tries to develop a smart technology that can work in predicting of crime in the future. This new tool uses decision support system (DSS) and fuzzy association rule mining (FARM), in which it can extract the factors of situational (opportunity) crime precisely based on previous data obtained.

Keywords? Decision Support System, Fuzzy Association Rules, Situational Crime Prevention

I.  INTRODUCTION Nowadays, the increasing volume of crimes has brought serious problems to many countries in the world.

Decision Support System (DSS) also play a big role in crime prevention. DSS gives the definition of ?all information systems that are used by managers or business professionals and don?t fall into some other category? [4]. Due to different perspectives and extremely various dimensions of the decision making support, DSS research field has evolved in different directions including crime prevention. This diversity during the years, created confusions related to the ?theoretical basis, architectural form, support mechanisms, design and development strategies, evaluation approaches, and managerial and organizational aspects of decision making support systems? [5]. This research field was perceived and presented by different researchers from various perspectives, starting from the advantages that DSS offers [6].

In general, more cases that contribute to crime are based on nominal and categorical factor (e.g., red, blue, green) that influence the developed system where it normally uses numerical value in processing task. For this research, we will employ fuzzy association rule where it is easily understood by humans because of the linguistic terms such as ?hot? and ?high?. Fuzzy logic assigns degree of membership between 0 and 1 (e.g., 0.4) to each element of a set, allowing for a smooth transition between membership and non-membership of a set.

The reminder of this paper is organized as follows.

Section II describes the related work. Section III explains the basic concepts and terminology of FARs mining. Section IV discusses the proposed method. Finally, conclusion and future direction are reported in section V.



II. RELATED WORK The project that has been developed is based on existing technique which is that proposed by Agrawal et al. He introduced the concept of apriori in getting frequent item set as well as how to find association rule. However, this technique still have a redundant data especially when generate association rule with linguistic data. This problem are overcome with add some measures known as fuzzy logic. This measure will help more in generation item sets and generate exact correlation towards linguistic form.

From previous research [7], their studies were more focused on shift-around effect among nearby precincts that possess the same pattern in the same time by using color indicators. According to the visual analysis, it can specifically confirm the precincts that possess the shift-around effect (clustering techniques) and help the decision maker in planning the special inter-precinct project to prevent recidivists from shifting around crime locations. Moreover, police can decide which precinct around the metropolises should enforce the same duties more precisely via figure and save more on human resources. However, it is just temporarily and police need to guard target location.

Noor Maizura Mohamad Noor Senior Member, IACSIT  Universiti Malaysia Terengganu Malaysia  maizura@umt.edu.my   Wan Mohd Farhan Wan Nawawi Master Student, UMT  Universiti Malaysia Terengganu Malaysia  wan_mohd_farhan@yahoo.com     Ahmad Faiz Ghazali PhD Student, UMT  Universiti Malaysia Terengganu Malaysia  ahmad.faiz14@yahoo.com  Manuscript received July 10, 2013. This work was supported in part by the Fundamental Research Grant Scheme (FRGS) using vot number 55077 and Exploratory Research Grant Scheme (ERGS) using vot number 59289 from the Ministry of Higher Education (MOHE), and grant eScienceFund from the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MOSTI) using vot number 52056.

Noor Maizura Mohamad Noor, Wan Mohd Farhan Wan Nawawi, and Ahmad Faiz Ghazali are with Universiti Malaysia Terengganu (UMT), 21300 Terengganu, Malaysia (e-mail: maizura@umt.edu.my, wan_mohd_farhan@yahoo.com, ahmad.faiz14@yahoo.com).

This will make offenders cancel the intention of doing the crime but it doesn?t mean the police has succeed because the offenders may come again later in few days after they see the police leaving the place. Thus, it is just temporarily safe and does not eliminate crime. To avoid the crime from happening, we need to cut out the opportunity until none is left and make the crime more risky because whether offenses are carefully planned or fueled by hate and rage, they are all heavily affected by opportunity [2]. This means that opportunity gives high impact to them for doing crime.



III. BASIC CONCEPT AND TERMINOLOGY During implementation of web-based systems in this study, it will comprise by two elements which are Fuzzy Association Rule Mining (FARM) and Decision Support System (DSS).

The detail explanation will discussed below.

A. Decision Support System Over the years, the concerns in the Decision Support Systems (DSS) area have diversified and the development of the web technologies has radically transformed the design, development, implementation and deployment of DSS [8, 9].

The initial concept of decision support system, even though it was launched before PCs existed, was focused on the use of interactive computing in semi structured decision making [4].

It evolved from the Decision Management System concept introduced by Michael Scot Morton. In 1980, Sprague noted that the initial definition of DSS ? computer-based interactive systems that help decision makers to use data and models to solve unstructured problems, was too restrictive, therefore this definition was extended to include any systems involved in the decision making process.

The DSS evolution can be divided in four generations: the first generation included data-centered DSS, the second generation of DSS focused on providing better user interface, the third generation focused on models and the last generation is related to web-based DSS [5]. A set of numerical data related to the DSS materials was published since the beginning of the DSS research including the most prolific authors in the field, the publications with the biggest number of DSS materials and topics/subjects/keywords of the DSS materials.

DSS has been applied in a wide range of computer applications that commonly manipulate information in a variety of fields. This includes computer-based systems that are being used in handling data in order to achieve an optimization for decision-making in crime prevention. Finding solutions to crime prevention using computer programming is not something new in forensic and information technology [6].

Projects have been done in developed countries and around the world to develop software tools to find solutions for crime prevention.

This DSS technology can be applied with association rules (AR) approach where AR is focus to determine the factor and effect for specific patterns. For example in crime, the factor is woman and the effect is rape crime with 80% confidence. It means that this type of crime occurs more frequently with 80% confidence in a specific area. By using the DSS  technology, we can make some recommendations to the user on what precaution or strategies to be made to pace particular issues when solving specific crimes based on confidence value. However, in rare cases, some items have very low support but has high confidence such as tsunami cases which are important to be noted by researchers. It happens seldom but when it?s happening, it brings a major impact to us. To prevent loss of interesting data, fuzzy association rule will be introduced.

B. Association Rules (ARs) ARs were first proposed for market basket analysis to study customer purchasing patterns in retail stores [10]. Recently, it has been applied in various disciplines such as customer relationship management [11], image processing [12]. In general, association rule mining is the process of discovering associations or correlation among itemsets in transaction databases, relational databases and data warehouses. There are two subtasks involved in ARs mining: generate frequent itemsets that satisfy the minimum support threshold and generate strong rules from the frequent itemsets. Let I is a non-empty set such that { }niiiI ,,, 21= ,and D is a database of transactions where each T is a set of items such that IT ? .

An association rule is a form of BA? , where IBA ?,  such that ??A , ??B  and ?=BA? . The set A is called antecedent of the rule and the set B is called consequent of the rule. An item is a set of items. A k-itemset is an itemset that contains k items. An itemset is said to be frequent if the support count satisfies a minimum support count (minsupp).

The set of frequent itemsets is denoted as kL . The support of the ARs is the ratio of transaction in D that contain both A and B (or BA? ). The support is also can be considered as probability ( )BAP ? . The confidence of the ARs is the ratio of transactions in D contains A that also contains B. The confidence also can be considered as conditional probability  ( )ABP . ARs that satisfy the minimum support and confidence thresholds are said to be strong.

However, this AR has disadvantages where it just provides the general information and only work with binary transactions. Like rape crime, AR only produce {woman} {rape} = 80% only. It makes police officers work harder to protect all women, but they don?t know what type of woman will always be the victim. With the proposed fuzzy association rule, it tends to help the police to get a detailed information from the system. For example, if the women suspected are children around the ages of 9-12 years, thus, police officers will always make checks to every school in the area or provide the schools with CCTV.

C. Fuzzy Association Rules A limitation of association rule mining is that it only works on binary transaction data (i.e., an item was either purchased in a transaction (1) or not (0)). In many real-world applications, data is either categorical (e.g., blue, red, green) or quantitative (e.g., number of murders). For numerical and categorical attributes, Boolean rules are unsatisfactory.

Extensions have been proposed to operate on these data, such as quantitative association rule mining and fuzzy association rule mining.

Fuzzy association rules are of the form:  (X is A)  (Y is B)  where X and Y are attributes, whereas A and B are fuzzy sets that characterize X and Y respectively. An example fuzzy association rule is the following:  (employed is high) and (kids born to never married is high)  (violent crime is high)   Fuzzy association rules are easily understood by humans because of the linguistic terms that they employ (e.g., hot, high). Fuzzy logic assigns degree of membership between 0 and 1 (e.g., 0.4) to each element of a set, allowing for a smooth transition between membership and non-membership of a set. The measures of support, confidence and lift have been fuzzified for the purpose of fuzzy association rules.

The fuzzy support is defined as: Let D = {t1, t2, ..., tn} be the transaction database and let ti represent the ith transaction in D. Let?s define the itemset- fuzzy set pair <X, A> where X is the set of attributes xj and A is the set of fuzzy sets aj. A transaction satisfies <X, A> means that the vote of the transaction is greater than zero. The vote of a transaction is calculated by the membership grade of each xj in that transaction [13].

When a frequent itemset <X, A> is obtained, fuzzy association rules of the form ?If X is A then Y is B? are generated, where X ? Z, Z = X ? Y, A ? C and C = A ? B.

For the purpose of mining fuzzy association rules, Apriori was extended to Fuzzy Apriori. The difference between the two algorithms is that Fuzzy Apriori uses definitions of fuzzy support and fuzzy confidence instead of their crisp counterparts used in Apriori.



IV. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  A. Methodology The methodology consists of three (3) phases. In Fig. 1, first, is load data (Phase 1) from large volume of dataset given.

After that, input some interestingness measures which are minimum support (minsupp) by aid from fuzzy apriori algorithm. Then, it will display frequent large-itemsets that satisfies parameter values. In phase 2, it will generate fuzzy association rules based on frequent itemset by using fuzzy rule discovery algorithm. Finally (Phase 3), one of the association rule from output given is chosen, for example {a,b}  {c} = 100%. Then, move cursor to antecedent ?a?, to see the fuzzy item of ?a? item. (Hint :  {a} = dark place attribute)

I. Phases I (Fuzzy itemset generation)  Dataset is referring to the crime records that are collected each month. The data set will be read and analyzed from the text file. The data obtained consists of more scattered values.

Fig. 1 : Architecture of the model proposed   Scattered values should be separated and classified according to the similarity of the data range. Classification of data will facilitate the following steps implemented, particularly the grouping of data. In view of the selected attributes are the effect taken, the classification is focused on the sources obtained by offenders' records and other attributes. The data used is crime records for several months to get the association of certain effects.

Minimum support (minsupp) depends on the researcher and the suitability of the data being discovered. This means that researchers should determine and introduce a minimum of support. Normally, the minimum support should be more than 30 per cent. There are dependencies between the values of minimum support and minimum confidence, and it is inversely proportional to the space research. If it is a large study area, then the minimum support and confidence is small and vice versa.

After satisfying the minimum support threshold, it stops whenever an empty candidate set of some size is generated.

Candidate itemset is the data that have been simplified and sorted in terms of code.



II. Phases II (Fuzzy Rules Discovery) The fuzzy association rule (FAR) is a combination of some itemsets that has been identified in the table. The combination will be determined based on the choice of the number of itemset want combined. In FAR, there are elements to be considered, namely confidence. Confidence measures the strength of the temporary regulations.

Confidence also means the ratio of the number of transactions or records that contain all of the items involved.

Confidence(c), of the union rules, X  Y is the ratio of the        number of transactions that contain X U Y to the number of transactions that contain X.



III. Phases III (Interesting pattern) From FAR mining, it will get several interesting patterns that satisfy the minimum confidence and minimum support respectively.

This pattern will recommend solutions to police officers based on the confidence value. Such recommendations include eliminating opportunity, altering environment and develop tactical strategies. A report generated would be in the form of a graph illustration.



V. RESULT AND DISCUSSION The results obtained from crime hotspots analysiz. For  example if snatched thief happens frequently on one place with confidence value is 80%, then the systems will educate people by give varies instruction. This intructions will display varies confidence value also. For example, if snatched thief is high intesnsity here, then solution A are preffered than solution B since confidence value for solution A more higher than solution B. This is important decision because normally people will panic under stressful situation that make bad decision.

This system also gives early alert to peoples when approach towards crime hotspots. When this happens, the offenders will stress because the people knows where this crime happens.

Furthermore, it also can give what a peak time of this crime always happened.



VI. CONCLUSIONS Fuzzy association rule (FAR) mining is undeniable very crucial in discovering the exceptional cases such as air pollution, rare events analysis, crime prevention etc. It is quite complicated, computationally expensive and thus only few attentions are interested in this area. The traditional support- confidence approach and existing interestingness measures such as normal Apriori are not scalable enough to deal with these complex problems with linguistic terms that require high affinity between items.

In this paper we proposed fuzzy association rule mining (FARM) which is based on fuzzy apriori algorithm that use if- then rules. Association pattern contains items that are highly affiliated with each other and eliminates false discovery (find interestingness or hotspots of crime).

The expected outcome for this research is one web-based system that supports decision support in which it can provide intelligence recommendations, so that, we can increase police strategies in an area to make it less attractive to criminal offenders.

