Design for Medical Imaging Services Platform Based on Cloud Computing  Technologies

Abstract?The rapidly developing cloud computing technologies turned out to be an effective approach to the construction of cost-efficient, high-performance, flexible and resilient regional medical imaging services platform. The paper firstly analyzed the features of cloud computing. Secondly the paper presented the development and clinical application problems of medical imaging. Thirdly the paper designed the overall technical framework of regional medical image cloud services platform, including the logical architecture, network architecture, storage architecture and software architecture.

At last the future research work about medical image file data intensive application is prospected.

Keywords-medical imaging; reginal healthcare; cloud computing; distributed file system; software as a service

I.  INTRODUCTION Cloud computing is the birth of the new term in the third  quarter of 2007. After only half a year, its attention degree exceeds grid computing and has been high up to now. The relationship of cloud computing and grid looks just like one of TCP/IP and OSI on Internet.  Cloud computing is a business model. The calculating task is distributed in large computer resource pool, so that all applications can access computing power, storage space and information service according to its demand. We may think that cloud computing is the development of parallel computing, distributed computing and grid computing or commercial implementations of these computing science concepts.

Elastic Computing Cloud in Amazon Company, Google GFS distributed file system and MapReduce distributed computing technology with their open source implementation : Apache Hadoop,  IBM Blue cloud computing platform and Windows Azure will turn to be the most influential cloud computing platform and in wide application[1][2][3]. And cloud computing will be widely applied in the fields such as earthquake monitoring, astronomical information processing DNA information analysis, medical image processing and so on in the future[4].

With the rapid progress of medical imageology, these advanced techniques and equipments such as 320-slice spiral CT, ultra-high field MRI, molecular imaging, functional imaging, multi-modality imaging fusion have brought convenience to doctors. As the major clinical and therapeutic effect diagnostic tool of the world?s high incidence diseases such as cancer, these devices have resulted in a large number  of medical image data. The sharing of regional medical resources and coordination of medical process through network functioned as a remarkable means of overcoming the difficulty of medical treatment and expensive medical expense. Regional medical imaging coordination was an significant part of regional healthcare and the establishment of regional imaging services platform could benefit tele- radiology, virtual radiology department, remote teaching, remote redundancy, personal medical record hosting, typical case query, content-based imaging retrieval, etc., which was of great importance for the balance of medical recourses, improvement of diagnosis accuracy in basic medical institutes and lower medical costs [5] [6].

In the recent IBM ?Global Outlook? report proposes the influence to the future five years technical development direction, with particular reference to the vertical service areas. For example, in the study of global ?medical reform? topic, it may involves a very high cost and as the user ( the patient) to access the service quality is not high, and the inside of the service agencies, like doctors and insurance companies also did not get what they want in the service, the entire circulatory system efficiency low. Future application of the model is to create a new generation of medical transformation system, cloud computing is one of the important methods of delivery. To find a suitable method and model is to analysis these data, then physicians and patients will be recommended and provided with the better treatment project[7] [8].

Combined with the analysis above, the paper gives the preliminary design of the overall technical framework of regional medical image cloud services platform based on the data center of Fujian Province Tumour Hospital, China. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the development and clinical application problems of medical imaging. Section III designs the overall technical framework of regional medical image cloud services platform, including the logical architecture, network architecture, storage architecture and software architecture.

Section IV prospects the future research work about medical image file data intensive application.



II. SUMMARY ON CLOUD COMPUTING Cloud computing is the development of parallel  computing, distributed computing and grid computing and commercial implementations of these computer science concepts. Cloud computing has the features such as large   DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.53    DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.53     scale, virtualization, high reliability, generality, high scalability, on-demand service and extremely cheap. Cloud computing is also the hybrid evolution and growth results of virtualization, Utility computing, IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service), PaaS (Platform as a Service), SaaS (Software as a Service) and other concepts. At the present the most success examples are EC2 (Elastic Computing Cloud) and S3 (Simple Storage Service) in Amazon Company, Google search engine based on distributed in more than 30 sites, with more than 2 millions servers in the cloud computing infrastructure support, IBM ?blue? cloud computing platform to bring customers to buy namely use namely, Microsoft Windows Azure operating system: ?blue sky,? China Ali cloud and so on.

The technology system architecture of Cloud computing is consisted of four parts of SOA layer, management middleware, pool of researches and physical researches.  The SOA layer is encapsulating layer of Cloud computing power into the standard Web Services and integrated into the SOA system, consisting of the specific service interfaces, service registration, service discovery, service access and service workflow. Management middleware is consisted of user management, task management, resource management and security management. Its function is scheduling a lot of application task in order to make the resources provide with efficient and safe application services. Resource pool is consists of computing resource pool, storage resource pool, cyber resource pool, data resource pool and software resource pool. Resource pool will be substantially the same type of resource structure isomorphism or nearly isomorphic resource pool.

Grid computing is collaborative sharing resources and solving with the problem in a dynamic, many agencies involved in virtual organizations. By comparing with Grid computing as shown in Tab. 1, Cloud computing is well- known by us. Cloud computing will have resources into small pieces. These resources are shared and used by same agencies. Cloud computing is easy to achieve and use by boss in the same unit. The relationship of Cloud computing and Grid computing is like one of TCP/IP and OSI. Cloud computing is a simplified form of grid computing. Grid is not only integrating heterogeneous resources but also solving with many technical problems coordination. Unlike cloud computing has a successful business model to promote, grid computing is very difficult to calculate and realize. But for many high-end scientific and military applications, cloud computing is unable to meet the demand, must rely on the grid to solve. Such as electricity and water resources to provide with people services, cloud computing may solve with computing power and storage space on the shared use.

Compared with 3G, Mobile internet and Internet of things, cloud computing will provide with all the user high quality service. Cloud computing will be applied in scientific computing, medical processing, network safety, image processing and so on. Combined with medical reform in China, the medical cloud computing architecture have been proposed on the report  of China Cloud computing application strategic research (2012) of the CCID (China  Center for Information Industry Development) Limited by Ltd.

Table 1 The Comparison of two Concepts  Grid Computing Cloud Computing Purpose Sharing high  performance computing and data resource and realizing resource sharing and cooperative work  Providing with universal computing platform and storage space and software services  Resource source Different organizations  Same organization  Resource type Heterogeneous resources  Isomorphism resources  Resource node High performance computer  Servicer/PC  Virtual view Virtual organization  Virtual machine  Calculation type Most tightly coupled problem  Loosely coupled problem  Application type Scientific computing  Data processing  User type Scientific community  Commercial society  Payment mode Free(the government)  Charge according to the amount  Standardization A uniform international standard OGSA/WSRF  There is no standard, but have been open Cloud Computing Alliance OCC

III. THE CLINICAL APPLICATION PROBLEM OF MEDICAL IMAGING  The eighty last century, medical information industry started and experienced the three phases of starts local application starts and the comprehensive construction in China, now which is going toward intelligent perception stage. Through construction of more than 20 years, in the field of public health, the basic epidemic reporting has been achieved in the country at the county level and above the county level medical institutions. The two class information platform of country and province has been constructed in a public health emergency command decision-making system and other aspects, which carried out disease control, health supervision, maternal and child health care, blood management information system in the city bodies. More than 90% of the county level and above hospitals have established the registration fees, medicines and equipment, medical management of hospital management information system. In addition to the information standardization and information construction has also made good results.

On the other hand, because of the complexity of the business of medical and health information system, in the process of construction there are many problems. To sum up as follows:     1) The lack of overall planning and unified standards. Due to the lack of long-term strategy and improve the overall planning, the lack of perfect standard system, each of the regions and units in accordance with their own information system construction, resulting in information exchange and sharing, system continuity and poor coordination.

2) The information isolated island serious, data availability is not high. All kinds of application information system construction greatly improve the management of relevant department and emergency response speed. But because of the vertical construction characteristic of information system, a large number of ?chimney? and ?the information isolated island? has been formed.

3) The information network is not open, the grassroots lag.

China?s medical and health department is currently not covering the whole business health network, the medical and health unit in the network cannot achieve interconnection network ability.

With the new medical reform constantly deepening of information construction, medical and health industry has put forward higher requirements, needs more advanced technology, more hand also need to explore the construction mode change. The health and medical institutions independent construction pattern, lack of talents and information isolated and other issued cannot meet the development trend in the future.  Cloud computing technology can realize centralized deployment and maintenance, lower construction cost and maintenance cost and better realize the sharing of information resources, to provide on-demand customized service. Cloud computing and medical information integration for the information foundation weak base and rural health brought a lot of application opportunity. Overall cloud computing in the medical industry has a broad application prospect. Fujian Provincial Cancer Hospital is the only three first class tumor hospital with medical, teaching, research, prevention, rehabilitation and training in Fujian province. In 1979 the hospital was begun to build up. In 1984 the hospital was begun to receive the patients and was officially launched to open Nov.12, 1986. After 25 years of efforts, hospital in medical technology, equipment, services, environment, personnel training, medical management and hospital culture building have achieved leap development. Hospital are attached to the development of discipline construction, improve the level of management, strengthen the comprehensive treatment of tumors and technical innovation, formed with the surgical operation, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, stem cell transplantation in the treatment of department of internal medicine, combine traditional Chinese and Western medicine treatment, biological treatment, radiofrequency ablation, interventional therapy and thermal therapy and other features of the tumor comprehensive treatment system. At the present advanced medical imageology techniques and equipments such as 320-slice spiral CT, ultra-high field MRI, molecular imaging, functional imaging, multi-modality image fusion have brought out convenience to doctors? early diagnosis and early treatment for cancer patients. As other hospitals, the application of traditional PACS (Picture Archiving and  Communication Systems) in the construction of large- scaled regional medical images center was confronted with great economic and technical challenges as follows.

1) High expenditure. The volumn of image data in PACS in a large-scaled first-calss third-level hospital would be on the order of terabytes or dozens of terabytes each year and medical omage data in a certain region would be on the order of hundreds of terabyres to even several petabytes.

The traditiongal FC SAN in the construction of large-scaled storage system would lead to high expenditure.

2) Limited performance and scalabiity. It was difficult to maintain the consistency of directory structure of the overall systen with extended storage devices.

3) Limited availability. The commonly-employed storge model of ?online, near-line, offline? in PACS could save the expense and quarantee diagnosis performance but it was at the expense of limited availability since it was difficult to obtain offline images.

4) Absence of systematic software. The present full- PACS software is suitable for high-speed, stale and saft campus network. Procvideed in pure internet access with limited bandwidth, poor stability and firewall blocking system, such kind of software is difficult to meet application need.

The rapidly developing cloud computing technologies turned out to be an effective approach to the construction of cost-efficient, high-performance, flexible and resilient regional medical imaging services platform. The presented project describes the construction of regional medical imaging services platform with cloud computing through various transfer media to provide services for SaaS-based tele-applications of medical imaging. The key point of the research goes to high-performance, reliable, scalable distributed storage architecture and parallel processing which were the basis of and key to regional medical imaging services platform [9].  At present there are a lot of cloud computing application projects which are building and exploring in main cities such as Beijing, Shanghai, Chengdu, Hangzhou, Qingdao and Xian in China. In order to promote the government service innovation, promote the information resource sharing, reduce the construction cost, the local government to actively carry out government cloud application projects, the government has become the basic platform of cloud platform of government information resources integration [10]. The main application fields of future government cloud are public service and public service of e-government cloud. And the public service cloud has mainly medical cloud, social security cloud and park cloud. Public service cloud need integrate various public resources and be suitable for deployment to the public cloud.

Government cloud construction should pay full attention to the top-level design, strengthen the standard system construction, select the appropriate mode of construction, fully integrate the government, enterprises, universities and institutes resources, refer to domestic and foreign advanced construction experiences, avoid the implementation risk.



IV.  THE OVERALL TECHNICAL FRAMEWORK OF REGIONAL MEDICAL IMAGE CLOUD SERVICES PLATFORM  As a world-widely largest search engine and cloud computing provider, Google was the first confronted with how to process large volumes of data (petabytes). It created GFS and MapReduce instead of applying traditional data store architecture and high performance computing.

Through the accumulation of storing and computing capacity of thousands of common servers, it realized the efficient processing of large volumes of data, which proved to be a big success. Apache Hadoop is an open source implementation of Google GFS and MapReduce, which turned to be the most influential open source cloud computing platform and in wide application. Taken the characteristics of Hadoop and the requirement of medical imaging cloud platform into consideration, the basic structure of medical imaging cloud computing platform was designed with Hadoop HDFS and MapReduce.

The benefits of Hadoop HDFS were presented as follows: l) It was particularly designed for rapid large volumes of data (petabytes) storing and processing, which was testified by Yahoo, Facebook, Amazon, Baidu, Taobao, etc. 2) High scalability. The increase of servers could realize the linear increase of storage capacity, disc I/O throughput rate and calculating capacity. 3) High redundancy. Each data block will be stored in three different nodes. 4) It is designed for streaming access, which is suitable for the long-term storage of medical images.  5)  Besides information storage capacity, MapReduce, coexisting with HDFS, could aggregate CPU power across the nodes for data-intensive applications such as image preprocessing, format converting, image fusion, CBIR (Content-based Image Retrieval), three dimensional reconstruction.5) HBase is the Hadoop database based on HDFS, which support large database table storage,  real-time random read and write. 6) Easy-transition. When decided to transit from classic file system (such as FC SAN) to HDFS, we should consider database, data repository transition.

Hadoop architecture has tools like Sqoop to meet this need easily.

Some problems existed in the construction of medical image storage system with Hadoop. Hadoop was designed for large files with default bloke size of 64MB by contrast frequently-seen medial images such as CT MRI were about 500KB each and there were about 100 to 200 images each scan. Suppose a sea of small files were stored in HDFS excessive meta data would contribute to too much RAM consumption of Name Node and eventually decreased the performance of whole cluster. In addition HDFS was not appropriate for the real-time application requiring low latency since its writing performed more weakly than its reading did  which was not suitable for the real-time application of  PACS.

To solve this problem with Sequence File in Hadoop a S-DICOM was specifically designed. Since with Key/Value pair  all images from one patient within a Study can be combined into one serialized file thus the process performance was improved significantly and RAM  of Name Node had no risk of large consumption.

Data with Key/Value pair served as the best input data format which was beneficial to medical-image-based data intensive applications. Though HDFS itself was not appropriate for real-time application it was economical highly scalable  reliable and with high Performance. Since traditional FC SAN was suitable for quick access to  small files a kind of online archived two-level model medical image storage architecture combined with the benefits of both FC SAN and HDFS which was called HMISA(Hybrid Medical Image Storage Architecture) was specifically designed. Medical images produced within one year stored in FC SAN with original format Which could fulfill the requirement of low latency of reading film and writing diagnosis reports. Those produced over one year would be converted into S-DICOM Format hosting in HDFS.

With components of SDFO (S-DICOM File Operator) reading and writing of images in substructure were shielded which provided interface to query reading and writing for upper layer applications and components.

Another problem is that DICOM is the standard protocol of transmitting, and the communication between Work Station and Image Server is auto. But Image Servers don?t know how to operate HDFS when receiving message relative to HDFS, so an expanded message Parser is need. There are three components: Listener, Receiver, Service Maker to meet these remand. When DICOM message aims of operating HDFS, these three components can work to fit it.

In accordance with IHE XDS-I specification basic and considering the relative concentration data, the service platform based in hybrid architecture has been used in the paper. Medical image diagnosis requires access to the courtyard image data, if data is stored in the area of medical image cloud services platform data center, according to the authorization access directly from the regional data center, or using XDS-1 specification from the regional image cloud services platform for patient?s index information of imaging data, and then to access from CS system in the hospital. The regional medical image cloud services platform network architecture is shown as Fig. 1.

A.  Logical Architecture Medical image cloud services platform is composed of  one center, two platforms and N services. A center is the regional medical imaging applications and data center, which can provide various types of image data storage, collaborative and operation management services for the regional medical institutions, health management.  In aspect of data storage, regional image data center can provide the off-line image storage and remote disaster recovery services for the major hospital. The data center can stored all the image data in the small hospital, a local cache only in the current image workstation can meet the needs of daily diagnostic imaging. In the collaborative aspects, regional medical center based on IHE PIX and IHE XDS-I specification provide cross hospital patient management service and image retrieval service for remote image consultation. The two platforms are virtualization hardware platform and software platform of SaaS model.

Virtualization can be quickly for the various medical institutions to provide IaaS patterns of host hire service, hospital portal, hot backup of server, high performance computing applications with hardware resources. SaaS software provides the way that reduces the hardware and software installation and maintenance cost effective means.

Due to the large amount of image data and large hospital PACS applications data of the diagnostic process of high real-time requirement, so it is still using the traditional mode of application. Other medical imaging of remote collaborative application can use SaaS model to B/S model software renting mode, mainly through the internet to achieve. The N services specifically include foundation, medical, teaching, scientific research and other applications.

B. Network Architecture Various medical institutions and urban and rural residents may access area of medical image cloud services platform by the three ways of optical fiber access, VPN (virtual private network) and direct access through the Internet.

C. Storage Architecture The storage system is designed into a kind of  distributed and centralized storage hybrid PACS architecture. Hadoop clustering groups are built between hospital campus networks. These distributed data stored by HDFS Hadoop clusters make use of the MapReduce technology in large scale data computing. The whole system schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 2.

D. The Implemrntation Steps of Medical Image Cloud  Application Platform From technical development of Cloud Computing and  the overall architecture and implementation of construction is a very complicated system engineering, not possible be done in one step, should be a gradual process. We have done some works according to the steps as following:  Step 1: The integration of the existing image data in the hospital, standardization and optimization. As described in the previous section, the hospital park cloud application platform firstly is constructed, which belongs to the category of private cloud. According to the characteristics of medical image data, the related components in HDFS storage framework have been designed and partial implemented. The components include the two parts of DICOM protocol communication and exchange of medical image data storage and retrieval. We have done some comparative analysis by module testing.

Step 2: By virtualization technology, the data resource can distribute according to actual needs.

Step 3: Cloud computing implementation, building service oriented elastic, dynamic IT infrastructure, service, do distribute service by actual needs, service is under the control and computing.

In a word, to sum up is as follows: integration and standardization, implementation of virtual, Cloud computing implementation. Now the medical image cloud application platform is shown Fig. 3.



V.  CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK  Cloud computing deployment model led the physical boundary of the network disappears in the hospitals, the cloud facing the challenges of access control. . Users in the hospital are most concerned about data security. The virtualization security and data security are the main problems of the cloud computing security. Cloud computing security needs consider both technology and strategy, including audio, compliance and risk assessment. At the aspect of strategy management of security mechanisms in the China hospital, we should concern on the strategy of network security and management field [11] [12].

The medical data computing center construction is very complicated technology, choosing a proper construction mode is a new problem before the government department.

We must integrate governments, enterprise, universities and institutes to do the cloud computing construction. We may suggest the construction mode. That is the typical private of government investment construction and independent operation and maintenance. And construction mode is gradually transition to the mixed cloud construction mode.

By cloud medical system architecture frame, government medical and drug management department, government Health administration departments, each big hospital, community hospital, supplier of drugs, drug logistics company, Health insurance company and the patient to medical cloud platform, sharing through the electronic medical record in the remote consultation, online registration and make an appointment, efficient service, shorten the patient waiting, reimbursement process, save social resources, at the same time all patients can effectively  shunt, ordinary patients will be scientific diversion to the community hospital, treatment and large comprehensive hospital focus more on difficult miscellaneous diseases and critically ill patients, alleviate the pressure of large hospital and the cloud platform of remote diagnosis ascending community hospital medical level.

