A Proposal of Personal Information Trading

Abstract? Personal information is a valuable asset for service  providers. They need personal information for several reasons  such as target advertising and personalization. Many methods  are used to collect personal information from consumers.

However, sometimes more personal information than is needed  is collected. Since consumers are now more concerned about  their privacy, service providers are finding it a lot more difficult  to collect consumer?s personal information, which results in less  benefit for both consumers and service providers. In this study,  we propose a new personal information trading platform that  provides benefit to both service providers and consumers. We  present the platform design, functions and benefits, a proposed  trading model, and the balanced personal information tradeoff  model, which is used to measure the balance between the  incentive to the service provider and the personal information  of the consumer.

Keywords-personal information trading; privacy; personal  information trading; personal information protection

I.  INTRODUCTION  In the era of Big Data, people connect themselves to  digital networks. Internet users frequently disclose their  personal information over online networks. The service  providers collect personal information and use it for several  purposes, such as for recommendation systems and  personalized marketing. Service providers can now easily  collect personal information using registration forms and by  collecting automatically generated information, such as web  access history, location, and sensor information. This growth  of information technology raises serious concerns regarding  privacy issues for the consumer.

Individuals have their own right to disclose their personal  information or not. However, people who lack awareness of  the intricacies of information technology are confronted with  many risks, such as financial fraud and identity theft, when  disclosing their personal information. Although personal  information collection can be a serious risk, it creates new  opportunities for service providers. Thus, many service  providers convince consumers to provide their personal  information. The disclosure of personal information is  becoming a common online activity. In order to consume  these services, the consumers have no choice but to accept to  disclose their personal information without any negotiations.

Some authors suggest that the personal information can  be a kind of commodity [1], [2]. Personal information becomes a resource that can be used within a company or may  sold to others [3]. However, it is difficult to accept being  treated as an asset because it is difficult to estimate the value  of personal information. There are researchers who have  worked on the value of personal information and the results  vary. For example, researchers developed a tool called  ?Cloudsweeper?, which aims at finding the value of an email  account. The email account value is calculated from the  service accounts value that are associated with each email [4].

Otsuki and Sonehara estimated the value of personal  information using a SNS utility. The results show an  estimation value of the personal information that is based on  the cost of the protection of personal information [5]. These  researches are just a couple of examples of different opinions  about the value of personal information. Even if the value of  personal information is difficult to estimate, the service  provider still offers the incentives as a reward to the  consumer in order to trade their personal information. These  rewards possibly affect the self-disclosure decision [6].

Moreover, the privacy and personal identity protection  regulations are now very strict in many countries due to the  rapid development of information technology. This may  create a new problem in the future as business industries  might not be able to collect personal information from their  consumers or cannot use their already collected personal  information. They have to find better ways to attract  consumers and get them to provide their personal information  and also to accept the usage of it.

This study proposes a personal information trading  platform (PIT) and a model for personal information trading.

This platform aims at being a medium between the service  and identity providers in order to provide maximum benefit  for the service provider and privacy protection for the identity  provider. In Section 2, we discuss the definition of personal     information that will be used in this research. In Section 3,  we discuss the current problems involved in personal  information trading and collection, which leads to the design  of PIT. In Section 4, we present the design architecture of  PIT, its benefits, and propose a trading decision. We discuss an evaluation model of the platform. How to find the  maximum benefit for the service provider as well as provide  privacy protection to the identity provider is our focus, so we  present a case study for this in Section 5. We conclude the  future institutional requirements and the challenges for  implementing PIT in the final section.



II.  PRELIMINARY DEFINITION  A collection of personal information problems usually  starts with a question, what is personal information? The  terms ?personal information (PI)? and ?personal data? are  widely used interchangeably and have the same meaning.

Their definitions have been debated for a long time,  especially in the legal terms. However, the definition is still  unclear [5], [7].

In early 2000s, most personal information was still  retained in offline databases. Personal information problems  were not a big issue because it was easy to control. Privacy  concerns arose when an individual system stored personal  information that could identify an individual such as in a  health care system. Many countries back then defined  personal information in the same way, and it was usually  defined as information that can be identified, directly or  indirectly, to an individual or a single person [7], [8]. The  term ?personally identifiable information? (PII) [9], [10] had  the same meaning in many counties.

Information technology have recently become tightly  integrated with human life. The definition of personal  information has changed to reflect the new age, Big Data,  which at small information prices can lead to identifying an  individual. Even if a de-identification method such as  anonymization, encryption and data shading have been used  to protect an individual, researchers have frequently proven  that anonymized information can be re-identified to an  individual [11], [12].

Therefore, personal information is any information  relating to an individual. It can be any information directly or  indirectly collected from an individual regardless of its  source.



III. PROBLEMS OF PI COLLECTION AND TRADING  We focused on the following personal information  collection and trading problems in our study.

Illegal collectors: Even though privacy laws and regulations that deal with the collection of PI have been  published in many countries and are widely debated, illegal  collectors are still a big problem. Today, there are a lot of  untrustworthy PI collectors, such as unknown application  providers who ask for consumer?s PI when they install an  application.

Lack of fair trading: People usually focus on the  protection of privacy for consumers but the trading benefits  for the service providers usually are ignored. Some  researchers suggest that the consumer hide their PI. Alastair  et al. introduced MockDroid, a modified version of the  Android operating system, which provides a method to return  a valid but incorrect information to the service provider [13].

Georgios, Michalis, and Evangelos implemented a SudoWeb  module, an extension for the Google web browser, in which  the user can select an identity from two prepared identities  when using a social login [14]. These are examples of the  customer protection that does not return any value back to the  service provider.

No opt-out and limit of usage time: The European  Commission proposed a new ?right to be forgotten? law that  allows people to opt-out from the service providers [15].

Nowadays, many websites and applications state their  privacy agreements and show the opt-out option. However,  sometimes people cannot control the opt-out request. For  example, consumers? emails were illegally collected by web  crawlers and illegally sold online in the black market.

Another problem occurs when PI has been collected and there  are no statements as to the limit of usage time of the PI.

Over trading: The service provider always requests as  much PI as they desire. They can request more information  than is necessary. One problem is it is difficult to find the  balance between the protection of privacy and the utilization  of the information [16]. We are always faced with this kind  of request in many services such as a request on a mobile  phone application and social network login. Felt et al. found  that the popular Facebook applications require too much PI  when a consumer requests their services [17].

Fake PI: The service provider can collect the  automatically generated information. However, the PI that is  directly collected from the consumer provider is still  necessary. Identity providers usually submit fake PI for  several reasons. Some criminals use it for criminal activities  such as identity fraud [18]. Some create fake profiles to hide  themselves when they use the online services such as social  network service [19]. Moreover, some professional advisers  advise people to use fake information when they do not trust  the service provider [20]. This fake PI can be a method to  hide their identity on the Internet, but we argue that this leads  to a new problem when the legal service providers use the PI  for their legal purposes.



IV. PROPOSAL OF PIT: A PERSONAL INFORMATION TRADING PLATFORM  Some reviews for resolving the problems with PI  collection and PI trading were described in Section 3.

Therefore, we propose a new Personal Information Trading  platform (PIT) to solve these issues.

A. Platform design The proposed PIT in this study is expected to contain the  following three components.

a) A Service Provider(SP): provides any services or products that require PI. For example, hotel, travel agencies,  and finance institutions, etc.

b) An Identity Provider(IdP): is a consumer and their personal information.

c) An Personal Information Trading Platform (PIT): addresses between a SP and an IdP.

Fig 1.  Platform Architecture of PIT    Fig 2.  The design of sequence diagram for PIT  Figure 1 shows the platform architecture of PIT, which  consists of 3 modules: security management, offer  management, and incentive management systems. Figure 2  represents the design of a sequence diagram for PIT. The  following activities occur during each trading activity.

1) SP selects an IdP target group and sends an offer.

2) IdP receives an offer and makes a decision.

3) IdP sends a response of the offer.

4) PIT sends the response with the PI to the SP.

5) SP sends an incentive to PIT with the PI request.

6) PIT sends incentives to the IdP.

B. Functions and benefits  SPs currently offer incentives to attract IdPs to provide  their PI. The incentive can be monetary such as a gift  voucher, product discount, and coupon. However, it is still  difficult to collect reliable information from an IdP as  described in Section 3. The PIT is a platform that will be  placed between the SP and IdP. It can provide the following  benefits to the SP and IdP.

a) SP: The PIT requires registrations from the SP when it requests the PIT service the first time. The PIT  administrator reviews the SP to filter out illegal collectors.

The objects of this action are to reduce the number of illegal  collectors and gain the trust of each SP to increase the self-  disclosure level of the IdPs. The PIT provides the list of IdPs  and their PI in an anonymity format that the SP can select as  a target group in order to send the offer. This method can  decrease the cost of the advertising because the SP can select  quality IdPs as a target group and aims at increasing the  response rate.

b) IdP: The PIT allows IdPs to approve or reject the incentive offers when receiving them from SPs. For this  reason, it is possible to build up the IdPs confidence for  providing real PI in the platform. The PIT decreases the  amount of over-requested information by controlling the  balance between an offered incentive and the requested PI.

Moreover, the trading is not limited to the PI of the IdP but  also includes the usage policy such as the usage time limit  and information sharing agreement.

C. Trading Model development Regarding the assumption that the PI trading activity  constitutes a SP and an IdP, we propose a model that  describes the trading of PI and associated incentives among  SPs. We begin with the concept of a simple socially  beneficial model to depict a comprehensive view of our  model. We chose a socially beneficial model because money  cannot be used to directly represent the value of PI. The IdP  does not decide to trade his information solely for money.

The social benefits for PI trading are the sum of the profits of  both the SP and that of the IdP. Then, we also look at the  concept of social exchange theory for looking into the  decision of the trading activity for the IdP and SP because it  suggests that a person?s behavior is a result of the exchange  process between the cost (C) and reward (R).

We have structured the simplest model for illustration  purposes here. The situation is an SP who wants to trade an  incentive to IdPs. Let i be the SP who wants to trade the  incentive for the PI. The cost of the SP (???) when providing an offer is the incentive value of the offer. The reward of the  SP (???) is the value from the PI including the value chain in the business. The total SP profit can be expressed by  ? (????? +  ????) ? ?=1 . There is only one SP in this study,  so the total SP profit is  ? =  (???? + ???).   (1) Let j be the number of IdPs who use service provider i.

The cost of the IdP (????) is the value of the PI from the IdP?s perspective. The reward of the IdP (????) is the value of the incentives that were offered by the SP. When a SP sends an     offer of incentives to more than one IdP, the total profit of the  IdP consists of the cost (CIdP) and reward (RIdP). It can be  expressed as  ? = ? (?????? + ?????) ? ?=1 .  (2)  For the PIT, the value of the PI from the SP?s and the  IdP?s perspectives are important. However, the values of PI  from the IdPs? perspective always fluctuate and change. In  the prototype design, each IdP has to complete a value of PI  questionnaire before starting the trade. The results of the total  profit of the SP (X) and IdP (Y) can be positive (+) and  negative (-). Figure 3 shows a flowchart of a decision model  in the PIT. When the SP can gain profit from the trade  (X > 0), the PIT suggests it to create an offer. Then, after the  IdP registers in the system, the PIT calculates the total profit  of the offer for the IdP. If the IdP can gain profit from the  trade (Y > 0),  the PIT suggests the trade to the IdP. This  decision module aims to create a win-win situation for both  sides.

Fig 3.  Decision flowchart of PIT  For example, we analyzed a situation in which the SP is  in the hotel business. The hotel wants to increase the number  of customers, so it creates a discount coupon to discount the  room price to trade with the PI. CSP is value of the discount +  advertising cost. RSP is value of the PI from the SP?s  perspective + the other related profits, such as the restaurant,  spa, etc. CIdP is value of the PI from the IdP?s perspective.

RIdP is value of the discount coupon  D. Balanced personal information tradeoff Model We propose a model for use in the PIT for estimating the  balanced PI tradeoff in order to provide an effective and fair  trade by supplying the maximum benefits to the SP while  protecting the privacy of the IdP. This model comes from an  assumption that each business has a different PI necessity  level and each person has his or her own PI value. Each SP  has a specified demand of PI attributes. The SP continuously  increases the level of services or products when the IdP  discloses their PI. However, the SP in each specified business  has a limit of their services or products. When the IdP  continuously provides more PI to the SP, the PI attributes will  exceed the necessity of the business. In the trading, we focus  on the value of each type of PI in a specified business (???) and the value of each type of PI for the IdP (????). When ???  is high, the necessity of that PI is high. When ??? is low, the necessity for that PI is also low. On the other hand, the IdP  does not want to disclose their PI when ???? is high. When ???? is low, the IdP easily discloses their PI. In this research, both the ??? and ???? have been used to calculate the total value of the PI for a specified business.

????? ????? ?? ?? =  ? ( ????  ?  ?????) ? ?=1 , (3)  where n is the amount of PI in a business.

Even if the IdP continuously provides more PI after all  the necessary PI have been collected, the services or products  of the SP remain the same. Thus, it is not necessary to provide  PI that does not relate to the business. For this reason, the  maximum PI tradeoff between the offer and value of the PI  can be decided on from the highest necessity PI attributes for  a specified business and the highest offer (100% of the offer).

If the IdP wants to provide only parts of the PI, the offer can  be decreased.

Moreover, there are several situations in which the IdP  trades between the PI and the incentives. Both sides can  possibly gain and lose their benefits. First, a SP may request  a lot of information so the IdP loses their benefits when they  trade high value PI for low value offers. Second, a SP may  provide a high offer for low value PI. The balanced PI  tradeoff model to avoid an unbalanced trade can be expressed  using the following linear regression:  ????? ????? =  ???? ????? ????? ?? ??. (4)  where Xmax is a total value of PI at maximum offer (100%).

Figure 4 shows the relation between the offer level and  the total value of the PI for a specified business on the PIT  platform using the balanced PI tradeoff model. For the same  amount of PI, a SP or an IdP might possibly lose benefit when  they do not carefully make the trade.

Fig 4.  Illustration of balanced PI tradeoff  Moreover, we might be able to judge the value of the PI  for creating a win-win situation by determining the maximum  profit for both the SP and IdP. When a SP requests more PI  from the IdP, there are three possible cases when we compare  the value of the PI for the SP in a specified business and from  the IdP during the trade for each PI attribute.  Case 1: The  value of the PI for the SP in a specified business is high but  the value of the PI for the IdP is low. Case 2: The value of the     PI for the SP in a specified business is the same value as that  for the IdP. Case 3: The value of the PI for the SP in a  specified business is low but the value of the PI for the IdP is  high. The PI in Case 1 is the best choice for the SP for gaining  maximum profit during the trade because the SP can  negotiate for a lower cost from the IdP. Thus, Case 2 is the  second choice, and Case 3 is the worst choice.



V. A CASE STUDY: TRAVEL BUSINESS  In Section 4, we discussed the design of the PIT  platform, trading model, and evaluation model. We aimed to  evaluate our balanced PI tradeoff model in this case study.

We have selected the travel business which is it is one of the  most popular businesses that adopt online information  technology into the business model as a case study.

A. Sampling frame and Measurement The value of the PI for a SP in the travel business in this  study was calculated by the necessity of the PI for the SP in  the travel business. The following two sampling frame  groups were the ones we focused on.

1. SP: We considered the necessity of PI in the travel  business by focusing on the average value of PI in the travel  business. We gathered the PI attributes from the registration  pages of the websites from many businesses to study the  necessity of PI for general SPs. The websites were selected  from the top-ranking websites from the Alexa website, which  publicly provides the website?s ranking and statistics. We  chose this data collection method because we wanted to find  the minimum PI necessary for a specified business. We can  interview SPs but they may add unnecessary PI in their  answers for other objectives.

2. IdP: We used an online questionnaire to find the value  of PI for the IdPs. In this research, we chose the comfort level  in which discloser of their PI to a SP is acceptable as the value  of the PI for the IdP. The sampling frames study came from  people who regularly use the Internet. The monitors were in  Thailand and they were between 15 to 70 year old. We used  the five stages assessment system to ask about the  comfortable level when disclosing their PI requested from an  online SP. Level 5 is the most uncomfortable level for  disclosing PI, whereas Level 1 is the most comfortable.

B. Results and analyses  Personal information was collected from 212 websites.

There are a total of 35 PI attributes that were collected from  the 212 websites for several businesses. From the websites  collected, there were 25 travel websites and 19 PI attributes  that were collected by the travel businesses. The number of  websites that collected each PI attribute was calculated into a  percentage. A higher percentage of the websites that  requested PI means that the PI was more necessary in the  travel business field. Then, the percentage was normalized  from 0 to 5 for analysis purposes.

Next, we designed a set of questions for the IdP using the  PI attributes that were collected by the SP. We asked for the  comfort level when the IdP discloses each PI attribute. 532 people completed the survey. The respondent information in  this survey is summarized in Table 1. The results for each  type of PI were collected and calculated using arithmetic  means for our analysis purposes.

TABLE I.  RESPONDENT PROFILE   Age  Education  15-20 3.7% High school 5.4%  21-30 39.3% College 2.8%  31-40 47.8% Bachelor's degree 47.6%  41-60 8.6% Graduate degree 40.5%  More than 60 0.03%  Career  Gender  Student 16.6% Male 48.4%  Self-employ 14.0% Female 52.1%  Private company 32.0%  Government officer 27.2%  State Enterprise 2.8%  Unemployed/Housemaid 3.5%  Others 3.5%    The charts in Figure 5 show the results of the values of  each PI attribute for the SPs and IdPs. The travel business  collects 19 PI attributes that are maximum necessity PI for  the travel business. The results were sorted and rearranged by  VSP from high to low. We can easily understand from the  results the proportion of VSP and VIdP. In this case study, the  values of some PI attributes are on the same direction. For  example, the values for their home number and last name are  important for both the SP and IdP. However, the values of  some PI are totally conflicting. For example, the business  phone number and company address have high values for the  IdP but low ones for the SP.

Fig 1.  Value of PI for SP and IdP  Moreover, we are able to divide the results of PI in this case  study into three groups using value of the PI for the SP. We  assume a necessary point that separates the results when the  VSP is more than 2.

1) Necessary PI (NPI): The value of the PI for the SP is higher than the necessary point. These PI are highly required  for a specified business.

2) Additional PI (API): The value of the PI for the SP is lower than the necessary point but higher than zero. These PI  are moderately required for a specified business.

3) Unnecessary PI (UPI): The value of the PI for the SP is zero. These PI are of no value to a specified business.

The SP can reduce the trading cost by decreasing the  request for some PI, which are API and UPI. If the SP needs  more API, it can select API that has a high value of PI for  them but a low value for the IdP, such as their gender.

Furthermore, Figure 6 shows the evaluation results from  the balanced PI tradeoff model. The chart shows that the  maximum tradeoff position when the SP collects all the  necessary PI attributes and provides 100% of their offer. In  order to reduce the offer cost, the SP may decrease the  amount of PI that is requested from the IdP. Besides, SP can  estimate the offer cost, if IdP negotiates to  enclose some PI.

Fig 2.  Evaluation results of balanced PI tradeoff model for the travel  industry

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  Recent results suggest that PI collection is a major key to  targeted advertising. Trading with an incentive has recently  become a method that SPs use to attract the IdP to provide PI.

However, the trade balance between the SP and IdPs is still  difficult to adjust.

We tried to determine the current problems with PI  collection and PI trading in this study. We proposed a  personal information trading platform, called PIT, which  aims at being a middle man between the SP and IdP. Not only  does it provide the trading platform, but it also aims to  recommend a reasonable trade providing maximum profit for  the SP and privacy protection for the IdPs. We proposed a  balanced personal information tradeoff model that uses the  value of PI from both the SP?s and IdP?s perspectives to find  the balanced tradeoff position. The balanced personal  information tradeoff provides an appropriate level of trade in  which the SPs do not lose their profits and the IdPs do not unnecessarily disclose PI.

The future challenges of the development of PIT are  security issues and intelligence functions. Security  technology has to be carefully integrated within the platform,  because PIT contains PI that can be a target of criminals.

After developing the platform, it will be possible to increase  the system performance by combining it with an intelligence  system such as an automated negotiation system.



VII. REFERENCES [1] R. T. Nimmer and P. A. Krauthaus, ?Information as a commodity: new  imperatives of commercial law,? Law and Contemporary  Problems 55.3, 1992, pp. 103-130.

[2] J. Frow, ?Information as gift and commodity,? New Left Review, 1996, pp. 89-108.

[3] C. Ciocchetti, ?The Privacy Matrix,? Florida Journal of Technology Law and Policy, vol. 12, no. 2, 2008.

[4] H. McCracken. (2013, June), Cloudsweeper?s Gmail Security Audit Is Alarming and Useful, Available: http://techland.time.com/2013/06/ 27/gmail-security/  [5] M. Otsuki and N. Sonehara, ?Estimating the Value of Personal Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES), 2013, pp.512-516.

[6] E. B. Andrade, V. Kaltcheva, and B. Weitz, ?Self-disclosure on the Web: the impact of privacy policy, reward, and company reputation,?  Advances in Consumer Research, no. 29, 2002, pp. 350-353.

[7] E. Katrine, ?Personal Information in New Zealand: Between a Rock and a Hard Place?? Interpreting Privacy Principles: Chaos or  Consistency? symposium, Sydney, 2006, 1.

[8] Directive, E. U., ?95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data,? Official Journal of the EC 23 (1995): 6.

[9] S. 1332--109th Congress: Personal Data Privacy and Security Act of 2005, Retrieved March 4, 2014, from http://www.govtrack.us/  congress/bills/109/s1332  [10] E. McCallister, T. Grance and K. Scarfone, ?Guide to protecting the confidentiality of personally identifiable information?. DIANE Publishing, 2010.

[11] O. Tene and J. Polonetsky, ?Privacy in the Age of Big Data: A Time for Big Decisions,? Stanford Law Review 64, 2012, pp. 63-69.

[12] A. Narayanan and V. Shmatikov, ?Myths and fallacies of personally identifiable information,? Communications of the ACM, 2010, 53.6: 24-26.

[13] A. R. Beresford, A. Rice, N. Skehin, and R. Sohan, ?MockDroid: Trading Privacy for Application Functionality on Smartphones,?  Proc.

12th International Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and  Applications, HotMobile ?11, 2011.

[14] G. Kontaxis, M. Polychronakis, and E. P. Markatos, ?SudoWeb: minimizing information disclosure to third parties in single sign-on  Security, 2011.

[15] J. Rosen, ?The Right to Be Forgotten,? Stanford Law Review, 64, 2012, 88-92.

[16] M. Otsuki and N. Sonehara, ?A Proposal of ?Identity Commons?: Utilization of Life Log and ID Information for Resilient Social  Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing, Internet of  Things (iThings/CPSCom), 2011, pp. 503-507.

[17] A. Felt. and D. Evans, ?Privacy protection for social networking plat- forms,? Proc. Workshop on Web 2.0 Security and Privacy (W2SP?08),  2008.

[18] E. A?meur and D. Schonfeld, ?The ultimate invasion of privacy:  Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), 2011, pp. 24-31.

[19] K. Heather. (2012, August), 83 million Facebook accounts are fakes and dupes, Available: http://edition.cnn.com/2012/08/02/tech/social- media/facebook-fake-accounts/  [20] B. Wheeler. (2012, October), Give social networks fake details, advises Whitehall web security official, Available: http://www.bbc.

