Virtual Health Management

Abstract? By 2030, 49% of the US population are projected to have a chronic condition, accounting for 78% of total healthcare costs.  Despite significant investments in healthcare and information technology, healthcare costs continue to rise and errors still persist.  A smarter health and wellness focus is required to allow proactive and preventative care through virtual health management conducted by patients and their care team, in a patient-centric and patient empowered information environment, resulting in a proactive and preventative care.

There are many new healthcare management opportunities and technical challenges as a result of Big Data and outcomes can be further improved when combined with self-management.    A virtual health management solution with the components of Big Data sharing, decision support, virtual management, and care team monitoring is critical to improving quality and reduction of costs.

Keywords?Big Data, Healthcare, Virtual Health, Self- Management, Patient-Centric, Virtual Management, Well-Being, Business Intelligence

I. INTRODUCTION Healthcare generates 30 percent of the world?s data according to estimates, with 65 percent of survey respondents indicating their data storage will grow at a rate between 25-50 percent per year [1], driven primarily by imaging files, electronic health records, personal health records, and scanned documents.  Despite this growth in volume, few healthcare providers have developed a formal strategy for handling the increasing amounts of data [2].  Big Data in healthcare reflects the volume, growth, and types of data, as well as the tremendous opportunities available.  In one report Big Data in healthcare was expected to be valued at $300 billion in the next decade, with annual growth between 1.2 ? 2.4 Exabytes per year [3].  The health care industry is well behind other industries in utilizing Big Data effectively.  In healthcare the discussions have surrounded how to develop value for quality care, how to share data, how to utilize business intelligence, how to distribute information to multiple stakeholders, and address all interests [4].

Healthcare costs continue to exceed inflation rates, with 18 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) spent on healthcare.  By 2020, 19.8 percent of GDP is expected to be consumed by healthcare for a total of $4.6 trillion [5].  The chronically ill patient population in the U.S. utilizes 78% of total health care costs, 76% of hospital admissions, 88% of  prescriptions, and 72% of physician visits.  In an effort to address chronically ill patients, Disease Management programs seek to better manage the population through education, and empowering patients to self-manage and monitor their illnesses.  Disease Management is a system of coordinated interventions for patient conditions that are significantly self-managed and supports the clinical-patient relationship, and focuses on prevention using evidence-based guidelines and patient empowerment.  Disease management programs include heart disease, heart failure, diabetes, pulmonary disease, and asthma.  The patient then follows established evidence based treatments, and is sent reminders for medication, screenings, and education.  These Disease Management programs consider that knowledgeable patients will receive less emergency visits, hospitalizations, errors, and reduce costs [6-9].

Extending Disease Management beyond only chronically ill patients, Population Health Management targets programs to patients to improve health outcomes across the entire continuum of low-risk to high-risk patients.  Population Health Management programs are increasing as employers, health plans, and other stakeholders seek ways to reduce costs and improve outcomes through patient involvement.  Despite interest in the programs, a limited understanding exists for the programs, and programs are still in the early stages with research ongoing for the most effective methods for improving the entire population.  In addition, while large employers have implemented programs, there is a lack of programs for many individuals self-employed or with smaller companies [10].

To address these challenges, and improve health and well being, a patient centric Big Data information environment incorporating the tenants of Disease Management and Population Health Management, through Big Data Sharing, Decision Support, Virtual Management, and Monitoring is required.



II. VIRTUAL HEALTH MANAGEMENT APPLICATION  An evaluation of a solution design for an artifact is explored to improve patient management [11].  Population Health Management and Disease Management include data capture, decision support identification, virtual management for evidence based guidelines, collaborative care models,   DOI 10.1109/ITNG.2014.124     patient self-care, and monitoring processes for outcome measurements, evaluations, and reporting feedback loop [8, 10].  These components are classified into a design and this prototype design includes a patient-centric model which  consists of Big Data Sharing, Decision Support, Virtual Management, and Care Team Monitoring.



III. DISCUSSION  A. Healthcare Management Implications By 2030, 49% of the US are expected to have chronic conditions, with 20% having more than one condition.  The patient centric model for virtual health management is therefore critical for long-term cost reduction and quality improvements [7].  The utility of the artifact and high usage rates by patients and providers must also include an incentive component, as many large employers who have implemented population health management and disease management programs find vendors ineffective in changing member?s lifestyle decisions and compliance with preventative care programs.  Incentives must be given to individuals such as cash, gift cards, or merchandise, and was rated as one of the major recommended changes to improve results according to recent surveys.  Provider incentives should also be added with shared savings, care coordination payments, and electronic use [10].

Details are provided via a sample output for a patient- centric health management solution.  For managers, the components of Big Data Sharing, Decision Support, Virtual Management, and Care Team Monitoring are critical to addressing smarter health and well being through the ability for patients to manage their own conditions.  A separate expanded version lists the components as included in Disease Management and Population Health Management programs, along with Target Population, Health Costs, and Patient Management considerations.

B. Future Directions Future directions include evaluating the Big Data design on an expanded production patient population, and measuring  associated outcomes.  Additional future research includes evaluating the disruptive strategy of patient self-management in health care, and methods to gain competitive advantages as a healthcare organization, through cost and quality of care improvements and unlocking the full potential value of Big Data in population health management and virtual monitoring.



IV. REFERENCES  [1] M. Miliard, "Deluge of data' has hospitals swimming  upstream," vol. 2012, H. I. News, Ed., 2012.

[2] J. DeGaspari, "Healthcare Data Experiencing Explosive  Growth," vol. 2012, Healthcare-Informatics, Ed., 2010.

[3] G. Hughes, "How big is 'big data' in healthcare," vol. 2012,  SAS, Ed., 2011.

[4] W. Hoover, "Transforming Health Care Through Big  Data," 2013.

[5] Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, "National  Health Expenditure Projections," 2012.

[6] H. G. Dove, Duncan, Ian, "An Introduction to Care  Management Interventions and their Implications for Actuaries," 2004.

[7] D. Herlands, Brown, Katherine, "Strategies for Chronic Disease Management," The Advisory Board Company, 2005.

[8] URAC, "What is Care Management?," 2012.

[9] J. M. Woodside, "Economic Externalities of Health  Information Technology," Journal of Healthcare Information Management, vol. 21, 2007.

[10] S. Felt-Lisk, Higgins, Tricia, "Exploring the Promise of Population Health Management Programs to Improve Health," Mathematica Policy Research, 2011.

[11] S. T. March, Storey, Veda C., "Design Science in the Information Systems Discipline: An Introduction to the Special Issue on Design Science Research," MIS Quarterly, 2008.

