Human activity recognition model based on Decision tree

Abstract?In daily life, people carry smartphones every where. The sensors included in smartphones can tell us much information. Activity recognition by smartphone can be used for healthcare and sports management. People carry smartphones in different positions, such as the pocket of the trousers, hands or bags. We use accelerometer embedded in the smartphones to classify five activities, such as staying still, walking, running, and going upstairs and downstairs. This work analysis behavior data from accelerometer, extract various features, choose highly correlated features, and construct an activity recognition model based on location-independent smartphone. We construct models based on (behavior, position) vector, position and behavior. Compare all these models, behavior based recognition model gain the highest accuracy and lest time-consuming, which can effectively identify human behavior.

Keywords?Activity recognition model; Position- independent; Decision tree

I.    INTRODUCTION People carry smartphones every day. Smartphones  have many sensors included, which can tell us much information. Using sensors, computing ability and appropriate algorithm, smarphones can provide more powerful service than phones used be. Healthcare system and sports management system can help users keep healthy life style. These system can urge users to take proper exercise every day  also provide the user's heart rate, blood pressure and other healthy information.

Specialized medical equipment or wearable sensors can be used for human activity recognition, but it requires the user to deliberately put on some devices. With smart phones, more and more researchers advocate to do activity recognition without being detected. While people carrying smartphones, their behavior are recognized and recorded.

Accelerometer information is useful in recognition user?s behavior. In this paper we first describe the current work in the field of activity recognition and the decision tree method. In section III we analysis behavior data form accelerometer, contain five activities and three smartphone positions. While extract various features, choose highly correlated features, we construct three decision trees based on (behavior, position) vector, position and behavior. Compare all these models to find the best model to classify user?s activity.



II.    RELATED WORKS Many researches have been done in activity  recognition. Previous studies is  Wearable Computing, people wear sensors at specified position to identify activity and gesture. In 2004, MIT?s Media Lab used five accelerometers worn simultaneously on different parts of the body to identify 20 kinds of everyday common behaviors. Mean, energy, frequency-domain entropy, and correlation of acceleration data was calculated and several classifiers using these features were tested.

Decision tree classifiers showed the best performance [1] .

With smart phones, more and more researchers started to do activity recognition by smart phones.

Gerald Bieber? team from Germany fixed the smart phone in user?s pocket of the trousers. Microphone was used to capture the sound of friction to identify user behavior severity. They fused sound and acceleration data to identify user?s activity[2]. Lenny Grokop?s team achieve comparable activity recognition performance using smartphones placed in unknown onbody positions including pocket, holster and hand. Results obtained from a diverse data set show that motion state and device position are classified with macro-averaged f- scores 92.6% and 66.8% respectively, over six activities and seven device positions[3]. Yiqiang Chen?s team[4-7] fused accelerometer and GPS information to recognition traffic patterns[4]. Paper [7] divided people's everyday behavior to: still, walking, running up and down stairs, falls, etc., Smartphone gather six kinds of behavior data to recognize behavior. Paper [5] considered different wear position of phone, different body parts move in different ways.



III. POSITION-INDEPENDENT ACTIVITY RECOGNITION MODEL  This paper first collect data from smartphone, then calculate the resultant acceleration. After analysis on time and frequency domain, ten features are calculated.

Three models are brought up and compared.

A. Data collection and analysis Our experiment carried on smartphones with ARM  processors, Android2.3 system. We developed a lightweight behavioral data collection system.

Experimental designed as follows:  This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61373116), Youth Foundation of Xi?an University of Posts & Telecommunications (103-0458), Nature Science Foundation of Shaanxi Province under Grand ( 2012JQ8047).

DOI 10.1109/CBD.2013.19     1. User information: we collected 15 user behavior data, the age distribution was: 20 to 30 years old 5 people, 30 to 40 years and 8 people, 2 persons 40 to 50 years old, basically covering smartphone user base;  2. Activity: behavior information collected is divided into five kinds: stationary, walking, running, upstairs, downstairs;  3. Phone position: for each behavior, the user's mobile phone wearing position subdivided into three kinds, namely, bag, trouser pocket, hands;  4. Each user behavior and location for each movement collected 10 times the acceleration information acquisition time 10 sec.

The following is time domain curve and frequency domain curve of resultant acceleration.

(1) Stay still  When users are stay still, the resultant acceleration value stable at 10, is the gravitational acceleration.

Operate the smartphone brings a small amount of jitter.

When the smartphone is carried in hands, trousers pocket or bags, the curve of time and frequency is almost the same. Fig 1 shows the time and  frequency domain curve of resultant acceleration when the user is staying still.

Fig. 1. The time and frequency domain curve of ?stay?    (2) Walking  User behavior data cyclical when the phone is in trouser pocket, so the best cell phone behavior recognition placement should be trouser pocket. Fig 2 shows the time and  frequency domain curve of resultant acceleration when the user is walking.

(3) Running  Users running data showed a periodicity, the frequency and peak acceleration is higher than walking data, energy is mainly concentrated in 2 Hz, peak or energy can be used to distinguish between running and other activities. Fig 3 shows the time and  frequency domain curve of resultant acceleration when the user is running.

Fig. 2.  The time and frequency domain curve of ?walking?        Fig. 3. The time and frequency domain curve of ?running?     (4) Upstairs  Behavioral data of going upstairs is very similar to walking, so here is a high incidence of false positives.

Fig 4 shows the time and  frequency domain curve of resultant acceleration when the user is going upstairs.

Fig. 4. The time and frequency domain curve of ?upstairs?       (5) Downstairs  The acceleration curve of  going downstairs is similar to running, but the cycle is longer, the amplitude is smaller, and therefore easy to distinguish.

Fig 5 shows the time and  frequency domain curve of resultant acceleration when the user is going downstairs.

Fig. 5. The time and frequency domain curve of ?downstairs?       We extract features from all 2250 samples, including  10 kinds: mean, median, variance, standard deviation, maximum, minimum, range, RMS (Root Mean Square), Fourier transform coefficients and spectral energy.

B. The model based on the vector (activity, position)  Fig. 6. The model based on the vector (activity, position)     People wear cellphones in different positions.

According to the foregoing analysis, acceleration data are different when cellphones is carried in different places. To make position-independent behavior recognition, we mix all of the positions and activities of the classification. In determining user behavior, while the placement of smartphone also identified. We build (behavior, location) vector, a total of 15 species, ID3 decision tree is used as classification algorithm to construct a model to  assigned all sample data to 15 classes.

Using all of the features to build a decision tree, which  shows in Fig 6. We calculate all the features information gain  by formula(1-1), and find that the mean is the best feature to do the first classification. After seven level classification, we get 15 classes. When test on the sample set, the rate of miss classification is 26.28% . Then we take cross-validation, which randomly divides the training set into 10 disjoint subsets. Each subset has roughly equal size and roughly the same class proportions as in the training set. Remove one subset, train the classification model using the other nine subsets, and use the trained model to classify the removed subset. The rate of miss classification is 48.18%.

C. The model based on position Build a decision tree to classify the position of  smartphone. Of all the features, the best feature to classify the position is the Fourier transform coefficients.

The tree shows in Fig 7. When test on the sample set, the miss classification rate is 20.44%. When take cross- validation, the miss classification rate is 38.69%.

D. The model based on action Classify activity directly without considering the  postion of smart phone. Using all of the features to build  the tree, which  shows in Fig 8. After pruning, the tree is compact.

The best feature is the maximum value, followed by the variance and range. Sample space of the tree model validation, if the sample set as a test set, then the error rate of 11.68%, if carried out 10 cross-validation, then the error rate of 19.71%.

Fig. 7. The model based on position    Fig. 8. The model based on activity    E. Comparison of three models  TABLE I.  ACCURACY AND TIME CONSUMING OF THREE MODELS  Tree species Accuracy Time  consuming Test on the sample set  10 fold cross- validation  Tree based on (activity, position) 73.72% 51.82% 0.8813  Tree based on position 79.56% 61.31% 0.8675  Tree based on activity 88.32% 80.29% 0.7869    To sum up, the decision tree model based on activity is more accurate than the model based on position. Both of therm is more accurate than decision tree model based on (activity, position) vector. When making position-independent activity recognition, the same activity in different position cannot be     differentiated very clearly. Judge activity and position simutaniously seems difficult. Due to the lowest complexity of the decision tree based on activity, it has the minimum time consuming and the highest efficiency. The comparison shows in TABLE I.



IV. CONCLUSION In this paper, phones were placed in three different  positions. Five daily behavior information has been collected based on the synthetic acceleration, ten kinds of user activity features are extracted. The decision tree based on the features has been established. This paper studies the three kinds of modeling method, vector (activity, position) based modeling, position based modeling and activity based modeling respectively.

Compare all these models, behavior based recognition model gain the highest accuracy and lest time- consuming, which can effectively identify human behavior.

