Virtual Machine Portability - A Novel Approach

Abstract?The rise of cloud computing has been driven by the benefits, the cheapest purveyor of application hosting, storage, infrastructure, huge cost savings with low initial investment, elasticity and scalability, ease of adoption, operational efficiency, on-demand resources, and the use of equipment that is largely abstracted from the user and enterprise and how the virtualiza- tion has changed the foundation of computing. In other terms the virtualization is the process that turns the hardware bound entity in to software based component and the end result comes in to the form of VM. Current virtualization software supports transparent VM migration between physical servers on the same LAN but WAN migration remains a challenge due to the need for network reconfiguration and storage migration. With this paper our main concern is to present the virtual machine portability (VMP) is one of the most important futuristic aspects of Virtual machine migration, the term VMP requires that cloud customers can keep their VM including the prefix-when migrate from one cloud services provider to another avoiding the costs of switching to new VM configuration.

Keywords-Cloud Computing, Virtualization, Live Virtual Ma- chine Migration;

I. INTRODUCTION  With the rapid growth of cloud computing, it is very easy to access computing resources without the burden of purchasing, updating, managing and maintaining the resources.

Cloud computing provides the illusion of infinite computing resources which are available from anywhere, anytime, on demand. Cloud service provider manage computing resources at data center and provide these resources to the consumer.

Infrastructure, software, platform are offered as service in a pay-as-you-go manner to users. Cloud computing makes better use of distributed resources and put them together to solve the complex computational problems. Most cloud platforms use virtualized data centers which maximize the computing resources utilization. Cloud computing is based on utility computing in which resources are provisioned on-demand and adopts its pricing scheme fully due to economical reasons.

Resources utilization can be maximized and operating costs can be minimized by service providers. Users do not need to worry about their data, backups because if something happen wrong, components fail, it is service provider?s responsibility to make data available.Virtualization is gaining momentum in the information technology world and emerge as a key technology of cloud computing. Virtualization is not a new concept, cost savings, and manageability are the reasons for the recent rising. It also supports service-oriented architectures, isolated secure systems, and flexible deployment. Virtualiza- tion allows to run multiple virtual machines on a single  host. A virtual machine (VM) is an abstraction layer between hardware and the user. Virtual machines run operating systems and its applications. A host operating system can run many virtual machines and shares system hardware components such as CPUs, disk, memory, and I/O among virtual servers[1].

Virtualization facilitates server consolidation, live migration, and resource isolation. Live virtual machine migration is the process in which one VM or many VMs are migrated from one physical host to another and they appear to be responsive all the time from user?s perspective. The service availability can be improved by moving less loaded VMs to another host so that resources could be assigned to more loaded VMs. It has many benefits such as energy saving, load balancing, and online maintenance.

There are large variety of Cloud services and the great number of service providers. The service providers use Service Level Agreements (SLAs) to express and negotiate user requirements and offer their services. Many live migration technologies are proposed to improve migration efficiency within cluster environment or data centers of same cloud service providers.

In existing technologies, there is no such a mechanism in which a user can continue with same service (VM) but with different service provider due to some difficulties with previous provider.

In this paper we are proposing a new idea in which a user can always keep his virtual machine with same configuration also with different service provider. We call this mechanism VMP (Virtual Machine Portability). This is the first idea in which a user can change his service provider but he can continue with his previous virtual machine.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the live virtual machine migration in which we describe virtualization and its type and live migration reasons.

In section III we discuss related work which are categorized into virtual machine migration in cluster, modern data centers and cloud data centers. We propose our idea in section IV with architecture description and advantages of this mechanism. In Section V we show implementation work with eucalyptus tool.

Section VI concludes the paper.



II. LIVE VIRTUAL MACHINE MIGRATION  A. Virtualization  Virtualization technology is used to maximize the uti- lization of hardware resources. It allows multiple operating systems run concurrently on the same physical machine. It splits up a physical machine into several virtual machines. A virtual machine can be defined as, ?It is a software imple- mentation of a computing environment in which an operating   DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.108    DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.108     system or program can be installed and run? [2]. Virtualization is the key technology in cloud computing. It is the most efficient solution resource management in cloud computing.

Virtualization technology organizes the computing resources flexibly and it unscrambles the hardware and software archi- tecture dependency. Virtualization technology also facilitates resource sharing, cost efficiency, fault tolerance, application isolation, portability. A layer, called hypervisor, separates the hardware resources and provide the virtual machines (VM).

VMs act like real physical machines; they use their virtual hardware resources. Live migration is one of the key features of virtualization technology which makes it attractive. Live migration allows to administrator to move running virtual machine or VMs from one physical server to another. It results high availability of services which is very beneficial for service providers. There are two main types of virtualization:  Type I (Bare Metal): In this type VMM (Virtual Machine Monitor) is installed as a primary boot system on the hardware.

Bare metal hypervisors run directly on the hardware and control the hardware and manage the guest operating system i.e. VMM has full control over all virtual machines.Examples are: Citrix XenServer[3], VMware ESX/ESXi[4], KVM[5], and Microsoft Hyper-V[6] hypervisors.

Fig. 1. Type I  Type II (Hosted): In this type hypervisors run within conventional operating system environment. Hypervisor is installed on the host operating system. Above hypervisor layer guest operating systems or virtual machines are installed.

Examples are: VMware Workstation[7] and VirtualBox[8].

Fig. 2. Type II  B. Live Virtual Machine Migration  Virtual machine migration is the process that a running virtual machine moves from a physical computer to another  computer. Many virtualization software such as VMware[9], Xen[10], KVM[5], and Open VZ[11] are used to implement it. There are two types of migration: 1) non-live 2) live. In non live migration a virtual machine stops, and the virtual machine?s state is transferred from the source to the destina- tion computer. Then restart on the destination computer. In live migration virtual machine?s state is transferred without stopping it. Virtual machine?s state has changed so addition- ally this difference is also transferred. Live virtual machines migration is an extremely powerful tool for cluster or data center administrators for many reasons such as: load balanc- ing, online maintenance and proactive fault tolerance, energy saving. The manageability of data centers and clusters has been significantly improved using virtualization and migration.

? Load balancing: Due to heavy workload on a physical host, there is need to rearrange the VMs, so to relieve the load VMs are migrated.

? Online maintenance: A physical machine may need upgrade and maintenance, so physical server must be free, all its VMs migrated to alternative server to free the physical machine for maintenance. So, it improves the service availability.

? Proactive fault tolerance: Proactive fault tolerance prevents physical host failures that is about to fail.

It keeps services alive by avoiding failures through preventative measures. All VMs over hosts could be migrated so that services which are running on virtual machines remain available all the time.

? Energy saving: Idle servers are frequently left power.

The idle servers are powered off and power consump- tion can be reduced by consolidating VMs of idle servers. So live virtual machine migration can also be used to save the energy.

Mostly hypervisors, such as Xen[10] OpenVZ[11], KVM[5], and VMWare[9] has feature of live migration which has very short downtime. Live virtual machines migration mainly use pre-copy approach which first transfers all memory pages and then copies pages just modified during the last round iteratively. When threshold comes or the maximum number of iterations is reached, the virtual machine is paused and then only CPU state and dirty pages in the last round are sent out to the destination host and finally resume on it. Due to iteration, memory pages have been modified, called dirty pages must be sent to destination also, hence memory pages are sent multiple times. Current migration requires network attached storage(NAS) which is accessed by all hosts uniformly. Live virtual machine migration allows seamless migration of online services without requiring users to reconnect.



III. RELATED WORK  A. Virtual Machine Migration  Sapuntzakis et al.[12] focused on user mobility and system management by moving hardware state, called capsule. To reduce amount of data of capsule, they developed copy-on- write disks (updates to capsule disks), ?ballooning? (zeros unused memory), demand Paging (fetches only needed blocks), and hashing (avoids sending blocks that already exist at the remote end) techniques. They have shown that by capsule     migration, running application can be started within 20 minutes on a 384 kbps link instead of installing the application.

To overcome the process level problems such as residual dependencies, Clark et al.[13] proposed the basic idea of live migration algorithm and also described writable working set concept. Live migration has the ability to move the entire operating system. They have implemented migration on Xen which is a freely available open source VMM in data center and cluster environments.

Current technologies of live migration focused on improve- ment of migration efficiency within cluster environment or data centers of same cloud service providers. We are categorizing virtual machine migration related work into cluster, data center and cloud data center environment.

1) Cluster Environment: Hines et al.[14] proposed post- copy technique to optimizing live migration of virtual ma- chines. Post-copy contains four key components: demand pag- ing, active pushing, prepaging, and dynamic self-ballooning.

Michael R. et al.[33] compare post-copy against the precopy approach using Xen Hypervisor. Using post-copy technique the total migration time and the number of pages transferred can be reduced as compared to pre-copy. But this approach has more downtime, which causes to service unavailability the users.

To provide fast virtual machine migration, Jin et al.[16] used memory compression and a VM migration approach (MECOM) based on it. The virtual machine services may be slightly affected based on memory page characteristics. For balancing the performance and the cost of virtual machine migration, they also designed an adaptive zero-aware compres- sion algorithm. Pages are quickly compressed in batches on the source and exactly recovered on the target. They compared with Xen hypervisor, it reduces downtime, total migration time and total transferred data on average.

By adding a bitmap page which marks those frequently up- dated pages Fei Ma et al.[17] improved pre-copy approach on Xen 3.3.0 in cluster environment. Due to using a network- accessible storage system (such as SAN or NAS), only memory and CPU status needs to be transferred from the source node to the target. Frequently updated pages put into the page bitmap in the iteration process and those pages are transmitted in the last round of the iteration process. This can ensure that those frequently updated pages are transmitted just once in the iteration process. It solves the resending problem of memory pages and reduce the transferred data and total migration time.

2) Modern Data Center Environment: Hacking and Hudzia[18] focused on migration limitation of larger appli- cation system such as SAP ERP due to consumption of large amount of memory and they present a system which support transparent migration of large enterprise applications workloads. This system has a novel mechanism of memory transfer based on delta compression and to reduce the rigidity of migrating large VMs, an adaptive warm up transfer phase is added. This system aims to increase transfer performance and reduce down-time.

Akoush et al.[19] examine migration times and propose models which predict the workload specific service interruptions. They show that the link speed and page dirty rate are the major factors impacting migration behavior. Prediction of migration time must be accurate to enable more dynamic and intelli- gent placements of VMs without degrading performance. The  current technology focused on the schemes of VM placement with performance constrains. There was little work concerning about both the performance and energy costs during the consolidation actions.

H. Liu et al.[20] proposed a model the VM migration per- formance based on theoretical analysis and empirical studies on Xen platform. It is the first model VM migration costs in terms of both performance and energy. They validate the models by conducting a large set of experiments. Modeling the performance of migration involves several factors: the size of VM memory, the workload characteristic, network transmission rate, and the migration algorithm. The most important challenge is to correctly characterize the memory access pattern of each running workloads.

3) Cloud Data Center Environment: ?Address-warping? problem is one of the difficulties in wide-area migration, the address of the VM warps from the source server to the destination server which complicates the status of the WAN, and the LANs connected to the WAN. Kanada et al.[21] use address translation to solve this problem. It translates the original and moved addresses of the VM, which have the identical but exist in different locations. It is like paging in memory virtualization.

Current live migration technology has long migration times and also wastes valuable network bandwidth due to sending memory pages several times during the live migration process, memory pages are frequently updated and these pages must be sent. A VM can easily dirty memory pages faster than these can be transferred over the network, it causes extended migration downtime. These problems be more difficult when memory or CPU intensive Virtual Machines (VMs) are mi- grated or VMs are migrated over slow networks. To reduce the total migration time Svard et al.[22] proposed a method dynamic page transfer reordering which dynamically adapt the transfer order of memory pages. In this approach, page weight is calculated which is based on page update frequency sampling information. Then it is used to prioritize the transfer of less frequently updated pages before the frequently updated pages. Then these frequently updated pages are sent in last, the number of page re-transfers is reduced, by reducing the amount of transferred data total migration time can be reduced.

To reduce the migration downtime they combine dynamic page transfer reordering with delta compression techniques. It increases the migration throughput and thus reduces migration downtime. They modified KVM hypervisor by implementing the combined page transfer reordering and compression algo- rithm.

Three elements: memory, status, and storage (the disk-image containing file system and user data) are transferred during VM migration from a source cloud to a destination cloud over a WAN. Celesti et al.[23] focus on the dynamic VM allocation and propose a ?Composed Image Cloning? (CIC) methodology to reduce the consumption of bandwidth and cloud resources.

Suen et al.[24] propose and compare techniques for both instance-based and volume-based storage in the public and pri- vate cloud infrastructure that can reduce the transfer bandwidth and storage cost of data involved during the migration process.

B. Cloud Brokerage  Cloud brokerage is a bridge between service provider and the user. Gartner explain the responsibility of cloud broker     into cloud service arbitrage, aggregation and cloud service intermediation[25]. Central Cloud Broker component is given by Grivas et al. [26] which is responsible for governance and the management of cloud environment, mainly focused on business process management. Chaisiri et al.[27] proposed a cloud broker with optimal virtual machine placement algorithm and this algorithm is also minimize the cost for hosting virtual machines in several provider environment.



IV. PROPOSED IDEA  A. Mechanism Description  Figure 3 illustrates three roles in cloud to cloud migration architecture: user, cloud broker, cloud provider. Here we are giving a term SCA(Service Change Agreement) for changing the service provider.

1) User: User is one who uses the cloud services and if he/she is not satisfy or with any reason any time he can change his service provider by submitting its VM description to the broker.

2) Cloud Broker: A cloud broker is an individual or organization that creates and maintains relationship among cloud providers. It acts as a liaison between cloud service users and cloud service providers. They select best provider for each user and also monitors the service continuously so that user will be satisfy. If user has any problem with the service then he can request to broker either to change his service provider or to improve the service.

3) Cloud provider: A service provider offers storage or soft- ware services via a private cloud or public cloud to users. The cost is based on a per-use utility model. Each cloud provider supports several instance types (VM configuration). A instance type is defined as hardware metrics such as CPU, storage, main memory. Some examples are: Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3)[28], Cisco[29], Citrix[30], IBM[31], Google[32], Microsoft[33], Rackspace[34], Salesforce.com[35].

4) SLA (Service Level Agreement): The emergence of cloud computing has led to evolution in terms of how ap- plications are built and managed this whole new perspective of how the things are done needed a new way of management . This management involves the constraints and parameters of service, service customer and service provider are to adhere to. It is the cornerstone of how the service provider sets and maintains commitments to the service consumer. When a customer wants to use service then first he engages in a negotiation phase, after an agreement has been achieved. The service provider and customer sign this agreement. The goals of SLA is to provide the clear reference to service ownership, roles and accountability and it match perceptions of expected service provision with actual service support and delivery.

B. Virtual Machine Portability  1) Methodology: This is a new mechanism for migrating the VM from one service provider to another service provider.

First user request to the broker to change his service provider then broker verify the request and forward the request to donor(source service provider) then donor approved request and forward approval to the broker. The broker fixes the porting and convey it to both source service provider and target service  Fig. 3. Virtual Machine Portability  provider. Then VM would be migrated from donor to recipient with the same configuration and VM would be disconnected from donor service provider and provisioned in target service provider.

2) Advantages: The following advantages are describing below:  ? Portability: Cloud service customer would be able to port service provider while retaining their existing virtual machine.

? Simplicity: VMP success mainly depends on the sim- plicity of the process. There could be many rules that the regulator may impose.

? Speed: Speed is one of the major factors that affect the success of VMP. Service level agreements should be stringent enough to minimize the time taken to migrate the VM to other service provider. This increases the level of customer satisfaction  ? Cost factor: VMP success also depends on the cost of porting the VM. The lower the cost, the higher will be the rate of porting. The cost here refers to the amount that the customer needs to pay to port their virtual machine to some other service provider?s.

3) Limitation:  ? Bandwidth Limitation: Bandwidth limitation is the most influential parameter on performance of VM migration. It effects to total migration time and down- time. To speed up migration it is necessary to have great speed of bandwidth.

? No shared storage: In most migration methods, shared virtual disk is considered so that source and destina- tion hypervisor can access to it. Otherwise it can take long time due to large size virtual disk. We are trying to implement with shared storage.

? Problem with platform compatibility: Many different types hardware is used with different platform, hence moving of VM from one service provider to another     may face this problem. Hardware compatibility is a big challenge.



V. IMPLEMENTATION  Eucalyptus: Eucalyptus[36] is a open source software that helps in managing and creating public or even private acces- sible cloud. Eucalyptus has become very popular and is seen as one of the key open source cloud platform. Its architecture is simple and flexible. Eucalyptus has five main components:  A. Cloud controller(CLC)  It is the frontend of the architecture and interacts with the user and also provides the virtual machine controlling. It is most visible element of the eucalyptus architecture.

B. Walrus Storage Controller(WSC)  It is a storage which is used to store and access virtual machine images and user data. WSC storing and accessing data either from running instance or from anywhere on the web.

C. Cluster controller(CC)  This is used to manage one or more the node controllers and manage/deploys instances on them. Cluster controller also manages the networking for instances running on the nodes.

It operates between cloud controller and node controller. It will receive request to allocate machine images from the cloud controller and in turn decides which node controller will run the machine instance. This decision is based upon status report which the cluster controller receives from each of the node controllers.

D. Node controller(NC)  It is back end of the infrastructure, used to control and terminating of virtual machine instances on the host. The NC role is to interact with the operating system and hypervisor running on the node, as instructed by the cluster controller.

Fig. 4. Eucalyptus Architecture  In order to create cloud environment, we used two ma- chines for node controller with 500GB hard disks and 8 GB RAM. Furthermore we installed Xen on the NCs. We install cluster controller and cloud controller on one machine with 500 GB hard disk and 8 GB RAM. These machine are connected through LAN network with 100 Mbps bandwidth. The cloud administrator and client input their request to the CLC through  running API functions. Therefore in order to create migration capability in eucalyptus we create an API functions. We run euca-migrate-instance API, firstly CLC finds the node?s IP address that the instance currently running there and then these values are transferred to the cluster controller. API Function shown in figure 5. We successfully migrated VM from one NC to another NC.

Fig. 5. API Function  Now we set up a eucalyptus based cloud with two cloud service provider which are connected through a switch. For each service provider we take two machines for node controller and one for cluster controller and cloud controller and these are connected via a private switch. Now we are trying to migrate VM running on NC of one service provider(source) to another service provider?s(destination) NC.

Fig. 6. A Simple Private Cloud Environment

VI. CONCLUSION  Current commercial cloud platforms are incapable of meet- ing the requirements of enterprise customers However, The technique described in this paper offer a promising new approach for supporting the task of virtual machine portability In this work we propose the idea Cloud-to-Cloud Migration, We envision the future clouds as flexible resource pools that seamlessly span multiple data center and enterprise sites.

With this kind of architecture, cloud providers and enterprise customers are able to transparently migrate VMs between sites. This can allow a data center operator to perform load balancing between sites without impacting customer applica- tions, or for customers to change placement decisions based on. This paper takes a step in that direction by simplifying the network reconfiguration for migration of virtual servers between cloud sites. This approach is expected to produce a more precise traceability reduce costs, improve efficiencies and reduce administrative overhead. Delivering IT services via the Cloud portends to be a time saver, a money saver and allow for better efficiencies.

