Integrating Practical CISCO CCNA Courses in the Computer Networks? Curriculum

Abstract?Nowadays, both wired and wireless computer net- works have significant importance. In addition, we are entering the world of big data analysis, where a lot of data is trans- ferred from the sources to given computing centers for further processing. This trend requires changes in the computer science? computer networking curriculum in order to prepare the students with market opportunities and challenges after graduating. The Computer Networks (and / or data communications) course, or the whole knowledge area of networking and communication in general, are supposed to be a core part of computer science and net centric computing. Given the fact that these students prefer to learn software oriented courses, the Universities have to make the course more interesting and sophisticated enough to follow today?s trends.

In this paper, we present a new adaptive curriculum for the Computer Networks course. The students have the opportunity to choose between a practically or theoretically oriented course.

Our intention is to make the most of the learning objectives in the course more practical and thus initiate increased interest of the students. However, the core part of theoretical lectures about low level reliable data communication is obligatory for both approaches.

Index Terms?eAssessment; Education; Teaching methods; Cisco; Curriculum.



I. INTRODUCTION  Computer networks and data communication are usually a part of a Net-Centric Computing, which mainly includes tradi- tional networking, web development, and network security [1].

However, networks are a key part of today?s and tomorrow?s computing environment, such as complex data centers, grid or cloud computing. Therefore, ACM/IEEE-CS renamed and re- factored its previous knowledge area into the new Networking and Communication, which is a part of Systems Fundamentals [2].

Computer science students usually want to attend soft- ware oriented courses, that is, programming languages and algorithms, rather than hardware oriented courses, such as Computer Architecture and Organization; or Computer Net- works and Data Communications. They usually want to use the computers or network devices without knowing how they work. Teachers must spend a lot of effort in order not to lose the students? attention and willingness to learn the latter courses after the first or second week. Therefore, the Computer Networks course curriculum should follow the new trends in  computer networks and introduce more practice in order to awake the students? curiosity during the semester.

In this paper, we present a new curriculum for the Computer Network course for computer science students. It is an adap- tive curriculum, which introduces two CISCO CCNA (Cisco Certified Network Associate) 1 and 2 courses instead of the existing (regular) tutorials and laboratory exercises. This new curriculum offers more options to all types of students, that is, whether the students would like to learn the course with more practice or more theoretically. We also present a detailed grading scheme, together with implementing online learning and e-assessment environment [3] for theoretical lectures, which are still obligatory for all students.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related work is presented in Section II for different methodologies of computer network course?s curriculum. Section III presents the Computer Networks course?s organization, grading and obstacles. In Section IV, we discuss the changes of the course by introducing CISCO CCNA program in the curriculum and new grading scheme. We evaluate our practical approach in Section V and discuss the CISCO CCNA integration in the computer network course curriculum in Section VI. Finally, Section VII is devoted to conclusion and future work.



II. RELATED WORK  The Computer Networks course is one of the core courses in computer science and computer engineering curricula. We have found many authors that introduced many innovations in the course in order to improve the teaching and learning processes. Most of them are focused on introducing practical exercises in the laboratory, regardless of whether it is with physical equipment or virtual.

The emergence of new techniques and technologies allows the education to alleviate the process of teaching and learning.

Anisetti et al. [4] show how paravirtual laboratory can be used to setup virtual networking labs, which usually improves the students? performance compared with the case when the stu- dents are working directly on physical networking equipment.

Hernandez-Leo et al. [5] introduced two tools, Collage [6] and Gridcole [7], which can be employed successfully in a real undergraduate network management course. Gil et al.

[8] enhanced the learning process by using a web 2.0 OER  2014 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON)  Page 499    (Open Educational Resources) resources, such as blogs, OCWs (OpenCourseWare) and video logs. Bastidas [9] proposed the extension of the learning by implementing the com- puter networking laboratory infrastructure to distance students.

VNUML-UM Virtualization Tool can be used for the practical teaching of mobility, load balancing, and high availability [10].

NVLab is another tool that uses virtualization, which is a web-based laboratory and offers the students tools to draw, configure, test, and troubleshoot network designs [11].

Several authors proposed new methodologies for the Com- puter Networks course. For example, Regueras et al. [12] proposed educational methodology based on collaborative and competitive learning. That is, part of the students collaborate in order to define the questions, while the others compete among each other in order to be the first to give a correct answer.

However, we have not found an appropriate proposal for practical approach for teaching computer networks and changes in the course curriculum. In this paper we introduce practical approach for teaching computer networks by imple- menting CISCO Networking Academy into the course, as well as the methodology how to integrate with the other parts of the course.



III. THE COMPUTER NETWORK COURSE  This section presents the existing curriculum for the Com- puter Networks course, which is supposed to be organized with 2 hours of theoretical lectures, 2 hours theoretical exercises and 2 hours laboratory exercises per week.

A. About the course  Usually, the Computer Network course is organized in three parts: theoretical lectures, exercises and lab assignments.

Several approaches exist in teaching the course, such as the top-down or bottom-up approaches. The former assumes that the teaching of the course starts with the upper layers of the main protocol stack (for example, application layer) and then continues to the lower layers (for example, physical media and signal transport) covering learning objectives from the applications to the reliable delivery, routing, forwarding, data link and physical medium data communication. The latter assumes that the students start with the lower layers and continue to the upper layers, i.e., they build the understanding of the network, transport and finally, the application layer.

We prefer a bottom up approach since the protocols of the application and transport layers (HTTP, FTP, DNS, DHCP, etc, together with their TCP / UDP ports) are covered in a preceding course - Internet programming.

B. The course grading  The distribution of the points that the students can achieve is presented in Table I. Since the course is lectured and organized in several parts, we defined the way how the possible points can be achieved by the students, as presented in more details in Table II. Let us explain each activity and grading.

The students must participate in several activities until the end of the semester in order to learn the planned objectives and  TABLE I STRATEGIC GRADING SCHEME  Activity Percentage Exams 75% Projects 20% Activity 5%  TABLE II ANALYTIC REGULAR GRADING SCHEME  Activity Points Minimum to pass Theoretical exam 140 50%  4 e-Tests (eAssessments) 60 - Tutorial exam 60 50%  Laboratory Exercises 30 50% Project 10 50% Total 300  to be prepared for the exams. Four e-Tests (e-assessments) are conducted using an e-Testing system [13], [14], each followed by a three weeks period for the material of theoretical lectures.

Each e-Test consists of 10-12 questions, mostly delivered as multiple choice answers, which cover the particular learning objectives.

Theoretical exams are also performed by using the e- Assessment system in order to have evenly grading since there are more than 750 students enrolled in the course and four different teachers. It usually consists of average 50 questions (mostly delivered as multiple choice answers), which cover all course learning objectives. Each student also needs to develop a project related to the topics covered in tutorials and laboratory assignments during the semester. Tutorial exams are usually with tasks, mostly delivered as real life problems of computer network and data communications.

C. Course obstacles  By comparing the points in Table II, we can conclude that 200 points (67%) of e-Tests and theoretical exams are achieved by the learning objectives covered by the theoretical lectures, 60 points (20%) by the tutorials (mostly through theoretical exams) and 40 points (13%) by the practical part, i.e., the laboratory exercises and the project.

After conducting in-depth analysis of the course in a period of more than 10 years, we detected that most of the problems for the students are the ?smallest? parts, that is, the laboratory and tutorials which offer the students with maximum 33%. The analysis show that this happens because the students are more focused on learning the objectives presented on the theoretical lectures, rather than other parts of the curriculum because they can achieve enough points to pass the exam only by learning the theoretical part. The other two parts were usually learned only by the best students who wanted to achieve higher grades.

Trying to enforce the students to achieve minimum points in the other two parts did not produce good results. As a consequence, the students were revolted because they had to learn a lot to pass the part which offered a small amount of points. Therefore, we tried another approach to upgrade and improve the curriculum by introducing some more interesting  2014 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON)  Page 500    TABLE III ANALYTIC CISCO GRADING SCHEME  Activity Points Minimum to pass Theoretical exam 140 50%  4 e-Tests (eAssessments) 60 - CCNA 1 55 70% (Final exam and Skills) CCNA 2 55 70% (Final exam and Skills)  Total 310  and practical topics, such as those covered by the CCNA courses from the CISCO Certified Networking Academy [15].

We believed that these changes would provoke the students to learn the computer networks in more details, as well as to be prepared for practical assignments required by the market. The companies prefer certified employees prior to employment, rather than spending money and time on their training and certification during the employment.



IV. THE NEW CURRICULUM  Theoretical lectures and e-Tests were not changed with this improvement, since there were no problems identified with them, but we upgraded and changed the other two parts. The students have the opportunity to choose a program (CISCO or regular) they want to enroll in order to learn the theoretical and laboratory exercises.

A. Cisco courses  This upgrade is based on student attendance on the CCNA1 and 2 courses instead of regular theoretical and laboratory exercises. The teachers are certified CISCO instructors quali- fied to provide a good presentation and assessment of students skills and knowledge.

The Cisco CCNA1 course covers the network fundamentals, teaching the students about the layered concept of the network protocols, VLSM, Ethernet, and other L1 and L2 protocols, while CCNA2 covers various routing L3 protocols. Both courses extend the student learning outcomes on behalf of the theoretical part, which is still covered well with theoretical lectures.

Another very important benefit for the students are the possibilities for obtaining the certificates and to get into even more advanced knowledge on computer networks by attending the other CCNA 3 and CCNA4 courses, also offered by the faculty?s academy.

B. The new grading scheme  The new grading scheme is presented in Table III. Both the theoretical exam and e-Tests kept the grading scheme because that material remained the same as the previous. However, the theoretical exercises are migrated from the theory into the practice, that is, the last three parts of the course are removed and CISCO CCNA1 and CCNA2 courses are integrated into the curriculum. But, the grading for the practical CISCO exercises are not a total of 100 points, but 110.

One might think that this new grading scheme will lower the pass criterion compared to the regular grading scheme, but we argue that the students that follow the course with the  CISCO curriculum have to learn additional learning objectives (for example, the same routing protocols with more implemen- tation details, additional routing protocols, etc.) and also have additional exams. It means that CISCO CCNA courses can be passed by practical and theoretical exams (total of 4 exams), while in the same time, the regular students should take only one theoretical exam.

Let?s analyze how the 100 points from the regular curricu- lum are achieved. Assigning the points to midterms, in the first half of the semester, a student can achieve 30 points for the theoretical exam, 15 points for laboratory exercises and 5 points for the project. These points and material should be equal with those achieved by the CISCO CCNA1. On the other hand, CISCO CCNA1 (and CCNA2) consists of these five parts:  ? 10 assessments (Modules according to CISCO) - each is assessed in a one hour period and the students are usually assessed at home;  ? Homework assignments - working some challenge exer- cises by CISCO tutorials or special made by our CISCO instructors, adapted as the student?s knowledge (although, our students have a good ICT background). But these homework assignments are allowed only for active and present students on the laboratory exercises;  ? Laboratory exercises - laboratory exercises where the students work on equipment and CISCO?s proposed simulators, which corresponds to the regular laboratory exercises, but now according to CISCO CCNA program;  ? e-Assessment exam (Final exam according to CISCO) - that corresponds to the theoretical final exam for regular curriculum; and  ? Practical exam (Skills according to CISCO) - which partially corresponds to the project for regular curriculum.

We can observe that the CISCO?s students have two addi- tional tasks, and one additional exam. Therefore, additional 5 points are added to each CCNA course. Next we explain the distribution of the 55 points of each CISCO course. 100% of CISCO points are normalized in 50 points, plus 5 points are bonus for those students that are active in the laboratory, work on the CISCO equipment and finished the homework asignemnts on time. The 50 points are distributed as:  ? 40% - Final exam; ? 40% - Skills; and ? 20% - Modules.

Additionally, the CISCO students must pass both the final  exam and skills with a minimum of 70%, rather than 50% for the regular students, which also makes the CISCO course harder to pass.

C. New course practical approach for theoretical exercises (CISCO program)  In this section, we elaborate the proposed curriculum for the theoretical exercises, which are lectured with two lessons weekly.

Table IV briefly presents the material covered with the theoretical exercises scheduled by weeks. Usually, two CISCO  2014 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON)  Page 501    TABLE IV CISCO EXERCISES BY WEEKS  Week Theme CISCO CCNA Module 1 Application Layers CCNA1 - Modules 1, 2 and 3 2 Transport and Network Layers, Segment & Packet Analysis CCNA1 - Modules 4 and 5 3 IP Addressing, VLSM CCNA1 - Module 6 4 Data Link and Physical Layers CCNA1 - Modules 7 and 8 5 Ethernet and Network Design CCNA1 - Modules 9 and 10 6 CLI and Router Interfaces CCNA1 - Module 11 7 Midterm 1 CCNA1 - Practical (Skills) and Final Exam 8 Static Routes CCNA 2 - Modules 1, 2 and 3 9 Distance Vector, RIPv1 CCNA 2 - Modules 4, and 5 10 CIDR (Classless Inter-Domain Routing) and RIPv2 CCNA 2 - Modules 6 and 7 11 Routing Table CCNA 2 - Module 8 12 EIGRP CCNA 2 - Module 9 13 Link State, OSPF CCNA 2 - Modules 10 and 11 14 Midterm 2 CCNA2 - Practical (Skills) 15 Final Exam CCNA 2 - Final Exam  CCNA modules are lectured each week. However, an excep- tion is made with the introduction modules of both CCNA 1 and CCNA2, which are lectured three hours in a week since that material is covered in theoretical lectures. On the other hand, several modules are lectured only one in a week, such as VLSM (Variable Length Subnet Mask), CLI (Command Line Interface), Routing table and EIGRP, since they are the most important practical parts and more attention should be given.

D. New course laboratory exercises (CISCO program)  There are 12 CISCO laboratory exercises that cover the practical part of CCNA 1 and CCNA 2 courses, i.e., by six laboratory exercises for each course. Each laboratory exercise is explained in detail below.

Week 1 - Application Layer - The first laboratory exercise consists of analyzing the application layer?s functionality and protocols, i.e., the students analyze the functions of well- known TCP/IP applications and their related services like HTTP, DNS, DHCP, Telnet, and others. This is an introduction laboratory exercise and the students do not have any trouble with it since they have already met these protocols in previous courses. The students learn how to troubleshoot by using the PING, TELNET and Traceroute commands. For homework, the students should analyze and give an example with some application services by their own desire.

Week 2 - Packet?s Analysis - This laboratory exercise consists of analyzing the network packets and frames in the laboratory supported by the packet sniffer utility Wireshark [16]. A homework is assigned to the students to analyze the network communication by specific network protocol in their home networks. In this laboratory exercise, the students learn the different PDU?s (Protocol Data Unit) headers in each layer (2, 3 and 4).

Week 3 - Configuring IP Addressing - Now we are moving in the lower network layer. By using the CISCO Packet Tracer simulator [17], the students should set up a basic network topology and make the most basic functions like turn on/off the network devices, interfaces on the network devices and work with the offered network cables. The most important learning  objective is to learn the hierarchy of IP addresses and the usage of subnet masks. For homework, students should make a basic network topology with only one router by their own desire, interconnect it with appropriate network cables, addressed it and check the network connectivity.

Week 4 - Subnetting - It is time to learn the subnetting, i.e., the students should subnet several networks from some IP address range with the same subnet mask and configure an appropriate network topology with them. For homework, students should subnet more complex network (and configure an appropriate network topology with them).

Week 5 - VLSM - After learning the subnetting, the next exercise consists of configuring a medium-sized network topology by subnetting the 8-9 tricky random networks using VLSM. A challenge exercises developed by CISCO is given for homework as a preparation for the practical exam, i.e., for the midterm 1.

Week 6 - Router Interfaces and Configuration with CLI - The last exercise of the CCNA 1 course consists of learning the router interface configuration through CLI, as a preparation for the practical exam, i.e., for the midterm 1.

Week 7 - Static Routes - This is the first exercise of the CCNA 2 course, which consists of setting up a static routing between 2-3 routers in a basic network topology. For homework, students have a task to configure a more complex exercise, which requires a configuration of a static routing among 4-5 routers in a specific network topology. The students learn the concepts of Source and Destination IP addresses.

Week 8 - RIPv1 - This laboratory exercise consists of designing and configuring a small network topology on a phys- ical CISCO equipment by using the RIPv1 routing protocol.

The students should analyze the advantages and disadvantages from the dynamic routing protocols in real life scenario. For homework, the students should design and configure a specific network topology with RIPv1 in order to prove the RIPv1 deficiencies (classful routing protocol deficiencies).

Week 9 - RIPv2 - After the students learn practically about the deficiencies of the classful routing protocols, they learn about the classless routing protocol. The laboratory  2014 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON)  Page 502    Fig. 1. Configuring a RIPv2 routing protocol on real equipment from the given picture  exercise consists of designing and configuring a small network topology with the RIPv2 routing protocol. In this exercise, they should understand the difference between the RIPv1 and RIPv2 routing protocols. Figure 1 depicts the laboratory exer- cise. The students should reconfigure the previous homework with RIPv2 and to prove that it will work properly.

Week 10 - Routing Table - It is time to learn how to read the routing table and reconstruct a network from the routing tables of several routers configured with the RIP routing protocol.

Week 11 - EIGRP - The laboratory exercise consists of designing and configuring a small network topology with real CISCO equipment with the complex EIGRP routing protocol.

The students also learn the advantages and disadvantages of the automatic summarization. The students learn how to prefer some route by configuring the advance EIGRP?s features.

For homework, the students should design and configure a complex network topology with the EIGRP routing protocol and static routes in the CISCO Packet Tracer simulator.

Week 12 - OSPF - This is the last exercise of the CCNA 2 course and it consists of designing and configuring a small network topology with real CISCO equipment with the link- state OSPF routing protocol. The exercise requires a specific setup of the router OSPF roles in the network topology like DR (Designated router), BDR (Backup designated router) and DROTHER (all other routers rather than DR and BDR).

For homework, the students should design and configure a complex network topology with the OSPF routing protocol and static routes in the CISCO Packet Tracer simulator.

E. The new exams (CISCO program)  This section presents the midterms and the final exam in the new curriculum.

1) Midterm 1 (CCNA 1): The exercise part of midterm 1 consists of two portions: the theoretical and practical. The former is in fact the final exam of CCNA 1, conducted on  CISCO Certified Networking Academy?s web site. The latter consists of subnetting an advanced network with VLSM, i.e.

the exam requires making 6-7 tricky subnets from network address with a given subnet mask. Also, this practical exam requires an additional interconnection of all given network devices with appropriate cables, configuration of devices by GUI, and configuring several application services on a server, such as DNS or HTTP. Each student solves the same network topology with random number of host per subnet in the CISCO Packet Tracer simulator.

A student must achieve a minimum of 70%, both in the CCNA 1 final exam and practical exam in CISCO Packet Tracer simulator to pass this part of the midterm 1 and to get a chance to take the midterm 2.

2) Midterm 2 (CCNA 2): The exercise part of midterm 2 also consists of the same theoretical (final CCNA 2 exam) and practical portions. The practical portion of midterm 2 consists of advanced static routing and dynamic routing with specific routing protocols (two of RIPv1, RIPv2, EIGRP, and OSPF routing protocols). Also, this practical exam requires an additional basic subnetting with the same subnet mask (without VLSM), interconnection between network devices in the given network topology, and configuration of devices by CLI (mandatory, can not use GUI). This practical exam is also conducted in the CISCO Packet Tracer simulator.

A student must also achieve a minimum of 70% on both portions to pass this part of the midterm 2.

3) Final exam (CCNA 1 and 2): The students are released from having to attend the final exam if they passed both midterms. Those students that will fail at least one of the midterms must take the final exam.

The students are allowed additional attempts for CCNA 1 and CCNA 2 final exams during the semester. Instead of the CCNA 1 and CCNA 2 practical midterm exams, the final practical exam covers the whole material of both CISCO  2014 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON)  Page 503    CCNA courses. It consists of large network topology, ad- vanced VLSM subnetting, interconnection of all given network devices with appropriate cables, configuration and working with networking services, mandatory CLI configuration of the network devices, and advanced static routing and routing with two different routing protocols.



V. THE EVALUATION OF THE NEW CURRICULUM  This section presents the evaluation of introducing CISCO in the Computer Networks course?s curriculum. We have introduced initial upgrades and curricula improvement with CISCO courses for the last 10 years, in the beginning at Faculty of Natural Sciences - Studies in informatics and later on at Faculty of Computer Sciences and Engineering after it is established in 2010. In this section, we present the evaluation of the last 4 held courses from the study year 2009/2010 onwards.

A. The number of enrolled students  Figure 2 depicts the number of the students that attended the course with CISCO or regular curriculum. We observe two periods with different program student enrollment distribution.

That is, more students attended the course by CISCO program in study years 2009/2010 and 2010/2011, and less in the last two years.

If we analyze the percentages of the CISCO students, we can conclude that it decreases each year, starting from 65% in 2009 to only 17.5% last year.

This trend happens mostly due to four factors. The first is the economic crisis, that is, although each student pays a discounted price at our academy, it is still beyond the limits of a budget of a regular student, and the crisis has the main impact. Additionally, the second reason is due to changes in the courses schedule which impose transferring this course from the third to the second study year in 2012. We concluded that it is very early in the study period and the students do not understand the real benefit of attending the course by CISCO program. Also changing the course in second year after the establishment of the Faculty of Computer Sciences and Engineering enabled massive attendance and the number of students has tripled. Most of these students are those willing to study programming related courses and are not motivated to get deeper in the computer networks. The reason is also connected with moving the course in the second year, that is, there are many other ?difficult? courses in the second study year, such Data Structures and Algorithms, or Databases. Last, but not least, the students fear that the CISCO can migrate its program to new version until they graduate.

We must note that moving the course from the third to the second study year caused the decrease of the course throughput, as depicted in Figure 3.

B. The course throughput distribution  Not only that the number of the CISCO students was greater during the years (when the course was in the third study year), but the course throughput was much better for CISCO  Fig. 2. The number of CISCO and regular students by years  Fig. 3. The percentages of passed CISCO and regular students by years  students. Figure 3 depicts the results of the evaluation during the years. We observe how the grade distribution is also significantly better for CISCO students. That is, more than 82% are passing the whole course with the CISCO program and impressive 98% passed the course in 2011/2012. On the other hand, regular students throughput varies between the small 28% to modest 47%.

C. The grade distribution  In order to prove that all course changes that we imple- mented are well designed, we analyzed the grade distribution of the passed students, which is depicted in Figure 4.

We observe very similar grade distribution for both pro- grams, despite a small advantage for CISCO students for grades 7 with 6, and 10 with 9, correspondingly. This led to slightly better average grade of 7.69 for CISCO students, compared to very similar 7.64 for regular students.

2014 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON)  Page 504    Fig. 4. The grade distribution of CISCO and regular students  Fig. 5. The average grade distribution through years  D. The average grade  Another view of grade distribution, that is, the average grades for each year, is depicted in Figure 5. The results of the evaluation show that CISCO students achieved slightly better grades than regular students, especially in the prior years when their number was greater.

We can conclude that although the CISCO students are allowed to achieve 10 more points, the average grade distri- bution of all years is very similar for both student groups, which proves our curriculum. Several arguments also confirm this conlcusion. The CISCO students actually have more topics to cover, an extra exam than regular students. They are more motivated due to practical challenges and also they are enforced to learn more since they spend money and do not want just to pass the course, but gain more knowledge through practical exercises.



VI. DISCUSSION  Tanenbaum [18] and Stallings [19] propose a bottom-up ap- proach for teaching and learning about the computer networks.

These books are also proposed to our students, even more, because they are officially translated to the student?s native language. The other approach is the top-down approach, which is proposed by Kurose [20]. The teachers usually choose the approach they prefer.

In this paper we presented the integration of these two oppo- site approaches simultaneously. That is, CISCO?s CCNA 1 and 2 approach is top-down, and it was a very hard to integrate with the theoretical bottom-up approach. The results of the course with the new curriculum, as well as with the regular one during several years confirm our success. Implementation of two CISCO CCNA courses improved the course?s average throughput of CISCO students spectacularly, that is, average 91.09% CISCO students passed the course, compared to minor 37.84% of the regular students. The CISCO students are more motivated because they work with practical equipment, they face real problems, and finally, they can continue with CCNA 3 and CCNA4, extend their knowledge, achieve a final certificate and find a job more easily.

The similar grade distribution and the average grade through several years is expected since 200 points (two thirds) of the points are still from the theoretical part of the course, which is obligatory for both approaches for the Computer Networks curricula.



VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  Computer science students usually avoid to learn the non- software courses, such as the Computer Networks and Data Communications, although most of the applications in today?s broadband world are distributed and acquire the services by the lower network protocols.

This paper proposes a new computer network curriculum by introducing CISCO CCNA 1 and CCNA 2 courses into the course. This change allows the students to choose if they would like to follow the course according to more practical exercises and tutorials, instead of the regular, which are more theoretical. The course evaluation in the period of several years show that these changes improved the course throughput without making the course easier, that is, the grade distribution of passed students is slightly better for CISCO students. The analysis also show that although the Computer Networks course is one of the core courses, it should be offered in the upper study years, after the students have learned more details about Internet, well known application protocols and distributed systems.

We have concluded the following: students obtain better results by learning more practical oriented courses, and mov- ing the computer network class in the second study year instead of the third year of study gives worse results. When the course is moved to the first or second study year, less students understand the importance of practical approach, and recognize it as opportunity to get in touch with engineering  2014 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON)  Page 505    skills needed in IT related jobs concerning administration of computer networks.

Our focus will be to analyze the success of the integration of CISCO CCNA3 and CCNA4 in the other computer network course, that is, in the Computer Network Design course, which are even more complex CISCO courses.

