A Prediction-Based Fault-Tolerant Aggregation Algorithm in Wireless Sensor  Networks

Abstract?Data aggregation is a key technology in wireless sensor networks (WSNs), enabling WSNs to be widely used in many fields such as environment monitoring. It can not only reduce redundant data transmission during data gathering, but also effectively improve data accuracy. However, poor anti- interference ability, limited energy and other reasons existed in sensor nodes make data error-prone, thus affecting quality of the aggregation results. In this paper we propose a prediction-based fault-tolerant aggregation algorithm, which is implemented on a constructed aggregation tree. Using temporal-spatial correlation between data, the algorithm can distinguish different data types.

And then we make a specific analysis of faulty data that may occur during data gathering and pointedly put forward different fault-tolerant solutions using the PSO-BPNN-based prediction model. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm can effectively predict data and exclude the impact of faulty data, ensuring real-time and fault-tolerant requirements.

Keywords?temporal-spatial correlation; data aggregation; prediction; wireless sensor networks; fault-tolerant

I.  INTRODUCTION A wireless sensor network (WSN) is a data-centric, self-  organizing network which can be deployed quickly. It consists of a large number of sensor nodes, which are low-power and have a short-distance communication capability. Each sensor periodically senses data and consumes most of energy to transmit and receive data. As a key technology in WSNs, data aggregation is a process dealing with several data to obtain what data are more suitable for user needs, and it can not only reduce redundant data transmission, but also effectively improve data accuracy [1, 2]. However, due to unreliability and instability of wireless link between nodes and a variety of faults including hardware errors, energy depletion and exception errors, nodes may become failure-prone, thereby reducing aggregation results accuracy. As an important indicator to evaluate network reliability, fault tolerance refers to the system?s ability to provide correct results when networks fail. It is a prerequisite to guarantee that networks can keep normal operation, critical to the validity of aggregation.

Therefore, it is significant to explore how to increase fault tolerance of WSNs.

The authors in [5] proposed DFDBW based on the weighted average method, DFDBW sets a credibility for each sensor node and synthetically judge whether a node has failed according to the average product of the measured value and credibility. Based on the weighted median method, authors in [6] proposed a fault-diagnosis strategy called WMFDS, which  measures the gap between measured data to detect faults. It can be also applied to binary decisions and real measured values.

Above algorithms both provide high detection accuracy and lower misjudgment rate, but lack specific strategies for fault recovery.

Taking advantage of temporal-spatial correlation between measured values, literature [7] effectively excludes faulty data and uses the median measured values of neighbor nodes to estimate measured value of target, improving accuracy of target detection and location. Literature [8] sets a weighted factor for each sensor and uses the weighted average method to aggregate data. When a node fails or submits faulty data, this algorithm can adaptively reduce this node?s weight, thereby reducing the impact of faulty data on aggregation results to improve fault tolerance. But when failure rate stays high, above methods can not guarantee aggregation accuracy.

Based on the Dempster-Shafer (DS) theory, authors in [9] proposed a fault-tolerant interval fusion method. It can not only ensure smaller interval estimation, but also meet local Lipschitz condition in certain circumstances, making fused results satisfy the stability requirement. Based on temporal-spatial fusion structure, literature [10] proposed a fault detection and recovery strategy. It detects faults in the fusion center, and then feeds the result back to local sensors by DS theory, effectively improving target classification accuracy. But the DS theory usually requires a large amount of computation, which is challenging for real-time demands.

The fault-tolerant aggregation algorithm proposed in this paper includes construction of an aggregation tree, an anomaly detection mechanism and a fault-tolerant mechanism.

Construction of a distributed aggregation tree is the basis of the algorithm, and then each node on the tree receives data from child nodes and sends them to its parent node after aggregation with its own data [11]. During the process, temporal-spatial correlation is used to synthetically judge the validity and integrity of data, to effectively eliminate all kinds of possible faults. After that, to satisfy the real-time requirement of WSNs, we use the PSO-BPNN-based prediction model proposed in [12] to predict data for fault tolerance.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In section II, the network model and environmental assumptions are described in details, and then we present our prediction-based fault-tolerant aggregation algorithm in section III. In section IV, we compare our algorithm with other two algorithms and evaluate the performance of them. Finally, concluding remarks are made in section V.

DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.28    DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.28

II. NETWORK MODEL AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSUMPTIONS  In this paper, we consider a wireless sensor network composed of N nodes, whose communication range is r, uniformly and randomly distributed in an R?R monitored region, shown in figure 1. If the distance between node u and v satisfies dis(u, v)?r, then they can communicate with each other directly; otherwise, they have to communicate with each other through multi-hop wireless links. A WSN can be modeled as an undirected graph G(Vertex, Edge), where Vertex is a finite set of sensor nodes, and Edge is defined as wireless links between nodes.

Figure 1. Network Model & Aggregation Tree  Definition 1 Temporal-Spatial Correlation: Due to continuity in time of physical environment, single-node sampled data in the adjacent interval have a high correlation. In addition, due to high density of network topology, sampled data of neighbor sensors also have a high correlation [13, 14].

Definition 2 Permanent Failure: A fault is called Permanent Failure if a sensor node doesn?t work properly because of equipment damage or energy depletion. This type of faulty data is easily considered as events, thus affecting the query results.

Definition 3 Temporary Failure: A fault is called Temporary Failure if a sensor node becomes low sensitivity because of outside interference. The frequency of occurrence of this type of faulty data is low and it can be easily ruled out.

The proposed algorithm in this paper is based on the following three environmental assumptions: (1) Each sensor node in WSNs can both sense data and aggregate data. (2) Events are spatially correlated while faults are not spatially correlated. (3) The aggregation algorithm always aggregates multiple copies of data into one copy and amount of each copy is equal.

Table 1 defines the symbols used in this paper.

TABLE I. Symbols Definition  Symbol Definition N Number of sensor nodes r Communication range  ?(i, t) Data of node i at time t PNi Parent node of i on the aggregation tree  ? Threshold for event detection in the group ? The amplitude of normal data ? Threshold for permanent failure judgment ? Probability to generate abnormal data

III. A PREDICTION-BASED FAULT-TOLERANT AGGREGATION ALGORITHM  A. Construction of an Aggregation Tree The construction of a distributed aggregation tree aims to  reduce redundant data transmission, but the optimal solution is equivalent to solve the problem of Steiner minimum tree which is NP-complete. To facilitate discussion, here we will only take energy consumed for data communication into account and use the weighted average method to aggregate data. The energy models for transmitting data and receiving data can be respectively represented by formula (1) and formula (2):  ? ? ? ? ? ?2,T uvE u v d u? ? ?? ? 	 	              (1) ? ?,RE u v u? ?? 	 ? ?                       (2)  where ? and ? are constants. duv is the distance between node u and v. 	(u) is the data amount transmitted from node u to node v. So the energy consumption of each wireless link can be given by:  ? ? ? ? ? ?22 *uv uvE e d u? ? ?? ? 	             (3) From assumption (1), we can know that the construction of  an aggregation tree is to find a connected subgraph  of G, such that  'G  ? ? '  '  min G  G G  e Edge  Vertex Vertex E e     ???  ??  ?                     (4)  From assumption (3), we can know . Thus the problem (4) can be simplified to construct a minimum spanning tree, and the Prim algorithm will be adopted to solve it.

? ? 2uv uvE e d?  B. Anomaly Detection Mechanism In WSNs, nodal data include normal data and abnormal  data, and abnormal data also include events and faults. It is fatal for WSNs to make the right decisions how to effectively distinguish different data types.

Because sensed data and aggregated data share with the same detection mechanism, we will just discuss how to distinguish different sensed data types. According to the temporal correlation in Definition 1, the detection mechanism will use single-node historical data to determine whether data are abnormal. In general, within the range [Cmin, Cmax], ?(i, t) is statistically continuous and admits a normal distribution (i), where Cmin and Cmax can be obtained from the known environmental parameters [15]. So the expected value of sensed data can be represented as:  ? ? ? ? ?max min  (i) , , C  C E i t i d? ? ?? ?? ?i t              (5)     Thus, if |?(i, t) - E(i)|??, then ?(i, t) is normal; otherwise, it is abnormal, as shown in figure 2 (a).

Definition 4 group: If node p is a one-hop neighbor node of i and p is not the parent node of i, p is called as a cooperative node of i. So the cooperative group of node i can be represented as ? ? ? ?? ?| , ,igroup p dis i p r p i PN? ? ? ? i .

Figure 2. Data sequence collected by nodes  Since single-node data can not accurately detect an event, we will further consider spatial correlation. When node i has detected abnormal data, i will further joint members in groupi to collaboratively sense, as shown in the dashed box in figure 1. The more nodes in groupi detect abnormal data, the greater the probability that abnormal data is an event is. Here we assume that if the proportion of nodes in groupi which have detected abnormal data is greater than ?, abnormal data are judged to be an event and immediately transmitted to the base station; otherwise, abnormal data are faulty data.

In order to better distinguish Permanent Failure and Temporary Failure, a counter counti is introduced to record times that node i has detected faulty data to determine failure types, and the process is described in algorithm 1. Temporary Failure and Permanent Failure are shown in figure 2(b) and figure 2(c).

Algorithm 1. The algorithm to distinguish Permanent Failure and Temporary Failure  C.  Fault-Tolerant Mechanism Let each sensor node in figure 1 run the anomaly detection  mechanism. When node i communicates with PNi, if i takes no notice of faulty data detected, its own data and data transmitted from nodes on the sub-trees will completely lose. Since traditional methods, such as reconstructing an aggregation tree, discarding faulty data, data retransmission, adjusting weighting factors and so on, can not completely meet fault-tolerant requirements for different faulty data types in consideration of real-time and data validity, here we will combine them with the PSO-BPNN-based prediction model in [12] to build a fault- tolerant mechanism.

Figure 3. Schematics of PSO-BPNN algorithm   Begin  Predict data by PSO-BPNN  Collect data  Acceptable error?

Update PSO-BPNN prediction model  Transfer PSO-BPNN prediction model  Transfer actual value  End  N  Begin  Predict data by PSO-BPNN  Wait for the next sampling  period  Data returned?

Update PSO- BPNN  prediction model  Return actual value  End  N Y  Return predicted value    1.  while( ReadData(?(i, t)) ) 2.    if(?(i, t) is faulty data) 3.       counti plus 1; 4.    else if(counti is greater than 0) 5.       counti substract 1; 6.    end 7.    if(counti is greater than ?) 8.       ?(i, t) is Permanent Failure; 9.       Send(?PERMANENT?); 10.  else 11.     ?(i, t) is Temporary Failure; 12.     Send(?TEMPORARY?); 13.  end 14.end Figure 4. Working p i and PNi rocess of node     The feed forward back propagation neural network (BPNN) is widely used to extract useful information for samples. But its blindness of weights initialization easily results in slow convergence speed and stack into local infinitesimal value. The authors in [12] adopt particle swarm optimization (PSO) to optimize initial weights and threshold of BPNN to construct an energy-efficient prediction model, called PSO-BPNN, whose structure is shown in figure 3. The PSO-BPNN combines the fast constringency performance of BPNN with the global searching merit of PSO, aiming to finding out potential laws according to historical data to afterwards predict the test set.

The PSO-BPNN-based prediction model is run at both node i and node PNi, as shown in figure 4. Only when the deviation between the actual and the predicted value at the node exceeds a certain threshold, the sampling value and new model parameters of node i are sent to PNi.

As shown in figure 5, in this paper we consider fault tolerance for both sensed data and aggregated data and each node runs two mechanisms.

Figure 5. Mechanisms for sensed data and aggregated data  The fault-tolerant mechanisms will perform if there exists  se, making the original dat  ived data from node i or received data are faulty.

Thi  tion algorithms or data han  e proposed algorithm is shown in  any of the following three conditions.

(1) Sensed data of node i are faulty. This is mostly due to the impact of physical factors or noi  a deviate from the normal range, and we adopt the prediction model for sensed data to predict data to reduce energy consumption. Moreover if the fault is Permanent Failure, node i still need to send a ?PERMANENT? signal to node PNi.

(2) Before a single data gathering deadline, node PNi hasn?t rece  s is mostly the results of node failure or a variety of outside factors during transmission, making data packets fail to reach the destination or lose during transmission. Instead of data retransmission in consideration of energy consumption and delay, node PNi predicts data of node i by the prediction model for aggregated data of node i and lets counti plus one.

Node i becomes permanent failure if node PNi receives a ?PERMANENT? signal or counti ?, and node PNi informs the base station to reconstruct the distributed aggregation tree after completion of this data gathering.

(3) Data after aggregation are faulty. This is mostly the results of adoption of improper aggrega  dling mechanisms, making data after aggregation deviate from actual value. Here the prediction model for aggregated data is used to predict data, while failure is reported to the base station for examining aggregation algorithms and data handling mechanisms.

D. Algorithm Overview The flow chart of th  figure 6.

Figure 6. Flow chart of our algorithm

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS In th m in Matlab.

is section, we simulate our algorith  e un for ran  Sensor nodes ar i mly and domly deployed in a 100?100 squared monitored area, and both average number of event detection and fault tolerance are adopted for analysis and comparison with our algorithm. In addition, temperature, which is randomly generated to admit a normal distribution  (i), is selected to assess effectiveness of the algorithm. Where Cmin, Cmax, E(i) and ? are respectively set to 30 , 35 , 32.5 and 2.5 .

10 15 20 25 30 35         communication range(m)  av er  ag e  nu m  be r o  f e ve  nt d  et ec  tio n     node 300 node 400 node 500 node 600   Figure 7. Relationship among communication range, number of nodes and  average number of event detection  Experiment 1. hip among com  Here we discuss the relations munication range, number of nodes and average number  of event detection, where ? is set to 0.3 and ? is set to 0.2. As shown in figure 7, when number of nodes fix, with increasing of communication range, the number of members in each node?s collaborative group also increases. Similarly, when the communication range fix, the increase of number of nodes leads to the increase of node density, resulting in increasing of number of members in each node?s collaborative group. Both of above situations will result in increasing of the probability, that abnormal data are judged to be an event.

0 20 40 60 80 100                               27 28    Figure 8. Aggregation tree constructed by our algorithm  t 2. Here we analyze fault tolerance of our algorithm where N is set to 30 and r is set to 15, and compare our algorithm with the adaptive weighted average method in [8] and the algorithm in [7]. Figure 8 shows the distributed aggregation tree constructed by our algorithm, while node-11, node-18 and node-22 are selected for discussion. In order to obtain better visualization of the sensor reading, figure 9 gives the polynomial interpolation (curve fitting) of the raw sensor readings. At the time, node-18 is selected to be the faulty node generating faulty data.

Experimen  0 5 10 15 20 25 30 29.5   30.5   31.5    32.5  ea di  Samples  Te m  pe ra  tu re  R ng  sensor-11 sensor-22 sensor-18 sensor-18(fault) Aggregation(actual) Aggregation(fault) Aggregation(proposed)   Figure 9. Comparison of aggregation operations under faulty conditions  after curve fitting  0 5 10 15 20 25 30 31.4  31.6  31.8   32.2  32.4  32.6  32.8   Samples  Te m  pe ra  tu re  R ea  di ng  Aggregation(actual)Aggregation(proposed) AdaptiveWeightedAverage Ding et.al Ding et.al with fault neighbors   Figure 10. Co  and other two  Figure 10 shows that the adaptive weighted average method can indeed effectively reduce weights of faulty nodes to improve data accuracy. However, since the weight adjustment is a cumulative process, it can not guarantee the validity of data at the prophase of adjustment process, and it is clearly inappropriate for Temporary Failure. In contrast, the algorithm in [7] uses the median measured values of the neighbor nodes of node-18 (node-9, node-22 and node-25) as the measured value of node-18, which can indeed eliminate  mparison between our algorithm     the impact of faulty data to some extent. However, if node-9 and node-25 both generate faulty data meanwhile, node-18 will adopt faulty data of neighbor nodes as its own estimated value, as shown in figure 10. While our fault-tolerant algorithm, which uses historical data to predict data, can effectively improve above disadvantages, excluding the impact of faulty data and satisfying real-time requirement. As shown in figure 10, predicted values approach actual values, enhancing fault tolerance of network.



V. CONCLUSION This paper presents a prediction-based fault-to  aggregation algorithm which includes construction of a distributed aggregation tree, an anomaly detection mechanism and a fault-tolerant mechanism. The algorithm owns high time, high fault-tolerance and so on. Experimental resul show that the proposed algorithm can effectively predict dat  rth explore ways to improve fault tolerance while redu net  gregation in Vehicular-Adhoc Networks: A Survey,? Procedia Technology, vol. 6, pp. 922-929, 201  [2] W.Z. Guo,  Chen and H.J. Cheng, ?Multi-source Te  in Wireless Sensor  eous sensor networks,? Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol. 69, no. 2,  210-219, Feb. 2009.

[5] B. Krishnamachari and S uted Bayesian algorithms for fault-tolerant event region detecti n in wireless sensor networks,? IEEE  013.

lerant Fault Detection for Wireless Sensor Networks,? Journal of Software, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1208-1217, Jun. 2007.

[7] M. Ding, D.C. Chen, A. Thaeler and X.Z. Cheng, ?Fault-tolerant target  detection in sensor networks,? in Proceedings of IEEE WCNC, vol. 4, pp.

real-  ts a  er  2362-2368, Mar. 2005.

[8] P. Sridhar, A.M. Madni and M. Jamshidi, ?Hierarchical Aggregation and  Intelligent Monitoring and Control in Fault-Tolerant Wireless Sensor Networks,? IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 38-53, Sep. 2007.

