Study of a Virtual Machine Migration Method

Abstract?With the rapid development of cloud computing, physical resources of the cloud data centres have been increasing and how to improve the utilization of server resources is an important research direction. The virtual machine migration method proposed in this paper achieves the reallocation of server hardware resources by migrating the virtual machines between servers in order to realize the resource scheduling and improve the resource utilization. The proposed method solves the problems that how to determine the trigger condition of virtual machine migration, select the target virtual machine and choose the destination node. The experimental results show that the proposed method can improve the utilization of server resources under the cloud computing environment effectively.

Cloud computing; resource scheduling; virtual machine migration; resource utilization

I.  INTRODUCTION As the cloud computing develops rapidly, a majority of  service providers focus on the construction of data centres, as a result of which the scale of data centres has been increasing and the energy consumption has been also constantly rising.

Despite numerous techniques present many solutions to lower the energy consumption of the data centre, but the consumption is still growing. In order to utilize the hardware resources of data centre more efficiently, many scholars study the resource scheduling issues of data centre deeply to lower the energy consumption of server clusters and then improve the energy efficiency of server clusters.

There are two types of resource scheduling algorithms which regard lowering the energy consumption of data centre as goal. The first type achieves the purpose of energy conservation by adjusting the CPU frequency dynamically [1]. Reference [2] presented a scheduling mechanism that lowers the processor speed to reduce energy consumption, proposed the corresponding formula of energy consumption and then drew the conclusion that lowering processor speed can lower energy consumption effectively. And the second type achieves the energy saving by shutting down idle server resources. Reference [3] presented a green cloud computing architecture, an energy-aware virtual machine optimization method and a selection algorithm for the study of energy consumption issue in data centre.

In order to improve the resource utilization, current scheduling algorithms use the strategy that allocates and optimizes physical resources dynamically for virtual resources [4]. French Jean Marc Menaud and Hien Nguyen  Van presented a virtual resource dynamic scheduling algorithm for cloud computing [5], and the algorithm gave a solution for choosing the virtual machine and determining the destination server [6]. The resource scheduling method proposed in this thesis achieves the reallocation of server hardware resources by adopting the migration of virtual machines between servers, and then achieves the purpose of resource scheduling. It determines the trigger condition of virtual machine migration in the process of resource scheduling and selects the targets involved in the process of virtual machine migration. The proposed method improves the utilization of running servers combined with the shutdown policy for idle servers, reduces the number of running servers to lower energy consumption and improve the energy efficiency of server clusters.



II. DEFINITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES Reference [7] presented SLA (Service-Level Agreement)  which is a contract between network service providers and customers to evaluate the quality of cloud services. In this paper, two SLA fulfilment level strategies based on sequential SLA strategy are defined in order to meet different demand, which are general strategy and strict strategy respectively.

Define 2.1 SLA fulfilment level of general strategy lg  is defined as following  ( ) ( )  1 exp lg exp1 m ax 0,1 exp  exp  ? ? ? ? ? ?? ?? ? ? ? ? ?? ??  <  = ? ? ? ?  T Treal T Treal T TrealT  (1)  Define 2.2 SLA fulfilment level of strict strategy ls  is defined as following  ( ) ( )  1 T Texprealls 0 T Texpreal  ? ? ? ? ?  < =  ? (2)  Remark 2.1 The value of lg  and ls  is between 0 and 1, and the higher the value is, the higher the capacity that a server complete tasks is. realT  is the real time length that a server spend in executing a specific task, and expT  is the expected time length to execute the same task.

Define 2.3 given a server r and SLA levels of a task set ( )1 2 3 nL l , l , l ,..., l= , SLA overall level rL  is defined as  following   DOI 10.1109/CBD.2013.33     ( )ir n li 1L n 1 n  == ?                         (3)  Remark 2.2 The value of rL  is between 0 and 1, and the higher the value of rL  is, the higher the current computing capacity of server r is.



III. VIRTUAL MACHINE MIGRATION METHOD The virtual machine migration method includes the  trigger policy for virtual machine migration, the selection method for target virtual machine and the selection method for destination node [8]. The trigger policy for virtual machine migration points out the type of the migration tasks, which include upper migration task and lower migration task.

The selection method for target virtual machine is used to determine the virtual machines which need to be migrated.

The selection method for destination node is utilized to determine the destination servers which the target virtual machines are migrated to.

A. Trigger Policy for Virtual Machine Migration The quality requirements of cloud platform users for  service are relatively high, so the service quality is the principal consideration of dynamic scheduling algorithms. In order to minimize the overall impact on clusters, the switch timing of different servers needs to be considered. According to the analysis of migration steps, principal scheduling steps can be divided into two types. The first type is the determination of migration timing, and the second type is the selection of migrated objects, which involves the selection of migrated virtual machines and destination physical server.

A factor that directly determines the migration timing is the setting of migration condition, which checks each test item of each running node including CPU utilization and memory utilization after the status information collection of all running nodes in resource pool is completed. The proposed trigger policy checks each item whether the migration conditions are satisfied, and the migration conditions involve two restrictions which are upper trigger condition and lower trigger condition respectively. Before migration tasks are triggered, CPU utilization?s SLA overall level upper and lower trigger threshold and memory?s upper trigger threshold need be determined. If the CPU utilization is higher than the upper trigger threshold, upper migration tasks are triggered, and if the CPU utilization is lower than the lower trigger threshold, lower migration tasks are triggered. The principal role of upper trigger condition is to reduce the load of high-load running nodes and ensure that the computing capacity of each virtual machine in these nodes can meet users? needs. Then policy selects appropriate virtual machines from running nodes meeting upper trigger condition and migrates them to other running nodes to ensure the computing capacity of the remaining virtual machines.

With regard to energy conservation, lower trigger condition is used to migrate all virtual machines of low-load running nodes to other running nodes and transforms these running nodes into idle nodes. Policy shuts idle nodes down and marks them as candidate nodes to reduce the number of running nodes, which directly lowers overall energy  consumption of data centre and improves resource utilization of the remaining running nodes.

The sensitivity of upper trigger condition is different from that of lower trigger condition. In terms of upper migration tasks, if physical resources cannot meet the needs of all the virtual machine instances, the performance of the virtual machines will be seriously affected and user experience will be drastically reduced. In terms of lower trigger condition, if the resource pool is not processed timely, merely some resources will be idle and energy will be wasted to a certain extent. So the upper trigger condition has priority to the lower trigger condition in the determination of trigger condition and the scheduling process.

Policy traverses each running node, performs scheduled testing tasks and collects CPU utilization, memory utilization simultaneously. And then upper trigger and lower trigger condition are judged successively. Upper migration tasks directly affect the performance of the running nodes, while lower migration tasks have no effect on the performance, which have a lower priority compared with upper trigger tasks. Having completed migration tasks, policy clears the counters of corresponding running nodes in order to avoid re-triggering migration.

Since resource utilization of cloud platforms is variable, time series and the relationship between target trends and time can be used effectively to forecast the time points when physical servers meet the upper and lower trigger conditions, and then virtual machine migration tasks can be triggered.

B. Selection Method for Target Virtual Machine The selection of target virtual machine focuses on the  migration tasks triggered by upper trigger condition. In the migration tasks triggered by lower trigger condition, all the virtual machine instances in running nodes need to be migrated, so we don?t need to select target virtual machine.

In determining the target virtual machine, the principal issue to be considered is the time cost required for migrating virtual machines. In the online migration process of virtual machine, what needs to be done includes the copy, migration, recovery and run of virtual machines. Therefore it?s quite obvious that migration costs mainly concentrates in the size of the CPU and memory utilized by virtual machine instances.

Since it?s impossible to evaluate how much computing capacity each virtual machine instance occupies actually, it?s difficult to define precisely how many virtual machine instances need to be migrated to make the SLA overall level of CPU satisfy the highest requirement of the remaining virtual machines. The flowchart of target virtual machine determination is shown in Figure 1.

In the target virtual machine set?s determination of upper migration tasks, CPU utilization and memory utilization need to be taken into account. Having completed the migration, if the SLA overall level of CPU is still inadequate, the next migration task will be triggered.

Figure 1.  Flowchart of Target Virtual Machine Determination.

C. Selection Method for Destination Node In the selection process of destination node, the principal  issue to be considered includes the selection of destination node set, the avoidance of cluster effect, and the setting of switch threshold.

The selection method for destination node mainly solves the problem that how to determine the destination set D in the running node set, of which each node is able to accommodate the target virtual machine. The remaining CPU and memory utilization of the running nodes that can accommodate the target virtual machine is higher than the needs of target virtual machine, and the utilization of the existing virtual machine is lower than the threshold of migration trigger. In order to solve the problem of chain migration, the running nodes with the higher unoccupied CPU utilization will be selected from destination set D as the destination node preferentially.

However, if the running node with the maximum unoccupied CPU utilization is selected, clustering effect may be caused. In order to avoid clustering effect, this method considers the specific remaining resources of each running node and adopts a random approach to determine destination node. Initially test tasks are performed on each running node to gain the maximum SLA overall level l max . We suppose that the set of the destination nodes which satisfy the condition is 1 2 3 nD (d ,d ,d ,...,d )=  and the current SLA overall level and the maximum SLA overall level of running node id  is il  and il max  respectively, the idle coefficient of running node id  is defined as following  ( ) i i  i n j jj 1  lmax l I  l max l =  ? =  ? (4)   Figure 2.  Schematic diagram of the destination node determination.

It?s apparent that the more the remaining resource of a running node is, the higher the idle coefficient is. According to the proportion that the idle coefficient of a running node in the destination set occupies, a section between 0 and 1 which is proportional to the proportion is determined, and the sections of all the destination nodes are consecutive and fill the interval between 0 and 1. The schematic diagram of the destination node determination is shown in Figure 2.

Each section representing a destination node distributes between 0 and 1, and the length determines the probability that the section is selected. The length of a specific section is calculated as following  ( ) ii n jj 1  Ilen d I  =  =   (5)  Having determined the consecutive section distribution, a random tag between 0 and 1 is used to generate a random number between 0 and 1, and then the destination node is determined according to the section that this random number belongs to. The proposed method introduces random factors to the control of virtual machine distribution in the destination node determination. These random factors consider the idle status of specific resources sufficiently, and take into account the avoidance of the clustering effect and the balance of the overall load distribution.

Eventually the setting of switch threshold needs to be taken into account. The server?s switch timing depends on the proportion that high-load servers occupy in all running nodes. The high-load servers are the running nodes whose monitor factor?s value is higher than the threshold. When the proportion of the high-load nodes exceeds max? , new running nodes need to be turned on as supplementary resources. When the proportion of the high-load nodes is lower than min? , idle nodes need to be shut down and marked as candidate nodes to save energy. The setting of these two thresholds directly affects the overall performance of the cluster and the average SLA overall level is also related to max?  and min? . The influence of these two thresholds on SLA is shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3.  Diagram of Two Threshold Values? Influence on SLA.

Figure 4.  Diagram of Two Threshold Values? Influence on Energy  Consumption.

In addition, the average SLA overall levels of all running nodes increase along with the decline of max?  and min? . The influence of these two thresholds on Energy Consumption is shown in Figure 4.

The lower the value of max?  and min?  is, the lower the overall energy consumption is, which is opposite to the influence on SLA. As can be seen from the above discussion, excessive threshold setting can reduce the overall energy consumption of data centre, but the computing capacity may also be lowered, the specific needs of the virtual machine may be dissatisfied and the ability to deal with sudden load increase may be lowered. On the contrary, low threshold setting can ensure a sufficient number of running nodes and adequate overall computing capacity, but the situation of idle resources may be quite serious and the overall energy consumption may be quite high.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS The scheduling for CPU utilization is the core issues of  the proposed resource scheduling method, and the issues to be considered include the distribution of all loads and the resource utilization of all running nodes in the data centre. In order to verify these issues, relevant indicators of the proposed resource scheduling method will be compared with those of non-dynamic scheduling algorithms.

Prior to running the proposed method, some unknown parameters concerning CPU work quality need to be set. In the experiment, the SLA overall level threshold of CPU is ?=0.97, the interval of prediction and data collection is 50 second, and the lower migration trigger thresholds of CPU utilization and memory utilization are both 20%, and the upper migration trigger thresholds of memory utilization is 80%. The CPU utilization of dynamic scheduling method is shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5.  CPU Utilization Graph of Dynamic Scheduling Method.

Figure 6.  CPU Utilization Graph of Non-dynamic Scheduling Method.

As can be seen from the graph, the server?s SLA overall level is almost opposite to its CPU utilization, which means that the SLA overall level will be low when the utilization of CPU is quite high. In the experimental preliminary phase, the CPU utilization of some servers such as server 1 and server 5 is very high, and then the trigger of upper migration tasks makes the CPU utilization of other servers such as server 2 and server 4 rise. In the middle and late phase, the load of each server continues to decrease and the servers which satisfy the lower migration condition trigger lower migration tasks. Most of virtual machines are migrated to server 2 and server 3 and the consumption of the idle servers declines to 0, which means that the idle servers are shut down.

In the next stage, the same load is run on the data centre using non-dynamic scheduling method, and the CPU utilization is shown in Figure 6.

Apparent from the Figure 6, if the data centre adopts non- dynamic scheduling method, load aggregation exists in the experimental preliminary phase. The load of some servers is quite high while that of others hovers at 60%, and some of the low-load servers complete their tasks and are shut down.

In the late phase, most of the remaining servers are in a low- load state.



V. SUMMARY In this paper, the proposed virtual machine scheduling  method can realize the dynamic scheduling of virtual machine resources by judging the migration trigger conditions of virtual machines, selecting target virtual machines and choosing destination nodes. The experimental results show that the proposed dynamic scheduling method can improve the resource utilization effectively compared with the non-dynamic scheduling method. However, how to set rational trigger thresholds and how the other secondary factors except CPU utilization impact servers? energy consumption deserve further research.

