Collaborative Engineering in Competitive Environments:

Abstract-The Precision Tracking Space System (PTSS) was to  be a multiple-spacecraft constellation to enable post-boost  intercept of ballistic missiles and increase missile raid handling  capacity of the Ballistic Missile Defense System. The PTSS  requirements, operational concept, and system baseline  development were conducted by a Laboratory team lead by  The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab (APL) as  mission integrator for the Missile Defense Agency (MDA). The  PTSS development strategy envisioned a team of Laboratories  [the Development Team (DT)] producing the first two  spacecraft (Development Articles) and Industry subsequently  producing the remaining spacecraft (Production Articles) to  complete and maintain the required constellation. The  transition between DT and industry was a risk identified at  project outset. To help mitigate, a team of six industry  representatives was formed to support the DT, focusing on  manufacturing and production efficiency. This team was the  PTSS Manufacturing and Production Readiness Integrated  Systems Engineering Team (ISET). The ISET concept is  derived from more than six decades of APL experience in  transitioning prototype systems to operation. Prior to PTSS,  this approach was most recently executed as a method to  develop standards for Operationally Responsive Space  satellites.

The PTSS ISET was a technical working group providing  support and analysis in system engineering, manufacturing,  and technology issues. A core ISET tenet was a strong focus on  technical products supporting overall system development,  realized through detailed, joint effort to answer specific  questions, assess and mitigate risks, and inform the DT and  Government in acquisition, production, and operational  matters. As such, the ISET operated without proprietary  barriers, forgoing non-disclosure agreements and working in  an open environment. The ISET included representatives  from the Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corporation, Boeing Company, Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company,  Northrop Grumman Corporation Aerospace Systems, Orbital  Sciences Corporation, and Raytheon Company Space and  Airborne Systems, and an APL chairperson. This team was  formed to develop products that would inform and educate the  DT in facilitating the transition to industry. A challenge to this  open approach of engaging industry early in the conceptual  development of a system that the government planned to    acquire was that the industry representatives may be in  competition with each other for the Production Articles.

To encourage data sharing and communication, a task plan  was formulated emphasizing specific products of use to the DT.

The tasks and products covered a wide range of topics to  inform in areas of spacecraft (bus and payloads) design,  interfaces, assembly, integration, and testing. Programmatic  topics were also included to address acquisition process risks  and financial factors related to the production of multiple  spacecraft. 49 tasks were identified. Each task was led by a member of the ISET with contributions from the remaining  members. Tasks were distributed throughout the team to  ensure consistent knowledge capture from all involved  organizations. The ISET worked together for over two years.

As PTSS entered a phase of re-formulation and the ISET  ramped down, all stakeholders were asked to reflect on lessons  learned, capturing the positive and negative aspects for future  efforts.

