

Effects of Ionizing Radiation on TaOx-based Memristive Devices  Michael McLain Sandia National Labs  P.O. Box 5800, MS 1167, Albuquerque, NM, 87185  505-844-6825 mlmclai@sandia.gov  David Hughart Sandia National Labs  P.O. Box 5800, MS 1084, Albuquerque, NM, 87185  505-844-3153 dhughar@sandia.gov  Ahstract-This paper evaluates the effects of ionizing radiation on tantalum oxide (TaO,) memristors. The data obtained from 60Co gamma ray and 10 keY X-ray ionizing radiation experiments indicate that it is possible for the devices to switch  from a high resistance off-state to a low resistance on-state  after a total ionizing dose (TID) step stress threshold has been  surpassed. During irradiation, the devices were floating,  grounded, or biased with a 1 Hz square wave with an amplitude of ?100 mY. While floating the terminals is not a typical bias condition within a circuit, it is speculated that this  condition might be worst-case because of the lack of a  discharge path. If a read measurement is performed prior to  reaching the charge threshold, the devices 'reset' back to a  pre-irradiation state. This suggests that the devices do not have  a cumulative TID effect. However, it was observed that having  a continuous bias on the device during the TID exposure did  not always have the same effect. The TID threshold level at  which the devices switch resistance states varies from device to  device; the enhanced susceptibility observed in some devices is  still under investigation. After a radiation-induced resistance  change, all of the devices could be reset and still functioned  properly. When the devices were set into a low resistance on?  state prior to irradiation, there was not a significant variation in the resistance post-irradiation (i.e., the devices were still in  the on-state). Overall, the memristor TID performance is  promising and could potentially enable the discovery of a  radiation-hardened nonvolatile memory technology to be used in space and aerospace applications.

