

A Cognitive Hierarchical Framework for Evaluating Emergency Response Activities   Mark Rahmes, Rick Pemble, Kevin Fox, John Delay   Harris Corporation,  Government Communications Systems Melbourne, Florida 32904   ???????? We describe a system model for determining decision making strategies based upon the ability to perform data mining and pattern discovery utilizing open source information to prepare for specific events or situations from multiple information sources. Within this paper, we discuss the development of a method for determining actionable information. We have integrated open source information linking to human sentiment and manipulated other user selectable interlinking relative probabilities for events based upon current knowledge. Probabilistic predictions are critical in practice on many decision making applications because optimizing the user experience requires being able to compute the expected utilities of mutually exclusive pieces of content.

Hierarchy game theory for decision making is valuable where two or more agents seek their own goals, possibilities of conflicts, competition and cooperation. The quality of the knowledge extracted from the information available is restricted by complexity of the model. Hierarchy game theory framework enables complex modeling of data in probabilistic modeling. However, applicability to big data is complicated by the difficulties of inference in complex probabilistic models, and by computational constraints. We focus on applying probabilistic models to evaluating emergency response activities. We specifically evaluate adversarial competition to help decide and plan how much to give in our emergency response example to capture the position of highest donor nation using mixed probabilities from game theory. Our contribution in this paper is to combine linear programming, hierarchical game theory with uncertainty modeling as a tool in order to plan for activities based on open source intelligence.

Index Terms?Game Theory; Emergency Response; Decision Making; Operations Research

I. INTRODUCTION Game theory is the study of strategic decision making. It  is the study of mathematical models of conflict and cooperation between intelligent rational decision-makers and is often thought of as an interactive decision theory. It has been applied to economics, political science, psychology, logic, biology and other complex issues.

Modern game theory began with the idea regarding the existence of mixed-strategy equilibrium in two-person zero- sum games, applied to economics. Later this evolved to provide a theory of expected utility, which allowed mathematicians and economists to treat decision-making with uncertainty. The notion of probabilistic predictions utilizing game theory is critical in practice to many decision making applications because optimizing user experience requires being able to compute the expected utilities of mutually exclusive pieces of data.

Economic factors (e.g. unemployment rates, prices for food, such as bread, or fuel), Political factors (freedoms, type of government), Religious factors (type of religions, religious tensions) combined with trend information such as sentiment analysis on social media, open source data, news, etc. can provide indicators of areas undergoing stress or at risk.  An attempt to predict the likelihood of reaction to a future event will be based on correct situation analysis.

Efforts to combine the information required for these predictions are time consuming and labor intensive. The availability of open source social media information and implementation of artificial intelligence (AI) methodologies makes this problem tractable. Our GlobalSite system, shown in Fig 1, can be used as a method for decision making and reduce cost of analyses.

Fig1. System Overview   As an example, consider the recent case of Typhoon Haiyan, which devastated portions of the Philippines in early November 2013.  Weather data and hurricane/typhoon forecast models could be used to project the path of the storm, and anticipate areas that may be affected.  This could lead to enriching Foundation GEOINT content for the Philippines in anticipation of the event (landfall of Typhoon Haiyan), as well as collection of additional data after the event to detect changes, assess damage, and support Disaster Relief/Humanitarian Aid.

The recent typhoon in the Philippines has seen an exciting change in how crowdsourcing can assist in disaster    B3.1.pdf WOCC 2014      response. Rather than sit and wait for heads of organizations and governments to dictate what is needed on the ground, people are able to assist first responders in the very work of saving lives, both directly and indirectly. Through the use of powerful technology, people are able to track weather patterns that are more accurate than anything you will find on the evening news. Geography buffs are able to use satellite imaging technology to create maps and locate where people are stranded and in desperate need of food and water. There are even examples of people who have been able to locate others who were buried under debris.  This kind of response is much more aggressive to a disaster [6].

The Philippines has strategic importance to the U.S. as part of the strategy plans to counterbalance China?s rising military influence with strong American allies in the region.

The U.S. and the Philippines are in the middle of negotiating an increased American military presence in the country [5]. Thus it may be in the U.S. national interest to be known as the most responsive nation for diplomatic purposes. In this paper, we look at modeling the situation for purposes of decision making on how responsive to be, based on intelligence of other nations (or players) activities.



II. ANALYTIC HIERARCHY PROCESS The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is a multi-  criteria decision-making approach. The AHP has attracted the interest of many researchers mainly due to the nice mathematical properties of the method and the fact that the required input data are rather easy to obtain. The AHP is a decision support tool which can be used to solve complex decision problems. It uses a multi-level hierarchical structure of objectives, criteria, subcriteria, and alternatives.

The pertinent data are derived by using a set of pairwise comparisons. These comparisons are used to obtain the weights of importance of the decision criteria, and the relative performance measures of the alternatives in terms of each individual decision criterion. If the comparisons are not perfectly consistent, then it provides a mechanism for improving consistency [18].

Hierarchical game theory can be used to solve for the best strategy for decision making in complex problem solving. Hierarchical game theory can determine cooperating capacity between hierarchies and detect the best united strategy. This can provide a powerful method of resource allocation and asset planning in order to maximize a player?s response [8]. Figure 2 shows the hierarchical, game structure for our example. All of these hierarchies are part of the overall player?s capability to compete with other players. The four hierarchies are: sensors, measures of merit, organizations, and competing donor nations. In our example we input uncertainy amounts of levels of giving to emergency response and model the probability of a nation attaining the desired position of giving with respect to another player or nation. A feedback loop is used to model sequential time periods as resources are allocated [14].

This framework solves for controlling ability in groups and the hierarchical trait in command and control. Thus, to enhance independent decision-making in lower decision- makers and make decision-making between the upper and  the lower decision-makers not only have clear hierarchies, but also interact and optimize each other. Sequentially, perfect effects can be obtained with a hierarchy model. [8].

Fig 2. Model Process Flow   The organizations determine the missions. The missions  are to be carried out by the organizations. The sensors are used to carry out the missions. Our example consists of organizations, sensors, measures of merit, and players.

Figure 3 shows the elements of each hierarchy.

Fig. 3.  Hierarchies and Elements   The goal is to maximize the decision function. The  overall performance of the decision is based on several levels of hierarchical decisions. Our example starts with the decision to optimize measures of merit for emergency response compared with other players. Task assets based on mission and the responsible organization. Cooperation between organizations is modeled using multi-player Prisoner?s Dilemma in our solution [10]. The choice of sensor to use is based on availability. The measures of merit are based on real world data. Each level of hierarchy has an impact on the overall ability for a country or blue player to compete on a global basis. Cooperation is less likely to emerge in a large group than a small group. The iterated Prisoner?s Dilemma (PD) game has been used extensively in     B3.1.pdf WOCC 2014      the study of cooperative behaviors in social and biological systems. The N player PD game is realistic for modeling the cooperation strategies [21].

However, in the real world, individual rational actions are not always taken. In our example, responsible organizations are given incentives to cooperate so that their action can take a better action in the international game so that the blue player can best compete [19]. Results of an open competition are well explained by CH. In many games it boils down to predicting how deeply other agents in the game will be reasoning. An agent that does not reason enough risks being exploited by its opponents, while an agent that reasons too much may not be able to interact productively with its opponents [20].

We let the objective function be F = (F1, F2) where F1 could be the blue team and F2 could be the red team. We let x1 be the decision maker?s choice for blue and x2 for red.

We let h11 to h1m be the lower hierarchical decision maker?s response for blue. The objective function for blue?s lower decision makers is fij. We let S1 be the feasible sets for variable x1. S1 depends on x1 and h11 to hmj. The lower decision-maker can modify the upper decision maker's mind according to the actual status [8].

Fig. 4.  Hierarchical Structure   In our example, there are several resource management  stages or hierarchies as shown in Fig 4. These stages include information needs, collection objectives, observables, tasks and plans. The resource management process seeks to decompose information needed to satisfy mission objectives into one or more tasks. The essence of resource management is uncertainty management [9]. Resource allocation problems in which limited resources must be allocated among several activities are often solved by dynamic or linear programming.

Operations Research is a branch of mathematics that studies decision making to obtain the best decision. Game theory can help determine the optimal investment strategy [19].

Generally, players may not possess full information about their opponents. In particular, players may possess private information that others should take into account when forming expectations about how a player would  behave. To analyze these interesting situations, a class of games with incomplete information was created as use case scenarios (i.e., games where at least one player is uncertain about another player?s payoff function) which are the analogue of the normal form games with complete information similar to Bayesian games (static games of incomplete information) [17].

Game theory offers important insights and demonstrates superiority of cooperation over competition. Game theory models the heuristics people use in managing their conflicts and helps to explain why rational decisions often miss opportunities for mutual gain [13]. Imperfect information may still be useful to help make decisions. Opponent modeling works by observing the opponent?s actions and building a model by combining information from a pre- computed equilibrium strategy with the observations [2].



III. MEASURES OF MERIT Despite a slowdown in the global economy in the year  that the survey took place, the 2013 World Giving Index has recorded a return to growth for charitable giving across all the areas we observe ? helping a stranger, giving money, and volunteering time over the same period. In 2012, proportionally more Americans gave in some way than in any other country. The United States has therefore risen again to first place in the rankings. The key reason for this rise is that a higher proportion of Americans helped a stranger more than any other country in 2012 [7].

In philanthropy, strategic giving of time, talent, and treasure can increase impact. However, in disaster philanthropy, effective and efficient giving can make the difference between life and death. Remember that disaster situations evolve quickly, and specific in-kind needs can be unpredictable. Cash donations provide relief organizations with agility, and they are able to purchase what is needed as new requirements arise. Giving cash enables relief organizations to purchase supplies locally, stimulating the recently impacted economy and providing both cash flow and employment to those impacted by the disaster. There are no transportation costs, customs fees, delays, or logistical issues when cash is given, and relief workers are able to dedicate their time to coordinating vital emergency care instead of being distracted by sorting and storing piles of in-kind gifts. When goods are purchased locally, they are more likely to be familiar commodities to survivors, and they are fresh and arrive quickly without extraneous transportation and storage costs. The goods purchased are also guaranteed to be more culturally, nutritionally, and environmentally appropriate for specific communities [4].

Our solution populates a reward matrix from open source unstructured data, as shown in Fig 5, in near real time through powerful game theory analysis. Once data accuracy is proven through sensitivity analysis, the information can either be used as training data or populated into a reward matrix for resource allocation and adversarial planning utilizing game theory concepts such as in a competitive or cooperative game model.

B3.1.pdf WOCC 2014       Fig 5. World Giving Index Data   A spider chart is a graphical method of displaying  multivariate data as shown in Fig 6. Each of the values of time, treasure, and talent investment from data contained in the World Giving Index and is represented starting from the center of the 2D plot.

Fig 6. Spider Chart

IV. GAME THEORY ANALYSIS Our techniques enable a methodical approach to  intelligent planning and reaction based upon construction and analysis of a decision model resulting in a structure of the most probable solution. This technique is useful for a number of applications ranging from behavioral economics, war fighter planning, and analysis of information, messaging, and risk management. Our system supports an artificial intelligence (AI) supervised learning approach to quantify information based on user selectable attributes and deriving probabilistic decision outcomes.

The approach combines the following input: open  (unstructured) source, and/or direct user input/modification.

In particular, we capture and model ?sentiment? and other situational factors through the assignment of positive, neutral and negative values. A reward matrix is then populated using game theoretic concepts such as in a competitive game model. GlobalSite utilizes game theory which permits the ability to solve for iterative solutions, instantaneous visual feedback, and interactions by the user on demand. Our output enables a methodical approach to intelligent planning and reaction including interaction of variables, parameters and attributes by user resulting in updated probabilities.

In many situations, the opponents know the strategy that they are following. We assume that the players know what actions are available. A maximin equilibrium often is the strategy and is called the Nash theory application of zero or constant sum strategy game [11]. We also consider a constant sum game in which for both player?s strategies, the two player?s reward add up to a constant value. This means, while both players are in conflict, that there is more to gain than simply having one player?s reward equaling the other player?s loss. Game theory considers the effect of a player?s decision on other decision makers. Two or more decision makers choose an action and that action affects the rewards earned by the players [15].

In many situations, the opponents know the strategy that they are following and what actions are available. The maximin equilibrium often is the strategy and is called the Nash theory application of zero or constant sum strategy game. This threshold can be used to determine if the player is on the blue or red team.  For example, if a reward matrix exists, then the equilibrium point is the one where the reward is the smallest value in its row and the largest number in its column. This equilibrium is also known as the Nash Equilibrium [19].

max all rows (row min) = min all columns (column max)   (1)  This left half of (1) presents the basic applied theory to decision making of our model under uncertainty. For a possible action, one consideration is to choose the ?best? worst outcome [19]. The maximin criterion suggests that the decision-maker should choose the alternative which maximizes the minimum payoff he can get. This pessimistic approach implies that the decision-maker should expect the worst to happen. The maximin criterion is concerned with making the worst possible outcome as pleasant as possible.

The right half of (1) represents minimax regret criterion which uses the concept of opportunity cost to arrive at a decision. The regret of an outcome is the difference between the value of that outcome and the maximum value of all the possible outcomes. For any action and state, there is opportunity of loss or regret. The decision-maker should choose the alternative that minimizes the maximum regret he/she could suffer. Although these decision-making criteria discussed may seem reasonable, many decisions are made without using any analysis [15].

We can solve this linear program using several manual techniques such as the simplex method, the dual simplex method, or the artificial basis technique. We can also use a     B3.1.pdf WOCC 2014      computer with LINDO software from www.lindo.com to solve for the mixed strategies as well as the value of the responses.

Using different weights allowed for choices is to highlight the ability and need for a tool which can be used to allow the user to dial and modify modeled parameters of the reward matrix to model ?what if? scenarios. Additionally saving the weights to a file allows for peer review in order to check and validate decisions. Our approach is modeled, so that the process can be repeated to allow for new or higher quality data/information to be inserted into the process to generate updated results [15].

In equation (2) we add in the uncertainty of donor nation contributions in order to model adversarial planning more completely. The values of alpha, beta, and gamma correspond to talent, treasure, and time respectively.

Equation (2) is the translation of a reward matrix to a linear program which can be solved mathematically. The subscripts on alpha, beta, and gamma correspond to the player row from the reward matrix. This allows for uncertainty modeling of each individual giving level. We show the linear program for the top four donor nations.

max v      (2) s.t.

v ? (77 + ?1)x1 ?  (64 + ?2)x2 ?  (58 + ?3)x3 ?  (33 + ?4)x4  ??? v ? (62 + ? 1)x1 ? (67 + ? 2)x2 ? (27 + ? 3)x3 ? (21 + ? 4)x4  ??? v ? (45 + ? 1)x1 ? (34 + ? 2)x2 ? (14 + ? 3)x3 ?  (25 + ? 4)x4  ??? x1, x2, x3 , x4 ??? x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 = 1

V. ADVERSARIAL PLANNING One method for detecting change or similarity between  the giving of donor nations can be accomplished through the application of a mutual information algorithm. Mutual information (MI) between two variables is based on information theory. It measures the amount of information between two variables. Mutual information considers the joint entropy and the individual entropies and is defined as:   I(X; Y) = H(X) + H(Y) ? H(X,Y) (3)  where I is mutual information and H is entropy [3]. When the data vectors are more similar, a lower numerical value is obtained for joint entropy. The mutual information value increases with increasing similarity. As the statistical relationship between the two vectors becomes more dissimilar, the joint entropy, H(X, Y), increases [16]. The vectors X and Y in our experiments correspond to histograms with six bins each for vector. Entropy is defined as:  ? H(pi) = -?pi log(pi)? ???? where p is the probability vector for which we assume to be a uniform distribution [3]. A good implementation in Matlab is available. The more change occurs between the pre/post tampering with a lower value for mutual information. Note that a lower MI value, when comparing similarity of giving, means that indexes are very different and quantifies the amount of difference in response [12].

Cognitive hierarchy is important because it predicts the effect of group size which is not predicted by the Nash equilibrium [1]. The results for the top three players with the U.S. are shown in Fig.7 and illustrate the probability of uncertainty in donor competition and serve as a cognitive decision making tool to help plan for responsive actions.

The probability of a nation attaining their desired position in the world giving index for emergency response is modeled as a function of increasing giving levels by a competitor nation in order to attain their national goals.

Fig 7. Probabilities and Mutual Information     B3.1.pdf WOCC 2014

VI. CONCLUSION No decision is ever 100% correct; however,  understanding the effects of algorithmic decisions based upon multiple variables, attributes, or factors and strategies with probability assignments can increase the probability for the best decision for a particular situation or event. We discussed a linear programming method for modeling adversarial planning for emergency response activities with limited resources. We realize that solution presented is only a guide and is not intended to replace the human brain in decision making. We offer a user assisted means of prioritization to make agent and resources more effective.

Automated game theory is promising for automatically solving real world strategies and helps the analyst make optimal decisions.

Our contribution in this paper is to combine linear programming, hierarchical game theory with uncertainty modeling in order to plan for activities based on open source intelligence. Our example shows mixed probabilities of a country staying in the top or desired position as a donor nation with respect to emergency response activities. The results shown illustrate the probability of uncertainty in donor competition and serve as a cognitive decision making tool to help plan for responsive actions. The probability of a nation attaining their desired position in the world giving index for emergency response is modeled as a function of increasing giving levels by a competitor nation in order to attain their national goals.

Our solution provides the ability to populate a reward matrix from unstructured big data. We combine a number of technologies for data fusion. Our solution is a multi-use application: course of action planning, resource management, and risk assessment. In the presence of game theory and hierarchical theory, and on the basis of dynamic state attrition-models, our strategy can solve this kind of problem favorably.

Automated processing techniques are needed to augment tactical intelligence-analysis capabilities by identifying and recognizing patterns, weighting them appropriately, providing near real time objective decisions where the user can interact with the information based upon their experiences and knowledge base. GlobalSite is a probabilistic decision solution which allows for users to interact with information in near real time using game theory to provide a reward matrix of the best possible outcomes.

Our approach adds computational intelligence to provide the analyst with a decision making capability to reduce time to collect and process data while retaining the information needed to complete the mission analysis. Additionally the probabilities of successfully performing emergency response is filtered by the level of cooperation between participating organizations. Proper execution is critical for attaining the desired impact in another nation.

