

Abstract?One of the more challenging aspects of software development is the ability to verify and validate the functional software requirements dictated by the Software Requirements Specification (SRS) and the Software Detail Design (SDD).

Insuring the software has achieved the intended requirements is the responsibility of the Software Quality team and the Software Test team. The utilization of Timeliner-TLX TM Auto-Procedures for relocating ground operations positions to ISS automated on- board operations has begun the transition that would be required for manned deep space missions with minimal crew requirements. [1] This transition also moves the auto-procedures from the procedure realm into the flight software arena and as such the operational requirements and testing will be more structured and rigorous. The auto-procedures would be required to meet NASA software standards as specified in the Software Safety Standard (NASA-STD-8719), the Software Engineering Requirements (NPR 7150), the Software Assurance Standard (NASA-STD-8739) and also the Human Rating Requirements (NPR-8705). The Autonomous Fluid Transfer System (AFTS) test-bed utilizes the Timeliner-TLXTM Language for development of autonomous command and control software. The Timeliner- TLXTM system has the unique feature of providing the current line of the statement in execution during real-time execution of the software. The feature of execution line number internal reporting unlocks the capability of monitoring the execution autonomously by use of a companion Timeliner-TLXTM sequence as the line number reporting is embedded inside the Timeliner- TLXTM execution engine. This negates I/O processing of this type data as the line number status of executing sequences is built-in as a function reference. This paper will outline the design and capabilities of the AFTS Autonomous Requirements Tracker, which traces and logs SRS requirements as they are being met during real-time execution of the targeted system. It is envisioned that real time requirements tracing will greatly assist the movement of auto-procedures to flight software enhancing the software assurance of auto-procedures and also their acceptance as reliable commanders.

