

Abstract? Launched 10 June 2011, the NASA?s Aquarius instrument onboard the Argentine built and managed Sat?lite de Aplicaciones Cient?ficas (SAC-D) has been tirelessly observing the open oceans, confirming and adding new knowledge to the not so vast measured records of the Earth?s global oceans.  This paper reviews the data collected to date, findings, challenges and future work that is at hand for the sleepless oceanographers, hydrologists and climate scientists.

Although routine data is being collected, a snapshot is presented from almost 2-years of flawless operations showing new discoveries and possibilities of lot more in the future.

Repetitive calibration and validation of measurements from Aquarius continue together with comparison of the data to the existing array of Argo temperature/salinity profiling floats, measurements from the recent Salinity Processes in the Upper Ocean Regional Study (SPURS) in-situ experiment and research, and to the data collected from the European Soil Moisture Ocean Salinity (SMOS) mission. This aids in the optimization of computer model functions to improve the basic understanding of the water cycle over the oceans and its ties to climate.  The Aquarius mission operations team also has been tweaking and optimizing algorithms, reprocessing data as needed, and producing salinity movies that has never been seen before.  On a similar note and news, the Argentine SAC-D end, the international partners of this mission (Argentina, Italy, France and Canada) have been mining on data from their 7 other instruments on-board this 1.5 Ton satellite.  A brief overview of their findings will also be covered in this paper.

Index Terms? International Sea surface salinity mission, SSS, global water cycle, microwave remote sensing, projects, climate studies, Aquarius/SAC-D, Observatory, spacecraft and instrument testing, performance, launch, NASA, CONAE.

Manuscript received January 12, 2014, 2014. The work was supported in  part by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.     INTRODUCTION .............................................. 1 	 ?

II.   MISSION ELEMENTS ...................................... 1	 ?

III. CHECKOUT ACTIVITIES  ................................ X	 ?

IV. INSTRUMENT AND PERFORMANCE ................ X

V. SCIENCE FINDINGS  ......................................... X	 ?

VI. FUTURE WORK  ............................................. X

VII. SUMMARY ..................................................... X ACKNOWLEDGEMENT .......................................... X	 ? BIOGRAPHY .......................................................... X	 ?

I. INTRODUCTION   n June 10th, 2011, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) of United States of America  (USA) and the Comisi?n Nacional de Actividades Espaciales (CONAE) of Argentina embarked on an epic space mission called Aquarius/SAC-D to measure Earth?s Ocean Surface Salinity.

The Aquarius/SAC-D is aligned to the Earth observation science goals of NASA and CONAE. NASA's mission objective is to understand one of the key climate parameters, salinity, required to study the Global Hydrologic Cycle and Global Change.   This mission also serves the needs of the Argentine space program for monitoring the local environment and for hazard detection.  This international mission includes contributions from Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI), Center National d?Etudes Spatiales (CNES) Ag?ncia Espacial Brasileira (AEB) and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA).

These space agencies also contribute towards the global investigations of the atmosphere, oceans and the effects of human and natural processes on the environment.

NASA?s Aquarius mission has been measuring sea surface salinity (SSS) from space for more than two years. The mission is designed to map SSS and its changes over the globe to study the links between ocean circulation, the global water cycle and climate.

These data help scientists better understand the far-reaching  Review of Recent Technical Accomplishments of Aquarius ? NASA?s first Global Sea Surface Salinity Mission  Amit Sen1, Gary Lagerloef2 and Tong Lee1 1Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology (CIT), Pasadena, CA, USA 2Earth and Space Research, Seattle, WA  O       effects of changing ocean circulation and rainfall patterns, and events such as El Ni?o, floods, droughts and longer-term climate change. For example, recent multidecadal salinity trends provide a strong indication of changes in the global water cycle, with wetter areas gaining in rainfall and low rainfall regions becoming more arid.

In 2012, the team analyzed and corrected many aspects of the data processing and calibration, and a new validated data release is planned for late January 2013.

Scientific studies were published using Aquarius data in 2012 showed new discoveries about long-wave current variations in the tropical Pacific and the other identifying the effect of the passage of a hurricane over the freshwater river plume of the Amazon.

Studies also highlight the fact that Aquarius is revealing smaller spatial scale features in the surface salinity that was anticipated before launch.

In September 2012, an oceanographic expedition Salinity Processes in the Upper Ocean Regional Study (SPURS) studied the arid subtropical Atlantic region, where the highest surface salinities in the world ocean are observed. Many autonomous sensors will remain in place for a year to investigate what ocean physical processes maintain these high salinity values and complement the large-scale measurements provided by Aquarius.

In addition, Aquarius microwave data are gathered continuously around the globe, including land and ice-covered areas, and are also available to study soil moisture and changing cryosphere properties. Salinity data from Aquarius and the European Space Agency?s previously launched Soil Moisture Ocean Salinity mission (SMOS) (http://www.esa.int/smos) represent a fundamentally new ocean remote sensing capability.

The objective of this paper is to give the reader an overview of the mission and some of the recent observations by the scientific team mining the data gathered by Aquarius.



II. MISSION ELEMENTS  Launched on June 10, 2011 from Vandenberg Air Force Base (VAFB) in California using a Delta II 7320-C launch vehicle, the primary focus of the Aquarius/SAC-D mission is to monitor the seasonal and inter-annual variations of the salinity field in the open ocean and to contribute to the understanding of the total Earth system and the consequences of the natural and anthropogenic changes in the environment of the planet.

SSS data from Aquarius provide a fundamentally new ocean remote sensing capability. The Aquarius microwave sensor, built by NASA?s Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Goddard Space Flight Center, is the heart of the salinity measurement system and is the prime instrument on the joint United States and Argentinan Aquarius/Sat?lite de Aplicaciones Cient?ficas-  D (SAC-D) satellite observatory. The Argentine space agency, CONAE, developed the SAC-D spacecraft, which carries Aquarius and other scientific sensors developed by Argentina, Italy, France and Canada.

The fundamental objectives of Aquarius are to enhance the knowledge of ocean circulation, climate variability, land processes, land use, soil moisture, and the hydrological cycle [Le Vine et al., 2007; Lagerloef et al., 2012].

Aquarius is an active/passive radiometer/scatterometer L-band microwave instrument designed to map the surface salinity field of the oceans from space. The Aquarius microwave sensor includes a 2.5-by-3-meter offset reflector and 3- radiometer feed horns. Because of the angle these make with the reflector, Aquarius observes the surface along three parallel tracks (so-called pushbroom design) as the satellite progresses along a near-polar orbit.

The mission retrieves salinity measurements from the brightness temperature (TB) emissivity of the sea surface, which is measured with an L-band radiometer (1.413 GHz frequency in the L-band portion of the spectrum protected for radio astronomy).  The emissivity is modulated by the electrical conductivity of seawater, which in turn varies with salinity. This is somewhat akin to conventional oceanographic salinity measurements made in-water with CTD sensors. The seawater microwave signature comes from the surface layer of approximately 1-centimeter optical depth.

Aquarius also measures radar backscatter at 1.26 gigahertz to mitigate the emissivity variations due to surface roughness. To acquire the SSS measurement, algorithms are used to correct for surface roughness (a function of wind, waves, and rain), atmospheric gases, sea surface temperature (SST), Faraday rotation, and solar and galactic emission sources, which collectively attenuate the brightness temperature. Unlike the SMOS mission, an onboard scatterometer is used to take simultaneous measurements of surface roughness directly along the swath [Le Vine et al., 2007; Camps et al., 2005; Font et al., 2004]. The Aquarius swath is 390 km wide [Lagerloef et al., 2008] formed with a three beam push broom configuration (76?94, 84?120, and 96?156km), the three separate sensors views the Earth at about 29, 38, and ??? 46 degrees from nadir with a repeat time of 7 days, equating to approximately four samples per month at a given location.

Salinity varies in the open ocean from about 32 to 38 grams dissolved salt per kilogram of seawater, measured with an international standard practical salinity scale based on electrical conductivity. To measure such small differences, the Aquarius microwave radiometers were designed and built to achieve unprecedented accuracy by including temperature control to within 0.1? C in the instrument design.

The Aquarius mission is designed to achieve a monthly average global root-mean-square measurement error less than 0.2 (practical salinity scale? approximately parts per thousand by mass) at 150-kilometer resolution. The size of the Aquarius       footprint limits the accuracy for measurements close to coastal boundaries because the warmer land brightness temperature adds a negative bias to the Aquarius SSS measurement. A nearshore land correction was developed for this before launch and continues to be improved.

CONAE, the Argentine Space Agency, provides the SAC-D portion, a Satelite de Aplicaciones Cientificas (SAC) program and includes several additional Argentine and European instruments.  Together with all its elements, it is known as the Aquarius/SAC-D Observatory.

The Aquarius/SAC-D Observatory is a three-axis stabilized earth-pointing, low-altitude Observatory that supports the nadir-pointing instruments. The Observatory, in launch configuration, is an octagonal shaped spacecraft approximately 2.7 meters across and almost 5 meters tall, with a total mass of 1366 kg including fuel. The bottom of the satellite incorporates two diametrically opposed hinges that support the deployable two wings solar array, 2.2 x 2.15 meters each, providing 1362 watts of power (at End of Life, EOL). Observatory power loads require a 925 W of orbital average power.

Communications will use S-band for telecommand and real- time housekeeping telemetry, and X-band for science data and stored housekeeping downlinks. Four reaction wheels, three torque rods and four dual thruster modules are used as attitude and orbit control actuators. Redundant star trackers, redundant gyros, redundant GPS Receivers, redundant tri-axis magnetometers and 12 coarse sun sensors will be used for orbit & attitude determination purposes.

The mission is being accomplished using an integrated set of Aquarius and SAC-D flight and ground system elements. The flight system -- the Observatory -- includes the eight remote sensing instruments and a Service Platform (S/P), i.e. the spacecraft bus. The ground system elements -- include the SAC-D Ground System that operates the Observatory from a Mission Operation Control Center (MOC) -- and foreign instrument ground systems for operating and processing the data of their contributed instruments.  The MOC interfaces with various ground stations for communications with the Observatory that includes transferring telecommands and receiving telemetry. Each instrument-contributing organization performs science planning, instrument operations and science data processing through their own user ground systems.

The routine Aquarius scientific data is processed at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) and archived at PO.DAAC at JPL.



III. CHECK-OUT ACTIVITIES  This early orbit operation and check-out is largely divided into 4 areas of commissioning.  They are spacecraft, Aquarius instrument, SAC-D instruments and final orbit correction.  A summary of activities for each of the areas is described herein.

SPACECRAFT COMMISSIONING:  The commissioning phase of the service platform was planned and successfully executed with the strategy to verify in-flight for each subsystem/instrument/sub-assembly its behavior, and to compare to predicts, analysis and tests performed prior to launch.  In summary, the strategy was to verify that all telemetry variables match with the values obtained during environmental/functional testing of the Observatory.  Response to the on-ground generated control commands were to be as expected and the On-board automatisms perform as tested nominally.

AQUARIUS COMMISSIONING:  The Aquarius initial turn on and check out activities were performed over 12 days during August of 2011 after the spacecraft completed its commissioning. The approach for this Aquarius Instrument on orbit check-out (OOCO) was to systematically turn on each of the instrument?s subsystem elements and checking out its functionality before continuing with the next element checkout.

Each day?s OOCO activities were performed and verified before final planning and approval was given to proceed.

Throughout the OOCO activities instrument and service platform housekeeping and instrument housekeeping and science data was closely monitored and reviewed by the Aquarius instrument and the science teams. Each activity was executed with close coordination between the Aquarius instrument team, collocated at the SAC-D Mission Operations Control center, and the Aquarius and SAC-D operations teams, located at GSFC and Cordoba Ground Station respectively.

All planned Aquarius commissioning activities were successfully completed.  All housekeeping telemetry was verified to be within specified ranges and consistent with predicts and measure test values during system tests prior to launch. The OOCO activities completed with the instrument in its mission mode and fully functional necessary to meet science objective. Key thermal performance with the instrument?s active thermal control achieved excellent control within each of the instrument?s four thermal zones.

Following the instrument?s OOCO, the instrument was being closely monitored for any impact or interference from the SAC-D instruments? as they were turned on one-by-one.

Currently the instrument is on in its mission, routine science data-taking mode, generating salinity data for the Aquarius Data Processing Team and Science team to collect, validate and generate SSS maps.  Typically, Instrument science data is being downlinked twice daily over the CONAE Cordoba Ground Station pass. The Aquarius instrument and operations teams closely monitor the instrument telemetry looking for any data trends that may impact instrument performance or forewarn the team of anomalous behavior.

The Aquarius Science Team?s assessment of instrument is that the radiometer looks stable on all 12 channels, wind response is close to expectations relative to reference wind models, and there is no evidence to date of solar contamination. Routine work is being performed by the Aquarius       Calibration/Validation Team to estimate and make corrections to error sources including Galactic radiation, cross-polarization errors, and estimated biases.

SAC-D INSTRUMENT COMMISSIONING:  SAC-D instruments started their commissioning phase on August 29th 2011. This phase began with the initial turn on of each instrument and continued with a testing sequence intended to provide in-flight validation of all functional and performance requirements.  At the end of the commissioning, the instruments continued operating in mission mode. After approximately one week into the commissioning, all SAC-D instruments (MicroWave Radiometer [MWR], New InfraRed Sensor Technology Radiometer [NIRST], High Sensitivity Camera [HSC], Data Collection System [DCS], Radio Occultation Sounder for Atmosphere [ROSA], Detectors ICARE & SODAD [CARMEN1] and Technological Demonstration Package [TDP]) have completed its functional verification and the first science data products have been obtained.  Calibrations and science data validation and processing algorithms adjustment period was extended to completely characterize the instruments.

ORBIT CORRECTION:  The orbit of Aquarius/SAC-D was designed to provide global coverage of sea areas between +/- 80 degree latitude with near 90 degree sun incidence angle measured from the local vertical (Sun-Dusk) and a 7 days repeat cycle. In addition, a frozen orbit was desired to minimize adjustments of the radiometric and geometric correction algorithms. To meet these requirements a sun synchronous orbit was selected with 657 km mean altitude, 98.008 degrees inclination of the orbit plane and 18:00:00 hrs.

mean local time of the ascending node (MLT).

During the Mission Phase, the observatory maintained an attitude that has the instruments pointed at geodetic nadir and the solar arrays pointing sunward. The observatory attitude continuously executes a ?yaw steering? maneuver (a ? 4? yaw cycle every orbit) to allow the Aquarius and MWR to make their observation with coinciding footprints on the ground.

For every mission day, housekeeping and science data is real- time downlinked or recorded and played back over 2-4 scheduled ground station passes at ETC near Cordoba, Argentina. The ASI Malindi station and NASA?s Near Earth Network (NEN) stations are available in the event of an emergency or to support special Observatory command sequences (i.e., orbit maneuvers and cold sky calibrations, activities). Changes to Observatory configuration or initiating new science activities are also planned as needed, be executed through pass plans than contain real-time or time-tagged telecommand uplinked over the same ETC ground passes.

At this time, the mission operations team?s efforts are focused on the routine science planning, observations and data processing while maintaining the spacecraft health and safety.

The Aquarius instrument maintains its mission, science data- taking mode, continuously generating salinity data that is brought back over the high rate channel downlinks at ETC. The Aquarius Data Processing and Science teams continue to collect the instrument and ancillary data, validate this data and process it into SSS data maps.  For the entire life, the Aquarius part of the mission, the instrument will be monitored for any changes in performance, anomalies and impacts from SAC-D elements that may affect the instrument?s science. The Aquarius Operations and Instrument teams have coordinated with the SAC-D team and developed operational contingency plans to be able to identify and react to anomalies that could affect the instruments health.

On 22 September 2011, NASA's new Aquarius instrument produced its first global map of the salinity of the ocean surface, providing an early glimpse of the mission's anticipated discoveries. This first global map of the salinity, or saltiness, of Earth?s ocean surface produced by NASA's new Aquarius instrument reveals a rich tapestry of global salinity patterns, demonstrating Aquarius' ability to resolve large-scale salinity distribution features clearly and with sharp contrast.  Figure 1 shows the map as a composite of the data collected since Aquarius became operational on Aug. 25.

Fig 1: The first global map of the salinity, or saltiness, of Earth?s ocean surface produced by NASA's new Aquarius instrument. Image credit: NASA/GSFC/JPL-Caltech  Similarly, the SAC-D instruments are in their mission configuration modes and are returning their own science data.

The SAC-D instrument operation is mostly conducted out of Cordoba. Instrument operations includes the capture of the data for all the SAC-D instruments and planning the science activities especially for the targeted observations for the NIRST and HSC instruments.

Monthly, the SAC-D and instruments operations teams plans and executes (as needed) orbit maintenance maneuvers to raise the spacecraft to accommodate atmospheric drag losses or to execute collision avoidance maneuvers.  In addition, Aquarius and the MWR science requests cold sky calibrations that are of 30 minutes durations and entail data taking for up to 10 minutes with the spacecraft rolled 180? to allow the instrument to make observations of dark sky, a stable, uniform radio frequency source.



IV. INSTRUMENT AND PERFORMANCE  The Aquarius radiometer is a three-beam pushbroom radiometer measuring the first three Stokes parameters at 1413 MHz with 25-MHz bandwidth [1]. It operates within the 1400- 1427 MHz primary exclusive allocation for passive sensing to avoid severe radio-frequency interference (RFI) and still maintain sensitivity to SSS. The radiometer is internally calibrated with a reference load and multiple noise diodes to maintain 0.13Krms/7-day stability [2] and externally calibrated using global averaged expected antenna temperatures or the oceanic vicarious cold-point brightness temperature [3] for longer term time periods. Pre-launch calibration measurements were carried out to measure values and temperature coefficients of front-end losses and noise diode excess noise temperatures after the methods in [4]. The predicted calibration bias prior to launch was +/- 4.4-K (3-sigma).

Radiometer initial performance and calibration bias assessment: Upon power-up the radiometer achieved thermal and radiometric stability within the first few hours. This allowed an initial performance estimate to be completed on the first day of operation. NEDT estimates were made over the open ocean using two-sample Allan deviation calculations. The measured NEDT?s are 0.12 K (on 1.44 second integration footprints) for vertical and horizontal polarizations and 0.15 K for third Stokes parameter channels. The instrument starting on the first day continues to produce high-quality antenna temperatures of the Earth?s surface. Two key design features enabling the observed performance are the strict thermal controller and oversampling for mitigation of RFI. The stable thermal environment created by the automatic thermal controller allowed the radiometer to produce quality data almost immediately after turn-on. Likewise, the RFI mitigation system, which is a combination of hardware-based oversampling [5] and ground-software based detection and removal [6], allows the radiometer to operate through the challenging RF environment found at L-band. Evidence of stable, RFI-free data over the ocean can be seen in the antenna temperature mosaic (horizontal-polarization) shown in Fig. 2.

(The diagonal striations are an artifact of the three distinct incidence angles and by using both ascending and descending passes.)   Figure 2. Mosaic of horizontal-polarized antenna temperature during first week of operation starting August 26, 2011. Data are gridded on 1.5-deg grid preserving the last acquired value.

Gray areas represent locations where at least one of three radiometers suffered persistent RFI.

Finally, an initial calibration bias (reference to ocean TA?s) was performed using both vicarious cold point and global average expected antenna temperatures. Biases on all channels were smaller than the maximum expected and negative, indicating a systematic error in the pre-launch calibration.

CALIBRATION DRIFT CORRECTION: Subsequent daily analysis reveals a slowly varying drift in the calibration bias.

Such a drift was not unexpected and similar settling was witnessed during engineering model testing [7]. The majority of the drift is a monotonic change in gain calibration, likely due to changes in the noise diode coupling circuits. However, a second non-monotonic component is also present and may be due to RF impedance changes in the front-end. The exact physical mechanism is still under investigation, but presently the drift signature can be explained by two different ratios of radiometer calibration counts where the first ratio is one of internal noise diode counts to external noise diode counts and the second is formed by the ratio internal noise counts while switched to the Dicke load vs. the antenna. The former yields the relative drift of the two different noise sources and is found to vary monotonically with time. The latter is sensitive to front- end impedance changes and carries the non-monotonic signature. The signatures of D1 and D2 can be fit to the observed calibration drift and used to reproduce it with an error of ~ 60 mKrms, providing strong evidence the drift is indeed due to hardware changes. A correction algorithm based on these results is being developed.



V. SCIENCE FINDINGS   Understanding the links between ocean circulation, the global water cycle, and climate variations requires knowledge of ocean surface salinity. Aquarius satellite mission (http://aquarius.nasa.gov), monitoring the global open ocean surface salinity field, embarked on its ?science operations phase? after completing the in-orbit performance assessment on 1 December 2011.

The global map generated by Aquarius shows the predominant and well-known climatological ocean salinity features, such as higher salinity in the subtropics, higher average surface salinity in the Atlantic Ocean compared to the Pacific and Indian Oceans, and lower salinity in rainy belts near the equator, in the northernmost Pacific Ocean and elsewhere, as well as the striking salty-fresh contrast between the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal. These features are related to large-scale patterns of rainfall and evaporation over the ocean, river outflow and ocean circulation.

The low-salinity waters associated with the Amazon River outflow are clearly visible, extending eastward from Brazil across the equatorial Atlantic. Superimposed are surface current vectors that illustrate the relationship between the meanders in the surface flow and the variations of the surface       salinity patterns. These currents are derived from satellite sea level and surface wind measurements via www.oscar.noaa.gov.

Combining these data sets in this way allows scientists to study the direct link between salinity patterns and ocean currents.

As noted above, another important element of the Aquarius microwave sensor is the scatterometer. This sensor measures the radar backscatter at L-band (1.26-gigahertz) frequency from the sea surface simultaneously with the radiometer emissivity measurements. This backscatter signal is proportional to the strength of the surface wind and waves (roughness). The Aquarius scatterometer has had exceptionally stable performance, with calibration changes less than 0.1 decibels over a year, allowing highly sensitive detection of sea surface roughness.

Areas of higher wind speeds are evident, such as the tropical trade wind zones and the storm belts in the sub-polar latitudes, and lower winds in the subtropics. Tropical or extra-tropical storms can also be identified, such as Prapiroon in the western Pacific. Without some proxy surface roughness, accurate salinity retrievals would not be possible. Numerical wind forecasts have limitations because of their lack of accuracy and coincidence in time with the satellite measurements. Aquarius solves this problem with simultaneous measurements that significantly improve the accuracy of the salinity data.

The most interesting findings came from the scientists at JPL [Tong Lee, Gary Lagerloef, Michelle M. Gierach, Hsun-Ying Kao, Simon Yueh, and Kathleen Dohan, ?Aquarius reveals salinity structure of tropical instability waves?, Geophysical Research Letters, VOL. 39, L12610, doi:10.1029/2012GL052232, 2012], on the salinity structure of Tropical instability waves (TIW).  This was the first Aquarius Science Application Publication.  The paper documented SSS measurements from the Aquarius/SAC-D satellite during September?December 2011 provide the first satellite observations of the salinity structure of TIWs in the Pacific.

The related SSS anomaly has a magnitude of approximately 0.5 PSU. Different from SST and sea surface height anomaly (SSHA) where TIW-related propagating signals are stronger a few degrees away from the equator, the SSS signature of TIWs is largest near the equator in the eastern equatorial Pacific where salty South Pacific water meets the fresher Inter-tropical Convergence Zone water. The dominant westward propagation speed of SSS near the equator is approximately 1 m/s. This is twice as fast as the 0.5 m/s TIW speed widely reported in the literature, typically from SST and SSHA away from the equator. This difference is attributed to the more dominant 17- day TIWs near the equator that have a 1 m/s dominant phase speed and the stronger 33-day TIWs away from the equator that have a 0.5 m/s dominant phase speed. The results demonstrate the important value of Aquarius in studying TIWs.

TIWs are westward propagating, planetary-scale waves that exist on both sides of the equatorial cold tongues in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans [e.g., Legeckis, 1977; Legeckis and Reverdin, 1987; Chelton et al., 2000]. They are caused by  barotropic and baroclinic instability associated with the meridional and vertical shear of the equatorial current systems [e.g., Philander, 1978; Masina et al., 1999; Grodsky et al., 2005]. The dominant characteristics of TIWs are 1000?2000 km wavelengths, 20? 40 day periods, and 0.3?0.5 m/s phase speeds, with faster speeds in the Pacific than in the Atlantic [e.g., Qiao and Weisberg, 1995; Chelton et al., 2000; Polito et al., 2001]. The stronger shear of equatorial currents in the Pacific results in more energetic TIWs, whereas TIWs are less energetic in the Atlantic due to weaker current shear. TIWs are stronger to the north of the equatorial cold tongues in the Pacific and Atlantic in association with stronger shear in the northern edge of the cold tongues. In the Pacific, TIWs are most active during boreal fall and winter when the equatorial current shear is largest. During El Ni?o when the cold tongue is weak or entirely disappears, TIWs are suppressed. During La Ni?a when the cold tongue and the related current shear are intense, TIWs become unusually vigorous. TIWs are found to play important roles in ocean dynamics [e.g., Baturin and Niiler, 1997; Grodsky et al., 2005; Jochum and Murtugudde, 2006; Menkes et al., 2006; Kim et al., 2007], ocean- atmosphere coupling [Xie et al., 1998; Liu et al., 2000; Chelton et al., 2001; Yu and Liu, 2003], and marine biogeochemistry [e.g., Feely et al., 1994; Gorgues et al., 2005; Evans et al., 2009].

TIWs have been detected in various satellite measurements of the ocean, most notably in SST [e.g., Legeckis, 1977; Chelton et al., 2000]. The SST pattern associated with the TIWs affects the atmospheric boundary layer and modulates ocean surface wind as observed by scatterometers [e.g., Xie et al., 1998; Liu et al., 2000; Chelton et al., 2001; Polito et al., 2001; Hashizume et al., 2001; Yu and Liu, 2003]. The TIW pattern is also identifiable in SSHA [e.g., Polito et al., 2001] and chlorophyll- a (chl-a) [e.g., Yoder et al., 1994; Strutton et al., 2001; McClain et al., 2002]. With the advent of satellite salinity measurements, it is now possible to analyze the salinity signature associated with TIWs. This provides a significant new capability to the scope of TIW observations that has important implications to ocean circulation and climate.

Figure 3. SSS (color shading), (a) SST (contours), (b) surface current (vectors), (c) SSHA (contours), (d) wind speed (contours), and (e) chl-a centered on December 18, 2011. The SSS, SST, SSHA, wind speed, and chl-a are 7-day averages.

Surface currents are 10-day average centered on Dec. 18. The units of SSS, SST, SSHA, wind speed, and log chl-a are PSU, oC, cm, m/s, and mg/m3.

A preliminary snapshot of these data in the eastern Pacific reveal TIW-like features [Lagerloef et al., 2012], and thus offer an unprecedented opportunity to study the salinity signature and propagation associated with TIWs.  Lee and his team used the Aquarius data to provide a space-borne analysis of SSS structure associated with TIWs, aided by a multi-sensor characterization of TIWs using other satellite-derived products of SST, ocean surface currents, SSHA, ocean surface wind, and chl-a.

Figure 3 is an example showing the comparison of satellite observations of SSS, SST, surface currents, SSHA, ocean surface wind, and chl-a in the central to eastern tropical Pacific. The maps for SSS, SST, SSHA, wind speed, and chl-a are 7-day averages centered on December 18 whereas the surface currents are 10-day average (the average of two 5-day records) centered on December 18. The TIW pattern is clearly seen in SSS (color shading in Figures 3a?3d). The SSS signature of TIWs aligns with that of SST (contour in Figure 3a), with the northward protrusion of higher SSS coinciding with that of lower SST. The well observed cusp- shaped pattern in SST is also evident in SSS, though not as sharp as the SST cusps given lower resolution and smoothing of the SSS data.

Between the cusps, there are clockwise- rotating patterns of surface currents (vectors in Figure 3b) that also have a strong  signature in SSHA (contours in Figure 3c), indicating a significant contribution by geo- strophic flow. These are features consistent with the anticyclonic vortices associated with TIWs that are sometimes referred to as tropical instability vortices [e.g., Flament et al., 1996].

As an early application of Aquarius data to study dynamic features of the ocean, observations of SSS by Aquarius provided the first space-borne observations of the salinity structure associated with TIWs in the tropical Pacific. The observed salinity structure of the TIWs is complementary to other satellite data such as SST, SSHA, surface current, ocean surface wind, and chl-a. Different from SST and SSHA, where the largest signals of TIWs are found a few degrees north of the equator, the SSS signature of TIWs is strongest near the equator in the eastern equatorial Pacific where saltier South Pacific water meets fresher Inter-tropical Convergence Zone water. The magnitude of SSS anomaly associated with TIWs is approximately 0.5 PSU (larger in he east and smaller in the west). The dominant westward propagation speed is 1 m/s, which is twice as fast as the 0.5 m/s TIW phase speed widely reported in the literature mostly based on observations of SST and SSHA away from the equator. This is attributed to the more dominant 17-day TIWs near the equator that have a 1 m/s dominant phase speed and the stronger 33-day TIWs away from the equator that have a 0.5 m/s dominant phase speed.

The Aquarius data provide a clear view of the salinity structure of the 17-day TIWs for the first time from space.

Previous studies suggest that TIWs affect meridional transports of water properties, specifically with regards to temperature and biology. The SSS signature of TIWs as revealed by Aquarius indicates that TIWs are likely to play an important role in hemispheric exchange of salt and freshwater, which on the longer time scales may influence the ocean circulation and hydrological cycle. The observed SSS signature of TIWs complements in-situ salinity observations by Argo floats, which have inadequate sampling to resolve TIWs. The Aquarius data also provide additional constraints to models and assimilation products in simulating TIWs and their consequences.

Another interesting finding is found from the data from SSS measurements from Aquarius/SAC-D satellite and SMOS mission.  Measurements were used to document the freshening associated with the record 2011 Mississippi River flooding event in the Gulf of Mexico (GoM). Assessment of the salinity response was aided by additional satellite observations, including chlorophyll-a (chl-a) and ocean surface currents, and a passive tracer simulation. Low SSS values associated with the spreading of the river plume were observed 1?3 months after peak river discharge which then receded and became unidentifiable from satellite observations 5 months after maximum discharge. The seasonal wind pattern and general circulation of the GoM dramatically impacted the observed salinity response, transporting freshwater eastward along the Gulf coast and entraining low salinity waters into the open GoM. The observed salinity response from Aquarius was consistent with SMOS SSS, chl-a concentrations, and the       passive tracer simulation in terms of the pathway and transit time of the river plume spreading. This study is the first successful application of satellite SSS to study salinity variation in marginal seas.

The Mississippi River is the largest river in North America, draining ~41% of the contiguous United States and ranking seventh in the world for river discharge [Milliman and Meade,  1983]. It has an annual mean discharge of over 13,000m /s (as  measured by the United States Geological Survey gauging station 7374000 located at 30?26?44.4??N, 91?11?29.6??W).

More than half of the freshwater input into the Gulf of Mexico (GoM) comes from the Mississippi River, with additional, lesser contribution from the neighboring Atchafalaya River.

River discharge in the northern GoM shows significant seasonal variability, with maximum flow around spring (March?June) and minimum flow in fall (September? November). Higher concentrations of nutrients, sediments, and dissolved organic matter accompany freshwater discharge, providing a major source of material into the GoM. Such nutrient input from the Mississippi River has been associated with enhanced chlorophyll-a (chl-a) concentrations and primary productivity in the northern GoM [Lohrenz et al., 1997; Rabalais et al., 1999]. Southerly/southeasterly winds are prevalent during spring and summer months when Mississippi River discharge is maximal, driving an eastward along-shelf current that trans- ports freshwater, nutrients, chl-a, sediments, and dissolved or- ganic matter over the narrow Mississippi- Alabama-Florida shelf [Morey et al., 2003a, 2003b]. A narrower shelf and deeper waters near the shelf edge permit floodwaters to inter- act with the general circulation of the GoM.

In the GoM, the ocean circulation is dominated by the Loop Current (LC) and its associated warm-core (anticyclonic) and cold-core (cyclonic) eddies. The position of the LC fluctuates within the GoM, but its most northward position occurs prior to shedding a large warm-core eddy, which happens every 3 to 17 months [Zavala-Hidalgo et al., 2006]. The LC and its associated eddies remain offshore of the continental shelf, but can force exchanges of fluid across the continental shelf break.

These interactions are observed as plumes of water that have different properties than the surrounding environment. Several studies have shown plumes of low salinity, chlorophyll-rich waters in the open GoM, along the West Florida Shelf, and even as far as the Florida Straits and Gulf Stream linked to river discharge in the GoM (i.e., Mississippi, Mobile, and Apalachicola Rivers) [Ortner et al., 1995; Gilbes et al., 1996; Del Castillo et al., 2001]. Such river discharge studies primarily use a combination of satellite and in situ data, but mainly rely upon satellite-derived estimates of chl-a, sediments, and dissolved organic matter, rather than freshwater estimates from limited in situ salinity observations, to characterize river plumes and describe their spatial and temporal variability.

The advent of satellite salinity measurements provides a unique opportunity to analyze river discharge events using global SSS distributions. Aquarius/SAC-D has been providing global SSS  maps on a weekly basis since late August 2011. The SMOS has also been providing global maps of SSS at a 10-day interval since 2010. As indicated earlier, recent research has demonstrated the value of Aquarius data in studying large- scale dynamic ocean features such as TIW in the Pacific [Lagerloef et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2012], the use of SMOS data in capturing seasonal features of the freshwater pool in the eastern Pacific [Alory et al., 2012], and the application of Aquarius and SMOS data to study the large plume of the Amazon/Orinoco River in the western tropical Atlantic [Grodsky et al., 2012]. However, it remains unclear as to whether Aquarius and SMOS data can be used to study salinity variation in marginal seas, such as Mississippi River discharge in the GoM. This is primarily because of the smaller scales of salinity features in marginal seas and the potential contamination of the SSS signal near land, such as radio frequency interference (RFI) and land effects on antenna sidelobes [Subrahmanyam et al., 2013]. The length of the Aquarius and SMOS satellite records currently limit the number of flood events that can be investigated. Of the years available, 2011 was a record-breaking flood year in the central United States, comparable to major flood events in 1927 and 1993. Widespread flooding was attributed to excessive precipitation from major storm systems in combination with extensive snowmelt. They demonstrate the applicability of Aquarius and SMOS data to observe SSS freshening associated with the extreme Mississippi River flooding event in 2011, and assess the transit time of the associated low SSS signal in the GoM, aided by multisensor characterization using other satellite-derived products, such as ocean surface currents and chl-a.

Aquarius and SMOS SSS data were used along with satellite- derived chl-a and ocean surface current products to study the salinity freshening associated with the record 2011 Mississippi River flooding event in the GoM. A time-series of USGS daily mean discharge revealed maximum flooding of the Mississippi River in May 2011. In asso- ciation with this discharge event, SSS freshening was observed from June to August 2011 (1?3 months after peak discharge) in the GoM that then receded and became unidentifiable from satellite observations by October 2011 (5 months after peak discharge). Seasonal wind patterns and the general circulation of the GoM dramatically impacted the observed salinity response. Specifically, prevalent southerly/southeasterly winds drove an eastward along-shelf current from May to September 2011 that transported freshwater along the Mississippi-Alabama- Florida shelf. From June to September 2011, freshwater interacted with the LC and its associated mesoscale eddy field (specifically a warm-core eddy that was shed in the July?September time frame). Low SSS values were entrained and transported along the eastern periphery of the LC and warm-core eddy and were transported out of the GoM by October 2011. The observed salinity response from Aquarius was consistent with SMOS SSS observations and MODIS chl-a concentrations in terms of the pathway and transit time of the river plume spreading. A passive tracer simulation confirmed the pathway and transit time of freshwater spreading observed by Aquarius and SMOS in the GoM. This study is the first successful demonstration of the utility of Aquarius and SMOS data to study the salinity       variation in marginal seas, regions that are challenging for the application of satellite-derived SSS measurements.

Another science application research involves a discovery with the Aquarius/SAC-D and SMOS observations on Haline hurricane wake in the Amazon/Orinoco plume. At its seasonal  peak the Amazon/Orinoco plume covers a region of 106 km2  in the western tropical Atlantic with more than 1 m of extra freshwater, creating a near-surface barrier layer (BL) that  inhibits mixing and warms the SST to >29oC. The new SSS observations from the Aquarius/SAC-D and SMOS satellites help elucidate the ocean response to hurricane Katia, which crossed the plume in early fall, 2011. Its passage left a 1.5 psu  high haline wake covering >105 km2 (in its impact on density,  the equivalent of a 3.5oC cooling) due to mixing of the shallow BL. Destruction of this BL apparently decreased SST cooling in the plume, and thus preserved higher SST and evaporation than outside. Combined with SST, the new satellite SSS data provide a new and better tool to monitor the plume extent and quantify tropical cyclone upper ocean responses with important implications for forecasting. Because of the importance of latent heat release as an energy source, hurricane strength depends on changes in the underlying ocean thermal stratification [e.g., Shay et al., 2000; Saunders and Lea, 2008].

Intense hurricane-induced mixing and upwelling act to entrain cool thermocline water into the mixed layer, leaving behind a cool wake of SST depressed by a few degrees, which reduces hurricane growth potential [e.g., Price, 1981; Bender and Ginis, 2000; Zhu and Zhang, 2006].

Passage over freshwater plumes generally causes strengthening of hurricanes due to high SST [Ffield, 2007; Vizy and Cook, 2010] and minimization of the cool wake due to the presence of the BL [Sengupta et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2011; Balaguru et al., 2012]. These produce nearly 50% increase in intensification rate over BL regions and occur in 10?20% of tropical cyclone cases worldwide [Balaguru et al., 2012], but are more probable (68%) for the most intense (category 5) hurricanes [Ffield, 2007]. They combine newly available SSS from the Aquarius/SAC-D and SMOS missions together with other in situ and remote sensing observations to explore the impact of the Amazon/Orinoco plume on spatial and temporal sig- natures of SSS and SST after the passage of hurricane Katia in fall, 2011. They expect that new ability to map the plume more precisely with satellite SSS will benefit hurricane forecasting when it is evident that the trajectory will intersect the plume at some stage.

Unlike SST widely available from remote sensing, SSS is relatively sparse and its response to passing storms is often overlooked. Recognition of the impact of hurricane on a BL goes back at least to sample profile observations of Price [1981] showing the breakdown of a BL in the Gulf of Mexico.

A similar Argo record was presented by McPhaden et al.

[2009] in the Bay of Bengal. But, compared to ARGO or moorings, the satellite SSS now enables tracking the spatial  variability of SSS induced by hurricanes in an unprecedented manner.

The hurricane season in the Atlantic extends fromearly June through the end of November, with a peak in late August - early September. The most intense hurricanes, according to the National Hurricane Center (NHC), form off the Cape Verde Islands in the eastern basin in fall, growing as they progress westward across the warm SSTs. In 2011, the first of two Cape Verde hurricanes and the second hurricane of the season began as tropical storm, Katia, in late August. Katia reached a Category 1 on September 1 with minimum central pressure of Pmin = 988 mb and the radius of sustained hurricane force winds R = 55 km. By the afternoon of September 4, Katia reached a Category 2 (maximum sustained winds >44 m/s, Pmin = 961mb, and R = 75 km). By the evening of September 5, after passing over the freshwater plume, Katia had strengthened to a Category 4 (winds >60 m/s, Pmin = 942mb, and R = 95 km). Twenty- four hours later, Katia weakened to a Category 1. They examine the response of the upper ocean to the passage of Katia as it appears in the in situ and satellite records.

About 68% of hurricanes that finally reached category 5 have crossed the Amazon/Orinoco plume [Ffield, 2007] where the presence of BL can enhance their growth rate by 50% [Balaguru et al., 2012]. They present a case study of the passage of hurricane Katia over the plume for which an extensive array of remote sensed and in situ observations are available, in particular new SSS from SMOS and Aquarius. A similarly strong haline wake event was detected with SMOS alone following hurricane Igor in September, 2010. The availability of SSS from both SMOS and Aquarius reinforces these first observations and demonstrates spatial and temporal patterns of hurricane-BL interactions in an unprecedented manner. They find that both Igor and Katia forced SSS changes  >1 psu over an area exceeding 105 km2. These abrupt changes last and have implications for SSS climate, since SSS is not damped like SST.

These observations confirm that over the plume a uniform density mixed layer is shallower than uniform temperature layer because of stable halocline, acting to inhibit cooling and vertical mixing. Under an intense hurricane the halocline, which is above the thermocline, is mixed first. This produces a SSS wake that is by a few psu saltier than initial SSS in the plume. From space-time diagrams of SSS and SST along the hurricane track they find that haline wake develops only within  the plume and is associated with at least 0.5oC weaker SST cooling than outside the plume. This difference in SST cooling is explained by additional work required to mix the BL. Thus BL leads to a reduction in hurricane-induced surface cooling that favors hurricane development, as the resulting elevated SST and high evaporation enhance the hurricane?s maximum potential intensity.

The geographic location and seasonality of the Amazon/Orinoco plume make hurricane overpasses a not-       infrequent occurrence. Indeed, the expansion of the plume in August-September coincides with the peak of the production of Cape Verde hurricanes, a group that includes many of the most intense (Category 4?5) hurricanes. Thus the results presented strongly suggest that the salinity stratification role in mixed layer dynamics should be taken into account when forecasting hurricane growth over the plume. The availability of satellite SSS from Aquarius and SMOS along with in situ ARGO measurements is critical to making such model improvements practical.

Another notable observation is the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) that impacts a wide range of weather and climate phenomena. Current global coupled ocean-atmospheric general circulation models exhibit considerable shortcomings in representing and predicting the MJO, specifically its initiation, due to a lack of in situ observations. For the first time, the MJO propagation can be detected from the data from Aquarius. The magnitude and extent of SSS variations during the MJO is established, providing a useful tool for data assimilation into models to correctly represent both oceanic and atmospheric processes during intraseasonal variations. Salinity observation allows for atmospheric conditions to be inferred from freshwater flux, on which surface salinity is highly dependent.

Increased observations of global SSS from the Aquarius mission will be particularly valuable in remote regions of the tropics and will increase the dynamical understanding and advance prediction of the MJO through model improvement.

On the intraseasonal scale, the dominant mode of climate variability known as the MJO [Madden and Julian, 1971] affects the tropics through strong air-sea coupling [Wang and Xie, 1998; Fu et al., 2003] and influences many global meteorological phenomena [Bond and Vecchi, 2003; Matthews, 2004; Maloney and Hartmann, 2000]. The convective anomalies propagate eastward at an average speed  of 5 ms_1 and typically cover 12,000?20,000km of the equatorial belt [Rui and Wang, 1990]. The mechanisms that produce the MJO breakdown into two hypotheses: (1) The MJO is a response to a preexisting forcing, and (2) the MJO is sustained by its own energy source through coupled circulation patterns; therefore, accurate initial conditions are vitally important for intraseasonal prediction [Fu et al., 2011]. With the increasing availability of satellite and in situ observations, the dynamics of the MJO will be better understood and the dynamic prediction will improve.

SSS responds to freshwater flux (precipitation minus evaporation) and wind-driven advection, making it an ideal variable to utilize when understanding the response of the ocean to atmospheric processes during the MJO [Matthews et al., 2010; Grunseich et al., 2011]. Positive SSS anomalies are produced during periods of enhanced winds and clear skies (positive Outgoing Longwave Radiation (OLR) anom- alies), which increase evaporation. Enhanced precipitation and cloud cover (negative OLR anomalies), combined with a reduction in winds, lead to a reduction in salinity anoma- lies. Additionally, advection can produce salinity anomalies, especially in tropical regions of the Indian Ocean where the horizontal salinity  gradients are strong.

Besides being a variable that responds passively to atmospheric conditions, SSS significantly controls upper ocean density and therefore the Mixed Layer Depth (MLD). The formation of a Barrier Layer, the layer between the MLD and Isothermal Layer Depth, can lead to possible feedbacks that impact the atmospheric component of the MJO, as stated as one of the three major hypotheses of the Dynamics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (DYNAMO) field campaign. This layer produces a stable stratification, reducing vertical mixing, which influences surface heat fluxes and thus could possibly impact atmospheric conditions during the MJO. Establishing the magnitude and extent of SSS variations during the MJO will be a useful tool for data assimilation into models to correctly represent both oceanic thermodynamic characteristics and atmospheric processes during intraseasonal variations.

In this study, they show for the first time the SSS variations measured from the Aquarius salinity mission that occur during the MJO and identify the mechanisms that produce the fluctuations. Accurate quantification of SSS during the MJO will lead to the improvement of models, data assimilation, dynamical prediction, and, most importantly, MJO initialization.

The atmospheric conditions associated with varying phases of the MJO propagation are responsible for the development of SSS anomalies. This study examines the magnitude and extent of salinity variations at the surface during the MJO using satellite-derived data. Previous studies such as Matthews et al.

[2010] utilize Argo observations to explain how the MJO modulates salinity. Unlike Aquarius, which measures salinity directly at the surface, Argo measurements are taken from 5 to 10 m depth (10 dbar). When compared with their results, SSS anomalies during the development of the convective phase appear to be less pronounced in the Argo data. This is possibly due to the weak atmospheric forcing that exists during this phase having little impact on the depth where the observations are taken. When the convection is strongest in the Eastern Indian Ocean, their results are consistent in showing the production of negative salinity anomalies, but in the western Pacific Ocean, Argo data show contrasting negative salinity anomalies. During the production of positive OLR anomalies in the Indian Ocean, both studies show positive salinity anomalies, but in the western Pacific Ocean, dissimilar results appear. These comparisons indicate that salinity variability during the MJO in the Western Pacific Ocean requires additional study in the future.

The ability of Aquarius to accurately detect the variations in SSS during different stages of the MJO propagation shows that it will be a useful tool in understanding MJO dynamics. The MJO-related SSS variations have only been shown in model simulations [Grunseich et al., 2011] and satellite studies utilizing additional oceanic parameters to understand the dynamics are only beginning [Grunseich and Subrahmanyam, 2013]. Analysis of SSS simulations from Hybrid Coordinate Ocean Model output revealed that high-resolution ocean       general circulation models exhibit difficulty in producing the same magnitude, spatial, and temporal variations in SSS during MJO propagations when compared with Aquarius data. This affirms that Aquarius-derived SSS will be a useful tool for data assimilation, model advancement, improvement of initialization, and better representation of both oceanic and atmospheric processes during intraseasonal variations.

Accurate SSS observations collected by the Aquarius salinity mission at the current spatial coverage and duration are unprecedented. It has now been shown that the measurements gathered from this mission will broaden the understanding in various modes of climate variability even on intraseasonal scales.



VI. FUTURE WORK This year is expected to yield significant scientific discoveries for satellite salinity measurements. A landmark collection of research papers will address early scientific results of the mission and include many aspects of how rainfall, evaporation, river outflows and melting ice are linked to salinity, ocean current and climate variations.

The satellite salinity data are now being tested in numerical ocean models that are used for ocean forecasting will soon be used to enhance the skill of long-term climate prediction models.

The SPURS measurements will conclude in September, and the science teams will focus on data analysis, studying the relationships between the in-situ observations and the satellite salinity data.

In the future, a second SPURS may be carried out in an area that is dominated by intense annual rainfall, in direct contrast to the arid region of the first survey, in order to fully understand ocean processes that regulate the reduced surface salinities and climatic changes in those regions as well.

At the end of 2014, Aquarius will complete a baseline three- year mission designed to measure the seasonal cycle and inter- annual climate variability. Provided that the onboard systems continue to work as needed, NASA and CONAE plan to maintain the mission operations into the future and continue to gather this important new data set for studying ocean dynamics, climate change and the global water cycle.



VII. SUMMARY The global map generated from Aquarius data clearly shows the predominant and well-known climatological ocean salinity features, such as higher salinity in the subtropics; higher average salinity in the Atlantic Ocean compared to the Pacific and Indian oceans; and lower salinity in rainy belts near the equator, in the northernmost Pacific Ocean, and elsewhere.

These features are related to large- scale patterns of rainfall and evaporation over the ocean, river outflow, and ocean circulation. The values depicted in the Southern Ocean retain significant uncertainties associated with high winds and low surface temperatures that complicate the retrieval processing.

Other important regional features are clearly evident, including a contrast between the arid, high-salinity Arabian Sea west of the Indian subcontinent and the low-salinity Bay of Bengal to the east, which is dominated by the Ganges River and southern Asia monsoon rains. The data also reveal important smaller details, such as prominent low-salinity water associated with outflow from the Amazon and Orinoco rivers. Aquarius will monitor how these various larger- and smaller-scale features change over time and provide data to study their link to climate and weather variations.

Aquarius also reveals considerable surface salinity variation at much smaller scales than expected.  In the global maps produced to-date, the lower salinity region coincides with the zonal heavy precipitation band in the Intertropical Convergence Zone. The current vectors reveal meandering and eddy features associated with the salinity patterns. Such detail of surface dynamical structure is not resolved with the conventional salinity observations, emphasizing the new capabilities now available for studying the ocean and new discoveries that are in store.

Algorithm updates and data reprocessing will be frequent and unscheduled during the first year. Evaluation data are pub licly available at http://podaac.jpl.nasa.gov/ SeaSurfaceSalinity/Aquarius. Registration is required, and users must recognize that the data are preliminary and are neither fully validated nor officially released for scientific purposes. Comments on problems and issues with the data are welcome. Validated data are to be released in late 2012, and new findings are expected in the months and years to come.



VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The Aquarius/SAC-D success is a tribute to the extraordinary talent, dedication, and hard work of the many scientists, managers, engineers, and technicians in the United States, Argentina, Brazil, Italy, France, and Canada whose individual contributions made this mission possible.

The research described in this paper carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, was done so under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.



IX. REFERENCES Dohan, K., and N. Maximenko (2010), Monitoring ocean currents with satellite sensors, Oceanography, 23(4), 94?103, doi:10.5670/oceanog.2010.08.

Jeffrey R. Piepmeier, David M. Levine, Simon H. Yueh, Frank Wentz, Christopher Ruf, ?aquarius radiometer performance: early on-orbit calibration and results?  Lagerloef, G., et al. (2008), The Aquarius/SAC-D mission: Designed to meet the salinity remote sensing challenge, Oceanography, 21(1), 68?81, doi:10.5670/oceanog.2008.68.

Lagerloef, G., F. Wentz, S. Yueh, H. Kao, G. John- son, and J.

Lyman (2012), Aquarius satellite mis- sion provides new, detailed view of sea surface salinity, in State of the Climate in 2011, Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., in press.

[1] Le Vine, D.M.; Lagerloef, G.S.E.; Colomb, F.R.; Yueh, S.H.; Pellerano, F.A., "Aquarius: An Instrument to Monitor Sea Surface Salinity From Space," IEEE Trans. Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 45(7), 2040-2050, July 2007.

[2] Pellerano, F.A., J.R. Piepmeier, M. Triesky, K. Horgan, J.

Forgione, J. Caldwell, W.J. Wilson, S. Yueh, M. Spencer, D.

McWatters, A. Freedman, ?The Aquarius ocean salinity mission high stability L-band radiometer,? Int. Geosci. Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), Denver, CO, July 2006.

[3] Ruf, C.S., ?Vicarious Calibration of an Ocean Salinity Radiometer from Low Earth Orbit,? AMS J. Atmos. Oceanic Tech., 20(11), 1656-1670, 2003.

[4] Ruf, C.S., S.J. Keihm, M.A. Janssen, ?TOPEX/Poseidon Microwave Radiometer (TMR). I. Instrument description and antenna temperature calibration,? IEEE Trans. Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 33(1), 125-137, 1995.

[5] Piepmeier, J. and F. Pellerano, ?Mitigation of Terrestrial Radar Interference in L-Band Spaceborne Microwave Radiometers,? Proc. IEEE Int. Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), Denver, CO, pp. 2292-2296, July 30- Aug 4, 2006.

[6] Misra, S., and C. Ruf, ?Detection of Radio-Frequency Geoscience Remote Sensing, 46(10), 2008.

[7] Piepmeier, J.R., F.A. Pellerano, M. Triesky, K. Horgan, J.

Forgione, and J. Caldwell, "Lessons Learned from the Aquarius Radiometer Engineering Model," Int. Geosci.

Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), Barcelona, July 2007.

Gary Lagerloef, ?Satellite Mission Monitors Ocean Surface Salinity? EOS, Transactions, American Geophysical Union, VOLUME 93 NUMBER 25 19 JUNE 2012  Gary Lagerloef, Simon Yueh and Jeffrey Piepmeiner, ?NASA?s Aquarius Mission Provides New Ocean View?, Sea Technology Magazine, Jan 2013 issue  Tong Lee, Gary Lagerloef, Michelle M. Gierach, Hsun-Ying Kao, Simon Yueh, and Kathleen Dohan, ?Aquarius reveals salinity structure of tropical instability waves?, GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. 39, L12610, doi:10.1029/2012GL052232, 2012  Michelle M. Gierach,1 Jorge Vazquez-Cuervo,1 Tong Lee,1 and Vardis M. T., ?Aquarius and SMOS detect effects of an extreme Mississippi River flooding event in the Gulf of Mexico?, GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. 40, 1?6, doi:10.1002/grl.50995, 2013  Semyon A. Grodsky,1 Nicolas Reul,2 Gary Lagerloef,3 Gilles Reverdin,4 James A. Carton,1 Bertrand Chapron,2 Yves Quilfen,2 Vladimir N. Kudryavtsev,5,6 and Hsun-Ying Kao, ?Haline hurricane wake in the Amazon/Orinoco plume: AQUARIUS/SACD and SMOS observations?, GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. 39, L20603, doi:10.1029/2012GL053335, 2012  Gary Grunseich,1 Bulusu Subrahmanyam,2 and Bin Wang, ?The Madden-Julian oscillation detected in Aquarius salinity observations?, GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. 40, 1?6, doi:10.1002/2013GL058173, 2013

X. BIBLIOGRAPHY  Amit Sen is a Space Flight Missions Program Manager at NASA?s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL).  Mr. Sen was the Aquarius Project Manager since the inception of the project through its  commissioning in space. He has extensive spacecraft, launch vehicle and mission implementation experience working with agencies such as ESA (Europe), JAXA (Japan), CNES (France), ASI (Italy), AEB (Brazil), CONAE(Argentina), CSA (Canada), DLR (Germany), ISRO (India) and their associate contractors.

Gary Lagerloef, Space Research institute in Seattle, Washington, is the principal investigator of the NASA Aquarius satellite mission. He earned his Ph.D. in oceanography at the University of  Washington. His research focuses on ocean physics and climatology, emphasizing new applications of remote sensing, with more than four-dozen scientific publications.

Tong Lee is the Aquarius Project Scientist and a Supervisor of the Oceans and Ice Group at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California.

His research includes Ocean circulation and its relation to climate variability on seasonal-to-  decadal time scales (in particular, upper-ocean heat & salt balance; meridional transports; inter-basin linkages; tropical- extratropical exchanges); data assimilation; adjoint sensitivity analysis.  He has over 50 publications to date in his areas of research.

