SpaceCube v2.0 Space Flight Hybrid Reconfigurable Data

Abstract-This paper details the design architecture, design  methodology, and the advantages of the SpaceCube v2.0 high  performance data processing system for space applications.

The purpose in building the SpaceCube v2.0 system is to create a superior high performance, reconfigurable, hybrid data processing system that can be used in a multitude of  applications including those that require a radiation hardened  and reliable solution. The SpaceCube v2.0 system leverages  seven years of board design, avionics systems design, and space  flight application experiences. This paper shows how SpaceCube v2.0 solves the increasing computing demands of  space data processing applications that cannot be attained with  a standalone processor approach.

The main objective during the design stage is to find a good system balance between power, size, reliability, cost, and data processing capability. These design variables directly impact  each other, and it is important to understand how to achieve a suitable balance. This paper will detail how these critical  design factors were managed including the construction of an  Engineering Model for an experiment on the International Space Station to test out design concepts. We will describe the  designs for the processor card, power card, backplane, and a mission unique interface card. The mechanical design for the  box will also be detailed since it is critical in meeting the  stringent thermal and structural requirements imposed by the  processing system. In addition, the mechanical design uses  advanced thermal conduction techniques to solve the internal  thermal challenges.

The SpaceCube v2.0 processing system is based on an extended version of the 3U cPCI standard form factor where each card is 190mm x IOOmm in size. The typical power draw of the  processor card is 8 to lOW and scales with application complexity. The SpaceCube v2.0 data processing card features two Xilinx Virtex-5 QV Field Programmable Gate Arrays  (FPGA), eight memory modules, a monitor FPGA with analog  monitoring, Ethernet, configurable interconnect to the Xilinx  FPGAs including gigabit transceivers, and the necessary  voltage regulation. The processor board uses a back-to-back design methodology for common parts that maximizes the  board real estate available. This paper will show how to meet the IPC 6012B Class 3/A standard with a 22-layer board that has two column grid array devices with 1.0mm pitch. All  layout trades such as stack-up options, via selection, and FPGA  signal breakout will be discussed with feature size results. The  overall board design process will be discussed including parts selection, circuit design, proper signal termination, layout  placement and route planning, signal integrity design and  verification, and power integrity results. The radiation  mitigation techniques will also be detailed including configuration scrubbing options, Xilinx circuit mitigation and  FPGA functional monitoring, and memory protection.

U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright  Finally, this paper will describe how this system is being used  to solve the extreme challenges of a robotic satellite servicing  mission where typical space-rated processors are not sufficient enough to meet the intensive data processing requirements.

The SpaceCube v2.0 is the main payload control computer and  is required to control critical subsystems such as autonomous rendezvous and docking using a suite of vision sensors and  object avoidance when controlling two robotic arms. For this  application three SpaceCube processing systems are required,  each with two processor cards.

