

Abstract: The ICT world is experiencing very dramatic changes nowadays, in particular due to the huge impact incurred by the move to IT transformation. Though technology and usage remain main drivers for the evolution of future networks towards 5G, we are currently witnessing a change in paradigm in the design and operations of networks and services. The rise of cloud networking and the move towards Software-Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Function Virtualization (NFV) are creating new opportunities for all players in terms of flexibility and programmability, openness and responsiveness while raising cost reduction expectations. Meanwhile there are still  a number of issues to solve, in particular regarding network and service management, which calls for self-x and cognitive solutions. The talk will address key-drivers for future network design, as identified within Orange, and it will highlight some challenges that we are currently considering in terms of architecture and management of future networks, resulting in emerging networking paradigms like information- centric networking and programmable networking.

Prosper Chemouil is currently Program Director on Future Networks at Orange Labs Networks. He graduated from ?cole Centrale de Nantes in 1975 and obtained a PhD in control theory in 1978. After a one-year post-doctoral visit to the Control Systems Centre at UMIST (Manchester, UK) funded by Inria, he joined in 1980 the Centre National d'?tudes des T?l?communications (CNET, then France Telecom R&D and now Orange Labs). Within the Network Architecture and Planning Department, he carried out research on congestion control and adaptive routing, and became the leader of the research group on dynamic routing and network management in 1984. This later resulted in the creation of Paris area, long distance and international network management centers of France Telecom early 1990, followed by the implementation of adaptive routing in the long distance transit circuit-switched network.

Prosper became the Head of the Traffic Engineering and Network Management Department in 1993, in charge of research on traffic modeling, forecasting and engineering, and on real-time traffic management.

Since 1998, Prosper has been a Research Director at Orange Labs, covering various facets of research on network evolution: he coordinated the research domains on Traffic Modeling, Control and Protocols (1998-2005) and on Network Modeling and Optimization (1999-2002)He further led the prospective Group on New Generation Networks (2000-2003), the expert research group on Networks and Systems (2006-2008) and the Post-IP Networks Program (2008-2012). He has been inducted as Expert Program Leader on Future Networks for the whole Orange Group in 2010. His interests are with the design and management of Future Networks and Technologies and their impact on network architecture, traffic engineering and control, and performance and quality of service (QoS). He is specifically involved in new networking paradigms like information-centric, programmable and autonomic networking.

Tuesday 6 May   ?  08:15 ? 09:45  ?  Room: Alfa 1 and Alfa 2 Janusz Filipiak, Comarch, Poland  Welcome to Poland, vision on the future of network and service management  Abstract: The keynote lecture briefly surveys how network management methods and systems changed over the last twenty years and presents how Comarch offer was aligned and strengthen to respond to those changes to grow the company from a start-up to a corporation of nearly five thousand people. Today, the telecommunications industry experiences another wave of technology changes. Raise of the era of everywhere connected Digital Services, virtualization of IT and network functions coincides with consolidation of network and service management, as well as pressure on business agility and cost cuts. The keynote lecture points out how to manage development of NG OSS  in that rapidly changing environment.

Janusz Filipiak has been working in the field of advanced technologies for over thirty years, conducting research at the France Telecom laboratories in Paris in the 1980s, and serving in capacity of an Acting Director of the Teletraffic Research Centre at the University of Adelaide in Australia. He also worked in research laboratories in the USA and Canada.

Professor Filipiak has written more than one hundred papers on telecommunications and data communication published in the IEEE Transactions on Communications, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Operations Research, and other journals renowned worldwide. He also published six books, including Modelling and Control of Dynamic Flows in Communications Networks, Springer-Verlag 1988, Real Time Network Management, North Holland 1991. He was also editor of Telecommunication Services for Developing Economies, Elsevier 1991.

In 1993 professor Filipiak founded Comarch, which is now a global corporation with subsidiaries in America, Europe, and the Middle East.

The company employs over 3500 professionals to deliver innovative IT systems to several market segments.

NOMS_2014_FP_inside_BW_NOMS_2014_FP_inside_BW  4/21/14  4:37 PM  Page 7     KE YN OT ES - W ED NE SD AY M AY  Management  in  a  Sof tware Def ined World  Wednesday 7 May  ?  08:15 ? 09:45  ?  Room: Alfa 1 and Alfa 2 Nelson Luis Saldanha da Fonseca, University of Campinas, Brazil  Networking in the Big Data Era  Abstract: The volume of data being produced today is increasing to astronomical levels; such huge volumes of data are currently known as Big Data. Indeed, the recent introduction of smartphones and tablets, together with the widespread use of social networks, has even turned individuals into active sources of data production. Facebook receives approximately 30 billion uploads every month, implying a daily generation of 10 terabytes (TB) of data, while Twitter generates more than 7 TB of data every single day. Equally important is the information generated by the use of 5 billion mobile phones worldwide. These realms of data must also be processed to transform them into useful  information and discover hidden inter-data relationships. Today, we are on the verge of a new era, and advancement will depend crucially on our capacity for effective and efficient communication of such enormous quantities of data.  In consonance, in this talk, I will discuss the major challenges for networking technology in the provisioning of communication in the emerging era of Big Data.

Nelson Fonseca obtained his Ph.D degree from the University of Southern California in 1994. He is a Full Professor at the Institute of Computing, State University of Campinas, Brazil. He supervised 50+ graduate Thesis and published 300+ refereed papers on different topics such and multimedia service, traffic management and resource allocation in clouds and virtualized networks. He received the ComSoc Joseph Lo Cicero Award for Exemplary Services to Publications, the Medal of the Chancelor of the University of Pisa, the State University of Campinas Zeferino Vaz award for academic productivity in Computer Science and the Elsevier Computer Network Journal Editor of Year 2001 award. His graduate students received several awards in Latin America Thesis contests. Currently, he is the ComSoc Director for Conference Development and he served as ComSoc Vice President Member Relations, Director of Latin America Region and Director of On-line Services.

He is past EiC of the IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials and a Senior Editor for the IEEE Communications Magazine. He is on the editorial board of Elsevier Computer Network Journal, Peer-to-Peer Network and Applications, Journal of Internet Services and Applications and Journal of the Brazilian Computer Society. He founded the conferences IEEE LATINCOM, IEEE LATINCLOUD and the series of Multimedia Communications Symposium in IEEE ICC and IEEE Globecom. He also chaired over 10 IEEE conferences.

Wednesday 7 May  ?  08:15 ? 09:45  ?  Room: Alfa 1 and Alfa 2 Tomonori Aoyama, University of Tokyo, Japan  Evolution from Single Cloud & Hybrid Cloud to Intercloud  Abstract: Cloud services including SaaS, PaaS and IaaS are expanding rapidly mainly in enterprises. The scheme of cloud services started in the form of single cloud and then hybrid cloud scheme has begun recently to compensate the lack of cloud resources for big data, but single cloud and hybrid cloud are provided based on one cloud provider.

The importance of intercloud scheme has been recently recognized around the world, because customers are requiring stable quality of services in case of sudden change of cloud capacity or damage of cloud due to system breakdown or power down enabling federation of clouds by different cloud providers. In addition, intercloud is  needed for mission critical applications such as medical services over multiple hospitals or common public services by multiple local governments. In this presentation, use cases and functional requirements for intercloud are overviewed, and the current status for standardization of intercloud is introduced. Furthermore, issues for handling virtual resources among servers, storages and software defined networks to provide various applications of big data are discussed.

Tomonori Aoyama received the B.E., M.E. and Dr. Eng. from the University of Tokyo, Japan? Since he joined NTT in 1969, he has been engaged in research and development on communication networks and systems in NTT Electrical Communication Laboratories.  From 1973 to 1974, he stayed in MIT as a visiting scientist. In 1995 he became Director of the NTT Optical Network Systems Laboratory and in 1997, he left NTT, and joined the University of Tokyo as a professor in the Department of Engineering. In April 2006, he moved to Keio University as a professor, and also served as R&D Advisor in NICT (National Institute of Information and Communication Technologies). Dr. Aoyama is Emeritus Professor of the University of Tokyo, and served as a member of the Science Council of Japan for 6 years.  He is IEEE Life Fellow and served as IEEE Tokyo Section Chair in 2011/2012. He also served as President of IEICE (Institute of Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers) in 2009 and is now IEICE Fellow. Dr. Aoyama has been serving as President of NPO, Digital Cinema Consortium of Japan (DCCJ) since 2001, and is serving also as Chair of the Global Inter-Cloud Technology Forum (GICTF), Vice-chair of Japan Cloud Consortium (JCC), Ubiquitous Networking Forum and the New Generation Network Promotion Forum.

NOMS_2014_FP_inside_BW_NOMS_2014_FP_inside_BW  4/21/14  4:37 PM  Page 8     KEYNOTES - THURSDAY 8 M AY  Management  in  a  Sof tware Def ined World  Thursday 8 May  ?  08:15 ? 09:45  ?  Room: Alfa 1 and Alfa 2 Stephen L. Diamond, IEEE Cloud Computing Initiative - EMC, USA  The Next Platform and the IEEE Cloud Computing Initiative  Abstract: Cloud computing has disrupted computing, impacting everything from service providers, enterprise data centers, small businesses, governments, and supercomputers, to individual consumers. Enabled by the cloud, big data analytics has disrupted enterprises by giving managers unprecedented insight into their business. The next platform of computing, building on cloud computing, big data, mobile, social networking, the Internet of Things--  connected to actuators, will compose an infrastructure encompassing billions of users, millions of applications, exabytes of data creation per day, and ultimately hundreds of billions of connected things.

This ?next platform? will be even more disruptive?changing not just computing or business, but the relationship between humans and society. The IEEE is uniquely positioned to enable and guide this transition. The IEEE Cloud Computing Initiative was founded to do this by leveraging the resources of the more than 40 IEEE Societies and Councils and the 425,000 technical professionals making up the IEEE for the benefit of humanity.

Stephen L. Diamond is founder and chair of the IEEE Cloud Computing Initiative and the IEEE Cloud Computing Standards Committee. Steve has 30 years of senior management, marketing, business development, M&A, and engineering experience in computer systems, software, semiconductors, and standards. He is GM of the Industry Standards Office and Global Standards Officer at EMC Corporation. Prior to EMC, he was Director of Product Management for Intercloud Computing at Cisco Systems, where he was responsible for Cisco's cloud standards program and built Cisco's first AWS-compatible cloud. Before that, he was VP of Marketing at Equator Technologies, a VLIW signal- processing semiconductor startup. Steve has authored more than 20 technical publications on cloud computing, memory and microprocessor technology, signal processing, expert systems, and computer graphics. He is a Past President of the IEEE Computer Society, twice served on the IEEE Board of Directors, was a founding member of the IEEE Standards Association Board of Governors, and was Editor- in-Chief of IEEE Micro Magazine. Steve was awarded the IEEE Third Millennium Medal and Computer Society Golden Core Award.

Thursday 8 May  ?  08:15 ? 09:45  ?  Room: Alfa 1 and Alfa 2 Raouf Boutaba, University of Waterloo, Canada  Cloud Management: Knowing is Half The Battle.

Abstract: The past few years have witnessed the rise of cloud computing, a paradigm that harnesses the massive resource capacity of data centers to support Internet services and applications in a scalable, flexible, reliable and cost-efficient manner. However, despite its success, recent literature has shown that effectively managing resources in production cloud environments remains to be a difficult challenge. A key reason behind this difficulty is that both resources and workloads found in production environments are heterogeneous. In particular, large cloud data centers often consist of machines with heterogeneous resource capacities and performance characteristics. At the  same time, real cloud workloads show significant diversity in terms of priority, resource requirements, demand characteristics and performance objectives. Consequently, finding an effective resource management solution that leverages resource heterogeneity to support diverse application performance objectives becomes a difficult problem. The focus of this talk will be on understanding the research challenges introduced by resource and workload heterogeneity in production cloud environments. We will first provide a characterization of workload and resource heterogeneities found in production data centers, and highlight the key challenges introduced by them. We will then describe our recent work towards addressing some of these challenges.

Raouf Boutaba is a Professor of Computer Science at the University of Waterloo and a David Cheriton Faculty Fellow in Canada, and a Management (2007-2010), and on the editorial board of several other journals. He served as the general or technical program chair for extensively in these areas and received several journal and conference Best Paper Awards such as the IEEE 2008 Fred W. Ellersick Prize Paper Award. He also received several other recognitions such as the Premier's Research Excellence Award, Industry research excellence Awards, fellowships of the Faculty of Mathematics, of the David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science and outstanding performance awards at the University of Waterloo. He has also received the IEEE Communications Society Hal Sobol Award and the IFIP Silver Core in 2007, the IEEE Communications Society Joe LociCero and the Dan Stokesbury awards in 2009, and the IEEE Communications Society Salah Aidarous award in 2012. He served as a distinguished lecturer for the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies. He is fellow of the IEEE and the Engineering Institute of Canada.

