Construction Methods Research of Knowledge and  Resource Database of Spade Punch Planter for Digital

Abstract?To improve the speed and accuracy of case retrieval of spade punch planter for digital design, this paper analyzed the design process of spade punch planter, proposed a method to design knowledge representation based on object oriented theory, and elaborated the construction methods of knowledge and resource database which include multi-level case database, knowledge rules database based on association table and spare parts model database of three layer structure.

Keywords?Spade Punch Planter, Digital Design, Model of Knowledge Representation, Knowledge and Resource database

I. INTRODUCTION The design application of modern mechanical design  methods in the agricultural machinery product is far behind the aerospace, automotive and other industries. Traditional design methods of planter need to draw overall assembly drawings, exploded parts drawings, craft flow drawings and model drawings, and finally the model planter will be manufactured.

Any changes to a local part of design drawings will bring a series of modification of calculations, designs, drawings and other works. It will cause the extension of the design cycle of planter. Traditional planter design methods have been unable to meet the requirements of modern mechanical design [1].

Especially with the functional requirements for the planter increasing, the traditional mechanical design can not meet the requirements of modern agricultural production [2].

Application of computer technology for the modern mechanical design technology research application provides a new approach.

Spade planter digital design, is using the experience of the experts in the entire design process. The key element of spade planter digital design is establishing the knowledge resource database which is easy to the knowledge acquisition and gleaned and can help designers achieve spade planter design.

This paper studied the description method of spade planter knowledge, constructed multi-levels architecture of knowledge resource database, and designed the hierarchy structure of knowledge resource database and application technology knowledge resource platform.



II. EXPRESSION PATTERNS OF KNOWLEDGE Knowledge representation is the source from the  knowledge gained about the facts, judgment and reasoning inductive generalization knowledge and build relationships, and then into the computer easy to express knowledge representation and use of symbols [3]. Common methods of knowledge representation include representation of production rules, first-order predicate logic representation, semantic network method, frame representation, object-oriented representation method. Yang Bing, etc. designed a capture human problem solving behavior rules and by recognizing - cycle of action to solve the problem [4]. Zhang Pan et al conclude a first-order predicate logic notation, and pointed out the advantage of a well-defined semantics, ease naturally represent concepts [5]. Cao pointed out the fire by the lexical semantic network representation parts, structural parts, part of the process, the semantic part of the four related components [6]. Wang Wansen other knowledge representation into the layered structure, which makes an object or a general all information belonging to the hierarchy structure, which consists of a series of "slot" and a series of "side" component [7].

Knowledge in the field of agricultural machinery is accumulated in the long-term practice, these knowledge throughout the product life cycle of agricultural machinery in all aspects of diversity, ambiguity and comprehensive features.

In general, knowledge can be used for the same type of representation. However, to solve a problem, different representations will produce completely different results. Based on the field knowledge of spade planter, this paper constructed knowledge and resource database of spade planter combined with a variety of knowledge representation.



III. SPADE PLANTER DESIGN KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION MODEL  Spade planter design knowledge representation model in order to fully express the characteristics of knowledge spade planter, digital design systems to meet the actual needs of this paper, the characteristics of object-oriented languages, based on an object-oriented hybrid knowledge representation,   DOI 10.1109/IMCCC.2013.169     abstraction as an object of knowledge classes and a sub-class, and the class and sub-class, subclass and subclass production between the use of the framework, semantic networks and express different characteristics of the process of the body such  as the knowledge, enable hybrid knowledge representation model. Figure 1 shows the spade planter design knowledge representation model diagram.

Fig. 1. Model of knowledge representation of spade planter design  Object hierarchy will be designed for each sub-object segmentation, extract the design parameters of each sub-object design. Parameter data values obtained in three ways: First, the value of direct extraction parameter library, two library is a method by method calculation, three is a rule rulebase preceding paragraph or by inference inference drawn rule items.

Through this form of mixed use of various methods of knowledge representation, give full play to their respective advantages, both to improve the digital design system efficiency, and convenient to the knowledge of the management and maintenance of the system.



IV. CONSTRUCTION METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE RESOURCE DATABASE OF SPADE PLANTER  Spade planter knowledge repository established in the planter can make the design process can effectively take advantage of a variety of knowledge resources. Based Categories, hierarchies, integrated design data and methods that will spade planter design process involves knowledge resources according to different categories, with the appropriate method to establish different knowledge resources stored body, forming several repository. These resources constitute a spade planter library of digital design system resource layer, each repository jointly support spade planter digital design process. Spade planter knowledge repository by the instance database, rule base and model libraries.

A. Hierarchy Structure Design of Case Database Design example is to meet the specific requirements of the  design results have been applied, in the instance of the formation process, experts in the field that contains the knowledge to solve specific problems reasoning, decision making and judgment, in order to facilitate the functional  principle planter design, selection and configuration design, size, integrated design, virtual simulation analysis and program evaluation. Since spade planter many types of parts, and each part has constituted by the large number of instances, to retrieve such a large system, the database instance must be an instance of the appropriate organization making it easy for the index. In this paper, based on MOP (Memory Organization Packge) instance library organized. Cases which have common characteristic was stored in common scenarios, including three types of objects: Specification (Norms), examples (Cases) and index (Indices).

Examples spade planter level libraries, abstract, common features on the top floor, features more specific, the more personalized the closer the bottom. The whole system is divided into three layers:  ? The first layer classification according to the functions and practices, in the layer to retrieve when each node as a special instance of centralized processing, easy to distinguish with the next layer instance, will be defined as per instance;  ? The second layer is the first layer of the sub-instance, by part type category, the level of each node also includes a number of examples on the next level, which is defined as the aggregate instance;  ? The third layer is constituted by a basic example, is output to the user's final selection results will be defined as the leaf instance. This allows you to search, depth step by step, from the abstract to the concrete, to quickly retrieve the appropriate instance.

D esign O  bject of spade planter  Sub-Object 1  Sub-Object 2  Sub-Object 3  Param 1  Param 2  K now  ledge and resource database of spade planter  Params base  Methods base  Rules base  Data  Class of param  Class of method  Class of Rule  Design pattern of object and sub-object based on object-oriented method     B. Organization and Description of the Knowledge Rules Database Knowledge of problem solving strategies rule base is  enlightening, reasoning knowledge, is the state transition of the operation, the problem solving process or algorithm, is the state transition or problem-solving process control strategies [8].

Spade planter rule base support all stages of design. In order to achieve the knowledge rule base to build, make the following definition:  Definition 1: The rule is defined as  R = <ID, Name, PS, CS>  Where: ID is rule number used to uniquely determine the rules; Name for the rule type name; PS, premise set, PS = {Pi, i = 0 ... I}; CS, characteristic parameter sets, CS = {Ci, i = 0 ...

I}.

Definition 2: The premise of the rule is defined as  P = <ID, E, C, V, ?>  The formula: ID, premise number used to uniquely determine the premise; E, is the premise; C, provided comparison type, C = {greater than, less than, equal}; V, provided attribute value; ?, provided the activation threshold.

Definition 3: The rule is defined as the concluding part of  C = <ID, E, O, V, C>  Where: ID, conclusion number used to uniquely identify conclusions; E, conclusions properties; O, conclusions operation; V, the conclusions of property value; C, conclusions credibility.

According to the above basic definition, planter knowledge rule base was constructed. Knowledge rule base using the stored knowledge associated table can reduce redundancy, save storage space; and by optimizing the query and index way to improve access speed; stratified knowledge bases can improve the efficiency of reasoning.

C. Design of Spare Parts Model Database Component model library file by the model elements, the  information received by the computer to take to carry out automated processing format. Model library by the model files.

Model file recorded by the model elements of the composition, the same set of functional model. Model elements in the model variables used document, also known as model parameters.

Model library hierarchy shown in Figure 2.

Fig. 2. Hierarchy structure of Spare Parts Model Database  In order to facilitate storage, management, call Warehouse components form a three-layer structure shown in Figure 3, each independently of each level, between the layers there is a corresponding conversion interface.

Fig. 3. Structure  of Model database  1) The external mode is from output to input, reflecting modeling logical representation of those ideas, using relational schema.

2) Logical view is reflected in the model repository logical relationships between models. Support Network links in the design model, the use of "and / or" to indicate to the model diagram between. In the "and / or" the graph, each node represents a model, "and" an arc or "or" arc represents the relationship between the model links. By logical view "and / or" coupling support network, the system can be based on the input parameters, output parameters and functions and other information through search model coupling support network, quickly bring the desired model in a certain order automatically link up.

3) Refers to the model of the physical model is stored on the media. In this layer, the process of model body is considered an operating system file stored in the document management system, and require the contents of the models distinct, different models stored in the model library has nothing to do with each other.



V. CONCLUSION  By analyzing the expression patterns of knowledge, this paper spade planter design knowledge representation model are described, presented based on the object-oriented hybrid knowledge representation method, which can improve the digital design system efficiency, facilitate knowledge management and system maintenance; describes spade planter knowledge repository construction methods, including multi- level case library, based on knowledge rules associated table three-tier structure in the form of libraries and library component models.

