

2014 IEEE Workshop on Electronics, Computer and Applications  Informatization Construction of Moral Education Curriculum Resources  in Schools and Universities  Shardrom Johnson Information Centre  Shanghai Municipal Education Commission Shanghai 200003, Peoples Republic of China  jshardrom@shmec.gov.cn  Jue Gao Computing Center  Shanghai University Shanghai 200444, Peoples Republic of China  gaojue@shu.edu.cn  Minjie Sian School of Computer Engineering and Science  Shanghai University Shanghai 200444, Peoples Republic of China  bianmj0302@shmec.gov.cn  Ahstract-To further promote the integration and overall planning of moral education curriculum resources, and  enhance the efficiency of moral education continuity in schools  and universities, the project of "Shanghai Platform on  Construction and Sharing of Moral Education Curriculum  Resources in Schools and lJniversities" take the national spirit  and life into practice as the main line, and carryon the overall  planning for the integration of moral education curriculum  resources in schools and universities. During the project, the  raw materials selection and distribution mechanism of the  subject teaching and extracurricular activities are submitted,  and the access and evaluation mechanism of the intelligence  resource about teacher interactive are put forward. By the  distributed cloud storage structure, some research focus have  been in automatic structuring of unstructured data,  intelligence of resource evaluation and resource precipitation,  hit rate of resource retrieval. Based on the above efforts, the  platform on construction and sharing has preliminary been  success in line with the characteristics of Big-Data, and the  informatization construction of moral education curriculum  resources in schools and universities has been initial results.

Keywords-injormatization resource system oj moral education; education injormatization; construction and sharing; schools and universities

I. INTRODUCTION  "Curriculum teaching material is the important carrier of moral education in schools, and it is the foundation for construction of moral education. Moral education in schools and universities should be planned overall", says Yuan   Daniel Hsu School of Computer Engineering and Science  Shanghai University Shanghai 200444, Peoples Republic of China  zoen@shu.edu.cn  Jiajin Yuan College of Electronic and Electrical Engineering  Shanghai University of Engineering Science Shanghai 201620, Peoples Republic of China  022110121 @sues.edu.cn  YeZhou Moral Education Department  Shanghai Municipal Education Commission Shanghai 200003, Peoples Republic of China  zhouye@shmec.gov.cn  Guiren, the leader of the project of "overall planning the moral education curriculum in schools and universities" and the Minister of Education.

The project of "overall planning the moral education curriculum in schools and universities" (0 I-I 09-070) is the National Educational System Reform Project, and it is one of six subprojects-"Shanghai platform on Construction and Sharing of Moral Education Curriculum Resources in Schools and Universities"(it will be called" The project" for short in the following paragraphs). The project take the national spirit and life into practice as the main line, and carry on the overall planning for the integration of moral education curriculum resources in schools and universities. A platform on resource management system and application system with distributed storage and centralized management in moral education area has been initially established. The project established the mechanisms about construction and sharing which links up longitudinally and gets through laterally education resources in schools and universities. The project will help optimizing, revitalizing and integrating existing accumulated moral resources. It will also help enhancing openness, pertinence and timeliness of moral curriculum resource construction in the network environment.

Convenience is provided to further encourage frontline teachers and students to participate developing novel, practical, interdisciplinary, multi-level moral education resources.

2014 IEEE Workshop on Electronics, Computer and Applications

II. SIGNIFICANCE AND VALUE  "National Medium and Long Term Education Reform and Development Plan Outline in China (20 I 0-2020)" and "Shanghai Medium and Long Term Education Reform and Development Plan Outline (20 I 0-2020)"all proposed many demands such as making modern information technology works sufficiently, constructing platform of moral resources and sharing, and constructing moral system of linking up schools and universities effectively. Informatization construction of moral education curriculum in schools and universities is the important essential project of constructing moral system that links up schools and universities effectively; it is also one of important measures of conforming to development and completing historic mission.

It is quite meaningful and valuable.

A. Be Conducive to the Formation of Open, Interactive  and Shared Pattern  Digitization of excellent educational resource is the foundation of developing modern education and it is one of the main education patterns of the information age.

Com?ared with pattern of intellectual transferring teaching matenal followed by traditional schools, transferring knowledge by class and preaching pattern cannot meet the demands of the current information age, and original management model of restraining daily behaviors makes the idea that moral education lacks effectiveness ingrained [1].

Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources !s a breakthrough in traditional moral education pattern, and It change the narrowness and closeness of our traditional moral curriculum [2-3].

Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities makes moral function develop from inside school to outside school. Moral education should be open to the whole society rather than b?ing restrained inside school. Through the construction, different teachers and students in educational institutions cannot only get shared resources but also enjoy a series of educational ancillary services including interactive service and so on. It makes educational activities more flexible and efficient and meets the continuously improving demands of educational teaching [4].

Firstly, narrow teaching content can be transcend to make teachers and students' life and experience, even the experience of people in different classes integrate into education?l teaching process and energize the moral study and teachmg content. Secondly, students' passive position in educational teaching can be changed. Changing from recIpient of ?nowledge to constructer of knowledge, stude?ts' learnmg enthusiasm and initiative are inspired.

Expenence of enthusiasm, initiative and perceptibility that traditional media cannot offer can be got so as to overall improve the students' studying quality and teaching effect of moral education. Thirdly, teachers' educational horizon can be widened. Teachers' educational concept can be changed to ?urther inspire teachers' creative wisdom [5]. Fourthly, SOCial educational prejudice can be viewed equally, and the traditional concept-"moral education is just a business in   class" can be reversed. Integrating large-scale social forces and making a deep social mark on content that moral education needs, so that we can make it life-oriented, easy to accept and easy to share.

B. Be Improved the Quality of the Moral and Constructing  Style of Moral Curriculum  <,=urriculum resources are important security of CUrrIculum reforming and practice, every curriculum should consider certain curriculum resources as the foundation and premise as also as the moral curriculum [6]. Without the wide support of moral curriculum resources, moral effectiveness is hard to make the breakthrough progress.

However, the past development of moral curriculum resources, whatever the time or the space, it used to be worked in a closed status [7-8]. Curriculum resources primarily are formulated by nation and local government.

What teachers conduct is the command curriculum plan and mainly the teaching staffs who are responsible for curriculum implement. The sense development of moral workers' curriculum resources cooled off naturally [9]. Until a new round of basic education reform, the concepts of curriculum resources are definitely put forward to arouse peoples' awareness of developing curriculum resources. However within the specific practices, many teachers still take a wait and see attitude and they doesn' t participate in the practical action of developing curriculum resources.

Informatization construction of moral education resources in schools and universities can link up educational institutes, government offices, every kind of institutes families, enterprises, institutes and social component? together. It becomes a new open system of excellent education resources sharing and management. Under the system, there will be a profound change in management model of moral working and the way of resource utilization and this supports conveniences for successful reform of ne? curriculum.

C. Be Propitious to Promote the Balance of Education and  Improve Educational Quality Overall  Keeping balance of education developing is directional requirement of our country's compulsory education law and core of achieving education equity. Only achieving the educational balance in fact, we can configure public education resources equally and reasonably, and further narrow education gap between urban and rural so that we can enhance education quality and promote education equity [10].

Compared with traditional media, based on modem information technology, informatization construction of moral education resources in schools and universities will construct a public platform on excellent education resources that constructed and shared by students, teachers and the public.

By the technology of cloud computing, the project covers all schools, universities, and administrations from three views of municipality, district and school, contents such as construction of moral curriculum resources, teacher's professional development, school's teaching management and evaluation are assembled together. It is a novel    2014 IEEE Workshop on Electronics, Computer and Applications  comprehensive platform on managing and applying moral curriculum resources integrated teaching research, teaching management and administration; It is a system of teaching resources management integrated novel and three? dimensional curriculum of all curriculum resources.

Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities constructs a basic model integrating abundant, massive and open moral curriculum resources. The carrier for promoting sharing of excellent education resources are provided to enjoy excellent education resources as long as the teachers and students in poor area meet the condition of network and it is significant to promote developing balance of education.

D. Be in favour of Improving Teachers' Quality and  Promoting Teacher Professional Development  Teacher is not only the main part of resource construction but also the main part of resource utilization in the course of moral curriculum resource, and teachers themselves are also the important content of curriculum resources [5]. Therefore, the quality of teachers decides identification accuracy, range, extent of construction and utilization, level and the ability of efficiency of moral curriculum resources [11].

Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities makes a big push on developing teachers' quality and promoting teachers' development. Based on network and computer cluster technology, distributed data storage is used to make comprehensive management application. Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities takes construction of moral curriculum as the core link. With the support of network technology, computer cluster technology and a series of cloud computing technology such as large-scale virtual date warehouse technology, cooperation and sharing with different area, different school and different major is formed to achieve diversification of the main part of research and practice.

Under the condition of open academic discussion and cooperative research, forming a novel teaching practice and teaching theory integrated different thoughts, theories and courses make a big push on moral quality of teacher themselves and professional development level.



III. THE CONSTRUCTION PRINCIPLE  While researching and constructing informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities, the research group of this project did not apply the concept and structure of mature resource library, however they emphasize constructing a resource platform [12]. One of the core systems of informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities is the system of resource management and it has several hierarchic resource access and mechanism of resource cleaning and deposition. With the processing module which has artificial intelligence, a convergent, interactional regulation getting more and more stable has been made to data of resource and application of production. At the same time, the resource system is also a working mechanism that standard, visual, easy-to-operating workflow is established in   every link such as entering, release, application and evaluation of resources.

A. Construction of Overall Plan and Promotion in  Different Stages  Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities will uniformly, comprehensively and systematically plan the project according to several aspects such as actual construction target, purpose, range, etc. During the specific design, development and practice, the principle of controllable cost and sustainable development should be insisted on. The software and hardware system of informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities should be expandable and can be changed according to the actual status of resource application and functional requirement.

B. Construction of Various Resource Type and Unified  Standard  During the informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities, considering the variety of moral curriculum resources, users can use different forms of expression and even documents. It can be shared by users as long as supportable format can be provided. To combine more moral curriculum resources with this construction content, standard data structure and data interface should be constructed according to the trait of moral curriculum resources. The content of moral curriculum in schools and universities should be planned and organized in unified standard form. By forms of providing data interface, the insert of moral curriculum in schools and universities are carried out. That Shanghai Municipal Education Commission provides the platform and moral curriculum resources are provided by schools, universities, and relevant education institution is the overall form.

Compared to the engineering project of education informatization, standardization is a very important principle.

The project will be constructed according to seven industry standards of education informatization such as standard CELTS system of education informatization and "Basic Code of Education Management and Information Education Management", and it is required to innovate and practice combined with the project.

C. Construction of Openning  For reflecting the open construction principle of resources, platform and service, informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities must be open and shared. Cooperation with all kinds of resource content must be encouraged. Besides encouraging initiative share of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities in Shanghai municipality, relevant moral research institutes, other provinces, autonomous regions and even international education institutes will be encouraged to provide relevant share of moral curriculum results or resources of the research.

2014 IEEE Workshop on Electronics, Computer and Applications  D. Usage of Copyright Reasonably  To avoid the problem about the use of network copyright, informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities will provide comprehensive, open use for free to the entire education system in Shanghai educational metropolitan area network. At the same time, the AppStore model is imported to provide rewards by collecting points and the rule of exchanging points should be made so as to effectively encourage and ensure the enthusiasm of every kind of personnel involved in the construction.



IV. BASIC STRUCTURE  By means of information technology, informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universItIes integrates moral curriculum resources to construct a unified, shared, open, platform structure. Basic date are released and managed by method of organizing foreground portals. The share of content is realized through resources online sharing. Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities will rely on content of moral curriculum in teaching institutes or organizations to communicate, to share and to interact through the platform structure. Through the platform structure, Big Data of moral curriculum resources are made based on cloud computing technology. Innovation of moral curriculum is encouraged and application of excellent curriculum resources is promoted as well. The scientific, reasonable mechanism of resource evaluation is formed to provide basis and support during moral informatization.

The research of the project combines theories with experience. Based on informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities, the basic structure of Shanghai platform on construction and sharing of moral education curriculum resource in schools and universities is put forward explicitly, as Figure I shown.

A. Framework Characteristics  The design of platform on informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities has three layers frameworks, display layer, business modules layer and data layer.

Display layer is in charge of display issues and information display according to pages of different function module. Human-computer interaction interface operated by users are provided to perform operation and processing behavior of data visualization.

Business modules layer is in charge of manage and operate data stream according to constituted business flow and rules so as to meet the demands of every module function.

Data layer is in charge of classified data storage, and data of municipality management, district management, school management are effectively classified and managed.

In addition, monitoring system of information security will fully monitor the operation of system and deal with every operating record and error record, etc. The system of unified identity authentication will be in charge of users' unified management and authentication on the platform.

B. Application Process  Different users will have different requirements when applying moral resources, every character will have different process when getting resources or releasing resources.

The platform on construction and sharing of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities is the efficient process of cloud resource management combined with computing resources, storage resources and network resources. It consists of three parts, structure of cloud computing technology, information portal and system of cloud resource management so as to complete the quick arrangement of system resources. Moral resources update with need, and cloud storage infinitely expands with need so as to make sure of overall structure. Based on the system structure of cloud computing technology, the technology supporting cost of overall platform is cut down and efficient system maintenance, system monitoring, system management are provided. The flow chart of Shanghai platform on construction and sharing of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities is shown as Figure 2.



V. INNOVATION  When the research group researching and constructing informatization of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities, they try to keep step with Big Data of information society. A lot of novel information technology and development methods are introduced to become many bright spots of informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities.

A. Function Merging  The resource library usually stands for past resource system, and it is basically a symbol of resource assembling according to the capacity. It is the list and heap of resources and it can be understood to a warehouse of resources or a supermarket of resources at most. The research group of the project considers the informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities as an exhibition that will never ends. It possesses functions such as resource condition, normative cooperation, reasonable acceptance, overall display, comprehensive evaluation and technology consultation. It is a technology supporting platform of construction and practice of moral curriculum as well as a communication salon with moral workers within zero distance all day long.

B. Storage Release  Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities applies secondary release storage of resource noumenon, resource description and resource management. Every label of resource municipality center corresponds to the specific resource of resource branch center. When the label of municipality center emerges combination demands, the specific resource corresponding to branch center doesn' t migrate so as to solve the contradiction of share and copyright, and so as to solve the shortage of network link resources because of storage and processor resources redundancy.

2014 IEEE Workshop on Electronics, Computer and Applications  C. Mechanism Structured, Mechanism Standardization  and Mechanism Automation  Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities realizes three functions, release function, resource application function and resource management function. Three corresponding job specification and mechanism are constructed as well.

There are three statuses of drafts, submission and release in resources entering. Among three statuses, "drafts" means that drafts have not been confirmed. Cooperating modification can be done through network cloud storage.

"Submission" means that authors have completed the resource submission. Network shows the label of content only at any time. "Release" means that resources have passed the examination and normal labels and resource release function are provided.

D. Construction Multi-agent  During Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities, resource municipal center mainly store drafts of special group, planned resources, resources recommended by schools and districts, excellent resources of selection, etc. It will be shown in the municipality center network by using labels. Resource branch center mainly store special resources and it will shown in the branch center network by using labels.

Users' resource can be stored in the public storage areas of resource municipality center and can be connected by means of label link. The used wide area network resource in moral practice can also be shown in the recommending resource website of municipality center by means of labels.

E. Experienced High Quality  Besides the intuitive classified navigation, informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities also pays attention to the function realization of combination query retrieval, so the required materials can be found by users quickly. Users will form the normative resource format by utilizing processed personalized teaching resources. They will enter the resource center after authors' approval, and become new resources.

Information users are information creators and information managers at the same time [13]. Resources of informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities originate from moral practice, and are used for moral practice. The occurred behavioral data will become resources of moral sustainable development and provide decision services for them. In addition, continuous improvement and improving resource platform quality are as the basis.

F. Evaluation Diversification and Intelligentialize  During informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities, resource evaluation consists of four parts, author self-assessment, peer (netizens) assessment, applying data and professional assessment.

"Author self-assessment" manifests that authors themselves assess the core value of resources; "peer (netizens) assessment" manifests that peers (netizens) assess the   resources subjectively and overall; "Applying data" embodies all kinds of users' conditions of browsing, downloading and adapting data. "Professional assessment" provides experts to evaluate according to the special gauge.

The main structure and standard initial value of resource evaluation is determined by experts. Initial value will be continuously amended in practical use and never stops improving. During informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities, evaluation rules must be improved and amended according to the practical use. Record of network behavior data and mechanism of data mining are established as well so as to realize the improving continuously function in the process of using.



VI. SAFEGUARD MECHANISM  A. Operation Management Mechanism  Informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities need to establish a long lasting management mechanism of resource construction and sharing. On the one hand, frontline teachers need to play a leading role during resource construction, and pay attention to actual needs while teaching in order to correspond with teachers' teaching thoughts and methods; On the other hand, service coordinating function of education system competent authorities needs to be played fully [14]. The whole city as a game of chess, everyone does his duty, the platform on construction and sharing of resources is construed and maintained to provide support service, operational guidance and technical support so as to provide high quality technical service [12]. In the specific operation, some aspects such as team building, operating mechanism construction, investment mechanism construction need to be taken into consideration.

Personnel include application developers, managing maintainers. Among them, application developers can consist of frontline teachers, research institutes and development enterprises. At the same time, frontline teachers' enthusiasm needs to be transferred to make them become the main force of resource development [II]. At the municipal level, a resource development backbone team which consists of backbone frontline teachers, research department, development organizations and education managers needs to be constructed to solve important, difficult problems of resource development and to lead, guide the moral curriculum resource work of the whole city.

Management and maintain team consists of municipality, university, district, department, school, information technician and backbone teacher. In the aspect of management responsibility division, municipality IS responsible for planning and operational guidance of municipal moral curriculum resource construction. It undertakes construction and management of technology platform, and guide universities, schools, districts to make deployment; Schools and districts participate in the plan making of municipal moral curriculum construction.

Affiliated departments and schools are organized to carry out the development and construction of local moral curriculum    2014 IEEE Workshop on Electronics, Computer and Applications  resources. They undertake the maintenance and management of moral curriculum resource platform in schools and districts, and undertake auditing and whether moral resource uploaded by affiliated departments and schools has been put into storage, and ensure the normal operation of data information service in whole city; While departments and schools accept the operational guidance of superior departments, the team undertake the preliminary examination of moral curriculum resource uploaded by teachers in their schools and maintain the accuracy of data in their schools.

B. Incentive Mechanism  Incentive strategy is not only specific method, but also the incentive dominant idea and guiding ideology. Through the research of incentive mechanism during constructing teaching resource, incentive strategy can be applied in the aspect of constructing incentive mechanism. Three factors, matter, spirit and information should be arranged reasonably in the main work of moral curriculum resource construction, and all constructers' enthusiasm of construing moral curriculum resource together should be stimulated [15].

Details include:  1) Relevant strategy of information acquisition and  information publishing Through recording and counting the network behaviors  of two aspects users' information using and information providing, all kinds of users' contribution to informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities presents obviously by means of "point". Service of online and offline moral curriculum resources is realized hierarchically and reasonable evaluation are given in different level scope so as to realize the construction and sharing of resources.

2) Relevant strategy of resource optimization and  resource display With regard to concerning, downloading and applying  major moral curriculum resources, they are promoted and propagandized by means of "on the front page" and "recommend". Several ways such as evaluation of "excellent moral curriculum resources" and special collection publishing are combined with to form the result resources, and it is considered as one of task, evaluation index of schools and teachers' moral work.

3) Strategy combined with resource sharing and moral research  With resource sharing and applying, choosing hot issues, difficult problems and key issues, all constructers are encouraged to host or participate in the informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities through establishing special research projects.

All constructers are encouraged through service being established by technical means to provide value of self? display and self-realization.



VII. FURTHER WORK  A. Optimizing Processes and Improving Mechanism in  Practice  Now the preliminary results of informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities-Shanghai platform on construction and sharing of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities (deyu.edu.sh.cn)-has officially run online, Shanghai Municipal Education Commission organize some universities, districts and schools to make a test. A new information platform usually can be improved gradually after a larger scale or a certain time of practical use. It includes: removing present municipality, districts, univerSItIes, departments or evaluation such as moral feature, thought moral qualities curriculum, science education value, team building, and social practice directly to this platform to operate and manage. The evaluation function and showing excellent resources function in real-time have been realized, excellent resources digitizing and repeat work of platform inputting twice has been also solved. Through these important activities of improving platform application value, it is a very important opportunity to let students, teachers, schools and moral workers understand, learn and know informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities.

In addition, it is necessary to find the defect existing in the present construction and sharing mechanism while adding case resources or applying experience communication function; It is necessary to grasp the problem and defect in the application and to make flow pressure test; It is necessary to optimize business process and to improve safeguard mechanism; It is necessary to respond to and solve the problems put forward by users and to make the process management and quality control.

B. Improving the Pertinence and Availability During  Resource Accumulation and Application  Now informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities still stays the level of statistics and the presentation function in the data utilization.

It is used for evaluation of resource reference, resource providers' activeness, contribution, and social evaluation of event (case) and figure (creator, evaluator). Data are not sufficiently utilized to promote its healthy development, and doesn' t become the necessary link during education and teaching.

After the samples of resource accumulating and application reaching the quantity which has statistical significance, resource description need to be further examined and improved. The applying data become models and mechanisms to reach the filter function and sediment function of resources so that resource diversity satisfies the pertinence and effectiveness of application and synthetically improves the quality of resources.

2014 IEEE Workshop on Electronics, Computer and Applications  C. Mining the Law of Connecting Moral Work Effectively  in Different Parts During Resource Optimization  Technically, the project research group can utilize features that explicit behaviors have digitized such as resource entering, application, and evaluation of Shanghai platform on construction and sharing of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities. Making a correlation analysis of relevant students' data before activity and after activity, elements of activity itself, social attributes such as teacher developmental stage and academic background, then positive and negative relevant factors can be found, and empirical correlation rule can be made. According to the comparison and characteristic contrast with constructers' individual teaching behaviors and variance calculation of conventional models, diagnosis and behavior suggestion are put forward during education and teaching [16].

In addition, through the content analysis and data mining of a lot of moral curriculum resources accumulated by Shanghai platform on construction and sharing of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities in different learning parts, we can try to find the case of moral education effectively in Shanghai universities and schools with making the summary of experiences and the rule induction so as to extract and guide the further informatization construction of moral curriculum resources in schools and universities.

