Big Data Empowered Self Organized Networks  Nicola Baldo, Lorenza Giupponi, Josep Mangues-Bafalluy

Abstract? Mobile networks are generating a huge amount of data in the form of network measurements as well as network control and management interactions, and 5G is expected to make it even bigger. In this paper, we discuss the different approaches according to which this information could be leveraged using a Big Data approach. In particular, we focus on Big Data Empowered Self Organized Networks, discussing its most peculiar traits, its potential, and the relevant related work, as well as analysing several cases of its possible application.

Finally, we report the results of a case study targeting network- wide Dropped Call/Bad QoS minimization, with the aim of answering the question of how big is the big data to be dealt with according to the proposed approach.

Keywords? Self Organized Networks; Big Data; 5G; Network Optimization

I.  INTRODUCTION A huge amount of measurement, control and management  information is generated during the normal operation of today?s 3G and 4G mobile networks. This amount is expected to grow even more for future 5G mobile networks, for various reasons: 1) the expected higher density of base stations, which is needed to provide the target capacity increase of 5G systems; 2) the higher number of mobile terminals that is expected to come with the Machine To Machine (M2M) and Internet of Things (IoT) paradigms; 3) the increasing variety of application and services, each with distinct traffic patterns and QoS requirements; 4) the coexistence of an increasing number of mobile technologies, each with its additional complexity and peculiarities; 5) the introduction of new architectural paradigms, such as Software Defined Networks (SDN) and Network Function Virtualization (NFV).

We are now in the information age, where Big Data approaches have already demonstrated in a variety of cases that it is possible to leverage such huge amounts of information to develop innovative solutions, as well as to bring more power and additional value to existing ones. Because of this, we believe that a Big Data approach applied to the huge amount of information generated within 5G Mobile Networks could yield significant benefits for all the players: network equipment vendors could offer more competitive solutions, mobile network operators could improve their profit margins, customers could get better service at lower prices, new business opportunities could arise for Big Data services aimed at mobile networks and, finally, the public administration and society could also benefit by using mobile network data for  other services and applications.

Among all these opportunities, in this paper we analyse in  detail the possibility of applying a Big Data approach to Self Organized Networks (SONs), which we find particularly promising and appealing. The reason for this is that existing 4G networks are already very complex and costly to manage and, even though SON solutions have been researched over the last several years, these solutions are still struggling to provide a comprehensive global network management. 5G networks are expected to become even more complex in order to address upcoming challenges, such as the foreseen need for a 1000x increase in capacity as well as the integration of new networking paradigms like IoT/M2M, SDNs, etc. As we will detail in this paper, we believe that state-of-the-art SON approaches suffer from a number of limitations, and for this reason their effectiveness in a 5G scenario would not be sufficient to achieve the global network optimization and operational cost reduction goals. For this reason, we foresee the advent of Big Data Empowered SONs (BES) as the most effective solution to autonomic network management for 5G systems.

Taking the above discussion as a basis, in the rest of the paper we provide the following contributions. In Section II we provide a general overview of the main sources of information that are available within a mobile network. In Section III we propose a high-level classification of the opportunities for a Big Data approach applied to mobile networks. Then, in Section IV, we focus on BES; in this context, we discuss the related work and other relevant background information. We propose different use cases for BES in Section V, and in Section VI we analyse in detail one of them, associated with the critical problem of reducing the call dropping in cellular networks. Finally, we draw our conclusions in Section VII.



II. SOURCES OF INFORMATION WITHIN A MOBILE NETWORK The huge amount of information that we referred to in the  introduction comes from various network elements, such as base stations, mobile terminals, gateways and management entities, and can be classified in the following categories:  1) Control information related to regular short-term network operation, covering functionalities such as call/session set-up, release and maintenance, security, QoS, idle and connected mode mobility, and radio resource control.

2) Control information related to SON functions associated to the optimization and maintenance of cellular  This work was made possible by NPRP grant No. 5-1047-2-437 from the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of The Qatar Foundation). The statements made herein are solely the responsibility of the authors.

European Wireless 2014  ISBN 978-3-8007-3621-8 ?  VDE VERLAG GMBH, Berlin, Offenbach, Germany     Fig. 1. The proposed Big Data approach to 5G Networks  systems, and which cover aspects such as radio link failure statistics, inter-cell interference and cell load signalling, etc.

3) Management information covering long-term network operation functionalities, such as Fault, Configuration, Accounting, Performance and Security management (FCAPS), as well as customer and terminal management. An example of such information is that defined for Operation and Management (OAM), which consists of aggregated statistics on network performance, such as number of active users, active bearers, successful/failed handover events, etc. per base station, as well as information gathered by means of active probing.

4) Authentication, Authorization and Accounting (AAA) information, including for example Charging Data Records (CDRs).

5) Customer relationship information, e.g., complaints about bad service quality, churn information, etc.

All these categories apply for current 4G systems; 5G systems are expected to include all of them, and possibly new categories.

With reference to 4G, the usage of the above information made by operators is typically limited to the following:  Information 1) is normally discarded after network operation purposes have been fulfilled. In very specific instances, e.g., when an engineer is working to fix a fault, small portions of it are gathered by the engineer via the tracing functionality;  Information 2) is currently leveraged by SON algorithms that aim at autonomously configuring, optimizing and healing the cellular network, improving its performance and at the same time reducing its management costs. These SON algorithms are often heuristic, and they discard information after using it.

Moreover, algorithms with different purposes have typically conflicting goals (e.g., optimizing coverage comes at the expense of inter-cell interference), and their coordination is an open challenge.

Information 3) is currently mostly used for fault identification, e.g., triggering alarms when some performance indicator passes some threshold, so that an engineer can investigate and fix the problem. The information of 3) can be easily stored; however it is typically used only for manual query by engineers.

Typically, the only automatic use of this info is threshold-based triggering, which can be done with very low computational complexity.

Information 4) and 5) is currently gathered and stored, but only used by customer service. The network operation departments typically do not leverage this information and do not have access to it.

To summarize, the current state-of-the-art is based on the following approach:  Only store relatively small amount of information, e.g., 3), 4), 5).

Information that would require much larger storage, e.g., 1) and 2), is discarded after usage.

Automated processing of information is limited to simple and low-complexity solutions (e.g., threshold- based triggering based on 3); specifically-targeted heuristic algorithms based on 2) ).

Many operations are still done manually, e.g., fixing network faults requires intervention of an engineer.

Data is not shared among departments of a mobile network operator. For example, the customer service does not leverage network management data, and the  European Wireless 2014  ISBN 978-3-8007-3621-8 ?  VDE VERLAG GMBH, Berlin, Offenbach, Germany    network management department does not have access to customer service data (e.g., CDRs).



III. OPPORTUNITIES FOR APPLYING A BIG DATA APPROACH TO MOBILE NETWORKS  The Big Data approach for 5G Networks that we propose in this paper is depicted in Fig. 1. In this section, we provide a high-level classification of the different purposes for which such approach could be exploited.

A. Big-data Empowered SONs (BES) By leveraging all the information available within a mobile  network, a Big-data Empowered SONs (BES) approach can bring mobile networks to Operational Excellence. Here are some practical examples:  Instead of simple threshold based network fault detection systems that require engineer intervention to run further measurements (e.g., by turning on tracing) to find out the source of the problem, a BES would autonomously identify the cause of the problem based on the previously recorded data, and fix it with little or no engineer intervention. An advanced BES solution could even prevent problems before they occur.

The currently open challenge of coordination among SON functions could be solved by a BES, by analysing the correlation among conflicting performance goals of different SON functions, and dynamically determining the operating point that provides the best performance trade-off.

Data traditionally unavailable for network management purposes, such as CDRs, could be leveraged by a BES, for example to find out typical mobility patterns of users, and proactively take network optimization actions, such as taking informed handover decision, concentrating spectrum resources in location with higher user densities, and turning off selected base stations when they are foreseen to be not needed.

B. Network-Aware Business Intelligence According to the Network-Aware Business Intelligence  (NABI) approach, the business intelligence of the mobile operator can be significantly strengthened by a Big Data approach. Here are some examples:  With NABI, Customer Service can move from a reactive approach - the user detects a problem, calls customer services, and after many interactions, eventually, an engineer fixes the problem - to a proactive approach: for example, customer service can be aware of the problem before the user calls to complain, and promptly provide a solution (e.g., promise a fix, or offer some compensation) to keep the customer happy.

A NABI approach could leverage the correlation between network performance and customer churn information to retain customers. For example, the operator could find out which are the network performance issues most related with past churn, and  then proactively identify users that are likely to churn in the future due to network performance issues, and offer them some compensatory benefit.

NABI can also be leveraged to take informed business decisions. For example, the operator could find out that the insufficient network infrastructure in some area is a major cause of churn, and decide to invest in better infrastructure there.

C. Open Mobile Network Data With an adequate regulation and appropriate means to  guarantee the necessary privacy and security, mobile network operators could export the data gathered within their network to other companies, institutions, and to the public, to achieve different benefits, realizing the paradigm that we call Open Mobile Network Data (OMND). Here are some examples:  OMND would be a key enabler for a lot of Smart City use cases, such as public transport network optimization, demographics, urban planning, etc.

OMND could be leveraged by third parties for providing location and context-aware content and services.

In the remainder of this paper, we will focus exclusively on BES, deferring NABI and OMND to future work.



IV. BACKGROUND AND CURRENT TRENDS FOR BES In this section, we will discuss some reference material in  order to provide the reader with the necessary background information on BES as well as with an overview of its current trends of evolution.

A. Academic While Big Data is currently a hot topic in the Computing  research community [2], the term ?Big Data? is still relatively new in the context of Mobile Networks. However, we argue that the idea of BES has been around for much longer, just with different names. To name a few seminal papers in this respect, both the Knowledge Plane approach of [2] and the Cognitive Network paradigm formalized in [4] have the same overall purpose of a SON, i.e., realizing an automatic network configuration, management and optimization, and qualify as a Big Data problem as soon as the network size is non-trivial. As another example, Autonomic Networks have the goal of removing the man-in-the-loop from network management [5], or at least lightening his burden [6], and it has been clearly stated that this approach in future networks will require novel monitoring architectures together with advanced data analytics [7] in order to be successful; these aspects make Future Autonomic Networks quite in line with the BES approach.

As we said previously, the term Big Data has started to be used in a mobile network context only very recently, and mostly for applications that are outside the scope of the operation of the mobile network itself; an interesting example of such type of work can be found in [8]. However, only a few publications address the use of a Big Data approach aimed at mobile network management and optimization. Some examples in this category are [9], where the authors apply a Big Data approach to the measurements gathered in a mobile network in  European Wireless 2014  ISBN 978-3-8007-3621-8 ?  VDE VERLAG GMBH, Berlin, Offenbach, Germany    order to carry out an enhanced Network Coverage analysis, and [10], where a similar approach is instead used to characterize data plane traffic and applications. We note that these publications focus almost exclusively on the data analysis part, but the exploitation of such analysis for network management and optimization is not addressed.

B. Standardization The concept of SON is quite well established in the  standardization of mobile network technologies. The use cases for SON up to now are defined in [26]. Each SON use case focuses on the optimization of a particular KPI at a specific layer of the protocol stack; additionally, different use cases have, in most cases, conflicting goals, and how to optimize them jointly is an open issue. BES has a much larger scope, i.e., it affects a big portion of the network, and possibly considers the whole protocol stack, all the planes (control, user, management), all the network segments (access, transport, core), QoE and, eventually, customer service information. In some sense, a traditional SON can be seen as a special case of BES with a limited focus.

As we discussed in the introduction, the current operational practice of 3GPP is reactive: only minimal information is commonly gathered for anomaly detection purposes (e.g. RLF), and tracing only activated when an anomaly is detected; furthermore, the tracing is typically performed manually by the engineer. The crucial difference of the BES approach is that tracing is always on, and the actions are taken automatically, without the need for human intervention. We note that BES can be realized with the information that can be gathered via the already standardized protocols and interfaces; in other words, the 3GPP standard is already ready for BES, it is mostly a matter for equipment manufacturer to integrate the necessary Big Data tools and solutions that can make it real. This of course does not preclude the possibility of standardizing further mobile network data sources that could allow the realization of novel BES features.

In the remainder of this subsection, we provide an overview of the 3GPP technical specifications that are most relevant for the realization of a BES solution.

To start with, Charging Data Records (CDRs) are defined in [20] and provide a comprehensive set of statistics at the service, bearer and IMS levels. These records are typically stored for offline processing by the operator and, because of this, they have been the first type of data involved in mobile- network related big data research studies. The granularity of this information in the time domain is however quite coarse, as records are generated in correspondence with high-level service events (e.g., start of a call). Hence, the use of this data for BES is expected to be limited to the same coarse time scale, e.g., network optimization on an hourly basis.

The Performance Management functionality, whose concept and requirements are standardized in [12], readily provides a significant amount of data on network performance that could be leveraged for BES. The available data is defined in [13], and covers, among others, the following aspects of the performance of the radio access network: Radio Resource Control and Utilization, performance of the various bearers  (both on the radio part and in the backhaul), idle and connected mode mobility.

The Minimization of Drive Tests (MDT) functionality defines some Radio Measurements [15] provided by the UEs which are aimed at coverage optimization. These radio measurements are both idle and connected mode mobility, cover items such as power measurements and radio link failure events, and can be associated with position information on the UE performing the measurement.

E-UTRA Control plane protocols and interfaces, such as the RRC [16], the S1-AP [17] and the X2-AP protocols [18], are also a potential major data source relevant for BES, especially concerning aspects such as cell coverage, UE connectivity, mobility in idle and connected mode, inter-cell interference, resource management, load balancing, etc. A subset of this information is in fact processed to obtain part of the measurement information that we introduced previously in this section; however, most of the information is actually discarded after it fulfilled its purpose. Rather than being discarded, it could be retained and leveraged for a BES approach.

Data plane traffic flow statistics are also an important source of information potentially useful for BES. This data can be gathered at various points in the mobile network, e.g., at the eNB, at the SGW and at the PGW. On this matter, IPFIX [19] is an example of standardized format for the exchange of such statistics.

In this subsection, we have mainly focused on 3GPP standardization efforts, given their relevance to the way BES is understood in this paper. We note, however, that there are efforts undertaken by other standardization bodies with a somewhat different scope, but which could be also of potential interest for BES, at least partially. Some relevant examples in this category are the Autonomic network engineering for the self-managing Future Internet (AFI) ETSI Industry Specification Group (ISG), with a generic network management perspective, or the TM Forum, with a business- oriented perspective on the operation of the network.

C. Commercial products At the time of this writing, no BES product is already on  the market, to the best of our knowledge. However, there are several products which include key components of what would be a BES system, and whose presence confirms that the underlying technology is ready for the design and development of BES solutions. In this section, we discuss a few examples.

Network monitoring solutions such as [21] provide means for interception and analysis of huge volumes of traffic; other products in the same category, such as [23], are explicitly claimed in their advertisement to include big data analytics capabilities. This type of solutions could be adopted in mobile networks to complement other sources of information, e.g., by providing an insight on end-to-end application level performance thanks to deep packet inspection.

We see an increasing interest in the industry for bringing network management solutions traditionally adopted for  European Wireless 2014  ISBN 978-3-8007-3621-8 ?  VDE VERLAG GMBH, Berlin, Offenbach, Germany    general IP networks, such as [21], to 3GPP based mobile networks.

Some mobile network analytics product [24] is already said to include some Big Data functionality that would allow to analyse the correlation between network traffic and end-user Quality of Experience. However, it is unclear to what extent it can support network self-organization, which is the primary target of BES.



V. BES USE CASES In this section we provide an overview of some use cases  where we foresee that the BES approach could be adopted.

A. Call dropped / Bad QoS A definition of these two use cases can be found in [14],  Appendix A. The state-of-the-art approach to address this use case, as discussed in [14], is based on the reactive use of the tracing system, i.e., no trace is active during normal usage, and only after a fault is detected (e.g., after a customer complaint is received), engineers activate the tracing of the relevant measurements for the affected network elements, to identify and fix the cause of the problem.

A first innovation with respect to the state of the art would be a Big Data assisted approach, where the trace sources are always activated for all network elements. A monitoring system would then periodically check this data, and eventually trigger notifications to the system engineers, attaching the associated measurement traces, so that the engineers can promptly identify the cause of the problem and fix it, without the need for post-mortem tracing. The amount of monitoring data transmitted would be significantly higher compared with the reactive approach; however, the computational demand for the processing of this data would still be relatively low due to the simple processing operations involved.

A further innovation would be achieved with a BES approach, where, in addition to the data sources of the former approach (which is basically KPIs), the corresponding relevant network configuration would also be gathered. An intelligent agent would then continuously analyse this data, and refine the network configuration to minimize dropped calls and occurrences of bad QoS.  The amount of data gathered would have a further slight increase with respect to the big-data assisted approach; however the computational demand for processing and analysing this data would become significantly higher, because of the complex processing required by the intelligent agent to determine the factors that cause the problem, as well as the best solution to fix it.

B. Self Organized Network Optimization According to the 3GPP specifications, the SON approach to  Network Optimization is referred to as self-optimization.

Several use cases are identified, including Mobility Robustness Optimization (MRO), Mobility Load Balancing (MLB), Inter- cell Interference Coordination (ICIC), Coverage and Capacity Optimization (CCO), and Random Access Channel (RACH) optimization [25][26].

The state-of-the-art approach is the following. When it is identified that a Network Element (e.g., the eNB) needs to  optimize some parameters, those are locally updated based on automatic optimization algorithms. As an example, the MRO use case focuses on the reduction of the call drop rate due to failed handover (HO) procedures. The state-of-the-art MRO approach consists in evaluating the HO failure events, and detecting the guilty cell based on the control information messages that are interchanged among NEs for the HO procedure. The HO parameters are then updated with the aim of performing the correct HO decision in the future. We note, however, that the objectives of the different SON use cases are conflicting. For example, the HO parameters optimized in the MRO case that we just discussed are the same parameters that would be optimized by the MLB function. So, the MRO optimization may affect the MLB, which would then affect the ICIC, which in turn would affect the CCO, etc.

A BES approach, on the other hand, would consist in identifying the set of messages, measurements and statistics to monitor online, for all the use cases, and propose a multi- objective optimization approach in a coordinated fashion. On this matter, the live analysis of the impact of different parameter settings on the various optimization objectives in different environmental conditions is crucial in order to cope with the complexity of 3GPP technologies and the heterogeneity of the possible deployment conditions.

C. Big data for Network Sharing optimization The use cases of Network Sharing (NS) are described in  [27]; the generic idea among all these use cases is that an Infrastructure Provider (InP) shares its network infrastructure to several Participating Operators (POs) with different possible RAN resource sharing granularities and dynamics, and different possible business models. The associated Operations, Administration and Maintenance issues are discussed in [28]; we note that one of the key enabling technologies for Network Sharing is Network Function Virtualization (NFV).

The current approach to NS is that the InP statically configures all the network entities (i.e., eNB, MME, SGW) for each virtual network operator (VNO), for example, with a virtual machine for each network entity. The performance of the virtualization framework of the InP is monitored at a coarse level, e.g., with periodic measurements of the CPU load at servers, total network load in a rack with several NEs, etc.

Engineers check this monitoring information and rearrange the configuration in case a problem is detected, e.g., manually transferring some NEs to other servers in case of overload.

On the other hand, a BES approach would involve the online optimization of the location of NEs in terms of data centre, rack inside data centre, and server inside rack. This could be done for a single PO, but also globally (i.e., across all POs within this InP) considering the traffic through interfaces connecting NEs of various VNOs. When multiple POs share the same spectrum and eNB (via eNB virtualization), a global optimization process could jointly consider the position and traffic demand of users of multiple VNOs to decide, for instance, that a certain virtual eNB of a PO is to be deactivated in order to allow more resources for the co-located virtual eNB of another PO that might be facing a traffic peak. Additionally, the reduction in the energy consumption of the InP could be another driving objective for the optimization.

European Wireless 2014  ISBN 978-3-8007-3621-8 ?  VDE VERLAG GMBH, Berlin, Offenbach, Germany    D. Increase global capacity/throughput density A BES approach could provide an effective means for  achieving an increase in the overall network capacity by optimizing the exploitation of a collection of available radio access technologies and configuration. For example, based on the variations in the traffic demand of the users and of their positions with respect to cellular base stations and WiFi access points, and monitoring information of the various relevant parameters of both the cellular and WiFi network infrastructure, a BES solution could dynamically aggregate multiple technologies, purchase spectrum on-demand, adjust transmission powers to meet different capacity/coverage trade- offs, or design the best global flow pattern and appropriately redirect traffic to obtain more aggregated throughput with the same resources.



VI. CASE STUDY: HOW BIG IS BIG DATA FOR A BES APPROACH TO THE CALL DROPPED/BAD QOS USE CASE  In this section we consider a practical use case for BES and model it making some simplifying assumptions, in order to get some rough figures about how big is the big data that would be involved in a BES approach compared with state-of-the-art solutions.

A. Use case definition We consider the Call Dropped/Bad QoS case that we  previously discussed in Section V.A. For this use case, we assume that a minimal BES solution could be implemented with the following pieces of information:  Radio Link Failure (RLF) information generated in correspondence with the occurrence of a RLF event, such as when a handover fails, or the UE in connected mode moves out of coverage. In particular, we consider the RLF Report contained within the UE Information Response defined in [16], the RLF Indication defined in [18], and the Handover Report also defined in [18].

Measurement Logging information, as defined in [16].

We assume that a BES approach would leave this logging permanently enabled for all UEs.

UE Measurement Reports [16]: the UE periodically sends these reports to the eNB as part of the normal operation, either periodically or upon the occurrence of some condition related with the measurements (e.g., signal above/below thresholds). Typically, the eNB discards it after usage. We consider that periodic reports are used, and that the whole content of all the reports is stored for BES usage.

Load Information, defined in [18], which is periodically exchanged among eNBs for inter-cell interference coordination purposes;  Resource Status Update, also defined in [18], which is periodically exchanged among eNBs for load balancing and mobility/capacity optimization purposes.

For comparison purposes, we will consider that a state-of- the-art (SoTA) solution would only gather RLF information, only keep logging enabled for 0.1% of the UEs, and discard the UE Measurement Reports, Load Information and Resource  Status Update messages right after consumption by the receiving eNB.

We stress that the set of information elements that we consider for the BES approach is rather minimal; actual BES implementations could easily include many more parameters, e.g., information from other 3GPP primitives, QoS and QoE measurements, and possibly also customer service information such as CDRs. Because of this, the figures that we will provide in Section VI.C for a BES solution will be quite conservative.

B. Modeling assumptions In this section we outline the modelling assumptions that  we adopted to perform our quantification of the amount of big data involved in the use case being considered.

First we need an estimate of the amount of data that corresponds to each of the messages listed in the previous section. To this aim, we note that most of the data comes from 3GPP specs where they are encoded often with the ASN.1 Packet Encoding Rules, which is highly compressed and efficient, but would cause an additional processing burden on a Big Data solution. We assume that, for a BES approach, the same data items are stored in a decoded format, which allows easy processing at the cost of slightly increased storage requirements. In particular, consistently with the storage requirements of typical database systems, and with the need for using global identifiers, we assume that:  Integers are stored in the minimum number of bytes required for storing the value range.

Enum values are stored in one byte.

Bitmask fields of length  bits are stored in  bytes.

ECGI values are stored in 6 bytes.

IMSI values are stored in 8 bytes.

Second, in order to make each data record identifiable within the BES framework, we make the further following assumptions:  The C-RNTI field is translated to the corresponding IMSI.

The physCellId field is translated to the corresponding ECGI.

For each UE Measurement Report, the IMSI of the reporting UE and the ECGI of the serving cell are also stored.

Third, we need to estimate how many messages of each kind would be generated. On this matter, we made the following assumptions for our calculations:  Each UE experiences on average a RLF event every 20 min.

Measurement Logging is always active with the minimum allowed interval of 1280 ms.

The report interval for UE Measurements is 240ms (minimum allowed value).

European Wireless 2014  ISBN 978-3-8007-3621-8 ?  VDE VERLAG GMBH, Berlin, Offenbach, Germany    The average interval between consecutive Load Information and Resource Status Update messages is 10 ms.

Fourth, some messages can contain multiple instances of some data structures, one for each cell for which information is reported. On this matter, in order to perform our calculations, we made the following assumptions:  Within each UE Measurement Report, data relative to 8 neighbour cells (the maximum allowed number) is included.

Each eNB has 3 cells for which it includes information within the Load Information and Resource Status Update messages.

Each cell is interfered by 8 neighbour cells, with whom it interchanges inter-cell interference coordination information via the Load Information message.

Finally, we need some assumptions on the network topology in order to derive our figures on how big is big data for a BES approach. To this aim, we adopt the values proposed in [29] for a residential deployment, i.e.:  The UE density is 10000 UE/km2.

The macro eNB density is 4.62 eNB/km2;  The pico/femto eNB density is ranging from 50 to 100 eNB/km2, which, according to [29], corresponds to a total network capacity ranging approximately from 50 to 300 GB/h/km2.

C. Results In Fig. 2 we show the amount of data that would be  gathered per unit area following respectively the BES and SoTA approach. The most striking aspect of the results is that the transition from a SoTA approach to a BES approach implies an increase on the amount of data to be handled between 3 and 4 orders of magnitude. Additionally, we note that the BES approach exhibits a significant dependence on the  small cell (pico/femto) eNB density, whereas the SoTA approach is constant. This is due to the fact that, as per our assumptions, the amount of information gathered by the SoTA approach depends only on the UE density, but not on the eNB density. Considered the volume of the data, the velocity of processing that a BES solution would require in order to satisfactorily address the use cases that we discussed in Section V, and the variety in the data itself due to the very complex interdependencies among the variables involved, we observe that the BES approach has indeed all the characteristics of a Big Data problem.

In Fig. 3 we report the average network load per eNB due to the collection of the network information needed as input for the BES optimization. We assumed that the network load is shared equally among eNBs regardless of their type; while not very accurate (e.g., the actual load per eNB would vary according to how many UEs are associated to each eNB), this assumption can still yield a meaningful order of magnitude of the considered metric. From the figure, we note that the SoTA approach has a network load on the order of kilobits per second per eNB, compared to the order of megabits per second per eNB of the BES approach. We note that these figures do not take into account any protocol overhead, so the actual network load would be probably slightly larger.

Overall, the results that we just presented show that the realization of a BES solution will require significant investments in data processing infrastructure as well as in additional network capacity. Because of this, a BES approach will only make sense if it is effectively able to achieve a significant improvement in network performance and efficiency as well as a reduction in network running costs. On this respect, we argue that more research on practical BES solutions is needed in order to be able to evaluate their effectiveness and viability in real network deployments.



VII. CONCLUSIONS In this paper we introduced the concept of Big Data Empowered Self Organized Networks, discussing its main   Fig. 3. Network load per eNB on the backhaul link due to the gathering of  monitoring information for the BES and SOTA approaches defined in Section VI.A considering the assumptions described in Section VI.B.

1.00  10.00  100.00  1000.00  10000.00  100000.00  1000000.00  10000000.00  25 50 100 200 400 800 1600  ne tw  or k lo ad  (b it /s /e N B )  small cell eNB density (eNB/km2)  BES  SoTA   Fig. 2. Amount of mobile network data to be gathered and processed for  the BES and SOTA approaches defined in Section VI.A considering the assumptions described in Section VI.B.

0.01  0.10  1.00  10.00  100.00  1000.00  10000.00  25 50 100 200 400 800 1600  da ta  am ou  nt (G B /d ay /k m  2 )  small cell eNB density (eNB/km2)  BES  SoTA  European Wireless 2014  ISBN 978-3-8007-3621-8 ?  VDE VERLAG GMBH, Berlin, Offenbach, Germany    traits and its possible interesting cases of application. We hope that our study can serve as a stimulus for further research in this field.

