Miniaturized Claw-Pole Generators and Motors with

Abstract Energy harvesting systems converting kinetic ener-  gy to drive an electromagnetic generator either to power an elec-  tronic device directly or to charge a secondary battery may be used to substitute big size and heavy weight batteries of autono- mous systems.  The output voltage and current of the generator  is mostly transient and discontinuous in nature and must be con- verted to a DC signal.  This requires energy converters with small volume and low weight.  We therefore present a novel to-  pology for a claw-pole generator, which features an extremely compact design and high conversion efficiency.  The design can be further miniaturized, still using conventional processes and  technologies for manufacturing.  In the development process analytical calculations applying reluctance network techniques were first carried out in order to determine the basic geometry  of the magnetic circuit.  A 3D-FE model was created to perform field calculations in order to optimize the alternator's output power.  These investigations also allowed a substantial reduction  of the cogging torque, which is typical for claw-pole machines.

The 3D-FE model calculations are in good agreement with expe- rimental results.  However, it turned out that there is a high sen-  sitivity of the cogging torque to geometrical variations of the claws.  When extending the system to two electrical phases, the generator principle was applied to build a motor with a high  torque density.  In a comparison with the data of commercially available motors of similar size it turned out that this new ma- chine is more than a match to them.



I. INTRODUCTION  Kinetic energy is one of the most readily available energy  sources for energy harvesting devices.  Typical applications  include the displacement or vibration of a proof mass in ma-  gnetic induction transducers or inertial converters based on  piezoelectricity.  However, rotating machines are rather sel-  dom applied up to now, although there are a number of small  motors on the market.  One reason may be that they have a  fixed shape, which is rather often not adapted to existing as-  semblies.  Clearly, they are not optimized to be used as gene-  rators.  They usually contain permanent magnets, which pro-  vide high power density without energy consumption and  coreless coils which are fabricated using specific manufactu-  ring methods (Faulhaber, Maxon).

On the other hand, there are only few miniaturized genera-  tors available.  Relatively small claw-pole synchronous gene-  rators are now widely used as alternators in automobiles [1].

The main drawback of usual claw-pole alternators is their  complex geometry, often resulting in structures which are  complicated to manufacture.  Due to small air gaps they ne-  vertheless offer the opportunity to fully utilize the high flux  density from nowadays rare earth magnets.

There is a growing demand for small generator systems  with high efficiency for energy harvesting purposes.  Typical  applications are miniaturized energy sources with a huge life-  time for autonomous electronic devices, such as portable  energy sources for emergency systems, wireless electronic  door locks or portable medical devices.

In order to miniaturize the size of a claw-pole generator  and to ease its construction, different geometrical modifica-  tions have been applied.  In a first step, the ring magnet was  substituted by smaller separated magnets, leading to a reduc-  tion in diameter.  The topology of the soft-magnetic rotor was  also changed.  The new shape leaves more space for the coil,  simplifies the manufacturing of the rotor considerably, and  enables further miniaturization of the system.  In Fig. 1, the  consecutive steps of design optimization are depicted.  As a  result, the new structure provides for an easy fabrication of  both the soft magnetic parts and the ring coil.  The cylindrical  coil is simple to manufacture and thus well-suited for mass  production.  It allows a high package density of wire, which    Fig. 1.   Different topologies of the claw-pole alternator with 6 pole pairs.

Subfigures (a) to (d) indicate how the miniaturized system (d) was  developed from the known form in (a) [2]   445978-1-4799-5183-3/14/$31.00 '  2014 IEEE       Fig. 2.   Magnetic flux paths for three different rotor angles. Left: maximum  flux through the coil, middle: no flux through the coil, right:  maximum flux through the coil with opposite flux direction [2]  reduces Ohmic losses.  Moreover, the flat shape of the coil  provides a relatively large surface for heat transfer to the hou-  sing.

The soft-magnetic parts, the claw disk shaped rotor and the  yoke of the proposed design feature very simple geometries  and are easy and cheap to manufacture, applying typical mass  fabrication technologies like e. g. stamping or injection mol-  ding of polymer bonded magnets.

By use of a specific mounting jig, the small permanent  NdFeB magnet chips, which are available on the market, are  in one assembly step glued to the return yoke with alternating  polarity.

However, due to the transverse-flux-machine topology, the  magnetic field in the air gap distributes in a complicated way  in three dimensions.  This results in an elaborate calculation  and design process.

The principle of operation is shown in Fig. 2.  Depending  on the rotor rotation angle, the magnetic flux generated by the  permanent magnets changes its direction when passing  through the core.  In a position where the rotor claws are  aligned with the permanent magnet poles, the magnetic flux  ? through the core and the coil reaches a maximum.  As the  rotor angle increases, the flux generated by two adjacent ma-  gnets closes across the claw, leading to zero magnetic field in  the core.  Further rotation results in a change of field direction  due to the opposite pole direction of the following permanent  magnets.  At constant rotational speed, the flux change fea-  tures an approximately sinusoidal function, which leads to an  induced voltage in the coil    ui(t) = N ??/?t, (1)    where N is the number of coil turns.  With a sinusoidal flux  change, the induced voltage will also be sinusoidal.  In order  to attain a generator voltage at low rotational speed, suited for  specific applications, the amplitude of the magnetic flux ?  through the coil has to be maximized, since the number of  windings cannot be chosen freely for a miniaturized system  without considerable increase of Ohmic losses.

Due to periodic changes in reluctance with increasing rotor  angle, the amount of energy which is stored in the magnetic  field varies.

The result is a periodic cogging torque, which is given by    Tcogg(?) = ?Wm/?? (2)    Therefore, one main development goal is to minimize the  cogging torque, as it hinders smooth rotation and creates  additional loads for the bearings.  This means that the ma-  chine has to be designed such that magnetic energy varies as  less as possible during rotation.



II. ANALYTICAL AND NUMERICAL GENERATOR MODELS  During the early stage of development, the generator was  modeled with a reluctance network in order to develop its  basic geometry.  The network is shown in Fig. 3.

Taking approximate material properties of the permanent-  magnet, geometrical parameters like pole and yoke thickness  as well as air gap size were obtained.  But there is no doubt  that analytical calculation can only give approximate results.

Hence, in a second step, these parameters were optimized  using the finite element method (FEM).  A 3D model of the  generator was created and computed in order to obtain more  accurate results for the relevant properties of the system, such  as magnetic flux trough the coil and the resulting cogging  torque.

With the basic geometry, a 3D-FE-model was created using  ANSYS Maxwell ? [3].  In order to optimize the alternator?s  power output and to reduce the cogging torque, geometry  parameters such as claw width and thickness, the size of the  permanent magnets and coil dimensions were varied.

Fig. 4 shows the magnetic field distributions in the alterna-  tor at different rotor angles, where the magnetic flux changes  its direction through the system.

The cogging torque was found to depend on the width of  the rotor claws.  This is illustrated in Fig. 5, which depicts the  cogging torque as function of the rotation angle for different  claw-pole widths.  The minimum cogging torque arises at a    Fig. 3.   Reluctance network representing the magnetic circuit  of the generator [2]      Fig. 6.   Cogging torque and amplitude of magnetic flux through the coil for  different claw-widths of the rotor. If a certain loss of magnetic flux  is accepted, the cogging torque can be reduced considerably [2].

claw width of 1.8 mm.  However, the magnetic flux through  the coil is also influenced by the claw width.

This is shown in Fig. 6, where both the amplitude of the  calculated and measured cogging torque as well as the ma-  gnetic flux are plotted as function of the claw width.  The ma-  gnetic flux decreases with increasing claw width, since broad  claws facilitate the flux leakage between adjacent magnets.

Minimal cogging torque values are experimentally obtained  at a claw-width of 1.9 mm, at only one percent loss of  calculated flux amplitude.



III. PROTOTYPE MANUFACTURING  Due to its high saturation polarization of about 2.35 T,  Vacoflux 50 (cobalt-iron) is chosen for all soft-magnetic parts  of the generator [4].  The coil has 500 turns and consists of a  self-bonding copper wire with a diameter of 80 ?m.  As ener-  gy density is vital for miniaturized systems, NdFeB is chosen  as permanent magnet material.  The bearing consists of  bronze sinter material.

Only conventional manufacturing methods such as milling  and lathing were applied, whereas for mass production, other  techniques are more suitable.

Fig. 7 presents a picture of the first generator prototype  with 6 pole pairs, whereby the rotor is removed.  The genera-  tor has a diameter of 12 mm and an axial length of 3 mm.



IV. EXPERIMENTS  Data from different generator prototypes were taken on a  test bench.  The generators were identically constructed ex-  cept for the rotor, where different claw widths were applied,  according to the FEM calculations.  The test bench allows the  determination of the rotational speed, the applied torque, the  terminal voltage and the current.  The generators were driven  by a motor at various rotational speeds, with different load re-  sistances applied.  Due to that, input and output power could  be computed.



V. RESULTS  The graph in Fig. 6 shows a good agreement of the calcu-  lated and measured cogging torques.  The minimum cogging  torque of 0.2 mNm is achieved with a claw width of 1.9 mm.

However, the cogging torque turns out to be very sensitive to  changes in the claw width.  The variation of the claw width  with 0.2 mm leads to a doubling of the cogging torque, for  example.

The terminal voltage as a function of rotational speed is  shown in Fig. 8.  It increases monotonically with increasing  rotation speed.  The open circuit voltage reaches about 5 V at  4.000 rpm.  The output power amounts to 400 mW at  20.000 rpm.  The maximum efficiency is 49 %.



VI. APPLICATION OF THE GENERATOR  The claw-pole generator described above was developed to  fit exactly into a new autonomous door lock system.  Ope-  rating the door handle manually (see Fig. 10) the resulting  torque rotates a transmission train which actuates the gene-     Fig. 4.   Magnetic induction in a generator at three different angles of rota-  tion, 0?, 7.5? and 15?, respectively [2]    Fig. 5.   Calculated static torque for different widths of the rotor claws from  1.5 mm to 2.0 mm [2]       Fig. 7.   Claw-pole generator with rotor removed [2]     rator.  The electrical energy is stored in a capacitor.  A small  decoder, either in contact mode or by use of an rf-signal  transmits a signal to unlock the door-catch.  Fast pressing of  the door handle produces enough energy for unlocking.  In  case of slower movements a repeated motion was necessary.

The dimensions of the generator are: diameter 12 mm, height  3 mm.  Requirements for the electrical data: 5 V at a power  rating of 200 mW.



VII. CLAW-POLE MOTOR  Based on the generator design in Figs. 1 and 2, a claw-pole  motor was developed.  It exhibits a very simple design and  offers a high torque density, which is about 2-3 times bigger  than those of other motors on the market, which are compa-  rable in size [2, 5, 6].  The two phase machine is composed of  two identical setups.  Each setup consists of a pot-shaped  yoke, a cylindrical coil, a claw disk and concentrically ar-  ranged magnets with alternating radial polarization.  The claw  disks are fixed on the shaft with an electrical offset of ninety  degrees to each other.  The construction of the claw-pole mo-  tor is shown in Fig. 9.

The motor can be operated by sinusoidal voltages with a  phase difference of 90? or by block commutation.  The phase  difference between the two coil voltages is used to control the  direction of the rotation.  In order to simplify the electrical  circuit, the motor is excited using block commutation during  the experiments.

A first prototype of the claw-pole motor is shown in  Fig. 11.

Experiments were carried out with three different sized  claw-pole motor prototypes, two with a diameter of 6 mm and  with different numbers of coils turns and one with a diameter  of 14 mm.

In order to find the rated current, thermal investigations  were carried out, which included the application of different  currents and the measurement of the stationary temperature  using a thermal sensor.

The critical component of the motor is the insulation layer  of the copper wire for the coils, with a maximum temperature  of 140 ?C.  The maximum operation temperature of the per-  manent magnets is 150 ?C.  Fig. 12 shows the stationary mo-  tor temperature as a function of motor current.  It depends  largely on the heat transfer to the environment.  The tempera-  ture is considerably lower in case the motor is embedded in  the clamping of the test bench.  The stationary temperature is  much higher for an operation in an air environment.  The air  environment was assumed to represent the worst case, and  thus gives the rated current.

At rated current, the motor with 6 mm diameter has an out-  put power of 250 mW at 15.000 rpm.  Maximum efficiency  of the motor is 21 %, whereas the prototype with a diameter  of 14 mm reaches 49 % efficiency.

Fig. 13 shows that the developed motors are superior to  other motors on the market when we compare the torques as  function of the motor volumes.  One reason for the excellent     Fig. 8.   Terminal voltage of generator for different load resistances [2]    Fig. 9.  Two phase claw-pole motor [2]     Fig. 10.   Prototype of door handle to actuate the generator     Fig. 11.   Prototype of claw-pole motor with a diameter of 6 mm [2]     torque density is the high functional integration of the sy-  stem?s components.  For example, the soft magnetic yokes  serve as coil cores, bearings and housing as well.  The high  torque opens a wide area of applications to the proposed  motor type.  However, the remaining cogging torque may rule  out its application in cases where smooth running is manda-  tory.

VI APPLICATION OF THE MOTOR  Due to the high energy density and its robust design, there  were interests to combine the motor with a gear and to apply  this system as window opener in a car (left side, Fig. 14).

The assembly of the prototype claw-pole motor with the gear  unit (right side, Fig. 14), fabricated by injection molding,  transmission ratio 20:1, lead to a driving unit with 13.5 mm  diameter and a length of 15 mm, which produces a torque of  0.1 Nm.



VIII. CONCLUSION  In this paper, a miniaturized claw-pole generator is pro-  posed to be applied in energy harvesting systems.  It offers a  high power density, a simple construction and is cheap to ma-  nufacture.  The claw geometry was optimized using 3D-FE  calculations in order to reduce the cogging torque, while at  the same time the magnetic flux was kept as high as possible.

Experimental results confirm the generator data obtained by  use of field calculations.  The applications of the generator in  an autonomous door lock system to generate electrical energy  by pressing the door handle turned out to be rather successful.

However, further development work will be done to reduce  the cogging torque even more.

From the basic generator design, a two phase synchronous  reluctance motor was derived, which proved to have higher  torque density than other motors on the market, comparable  in size.  The combination of the claw-pole motor into a gear  box resulted in a compact geared motor with high torque.

First tests revealed that this unit may well be used as a win-  dow opener in cars.

