InSAR-based monitoring of mass movements in Southern  Kyrgyzstan using ALOS/PALSAR

Abstract Southern Kyrgyzstan is an area of high landslide activity causing significant damage every year.  Since large areas are affected there is a big need for efficient methods for landslide monitoring. We use L-band ALOS/PALSAR imagery to analyze surface deformation related to gravitational mass movements. A total of 26 L-band ALOS/PALSAR raw data sets were received from JAXA covering the study area in South- ern Kyrgyzstan during a time period between 2007 and 2010. We applied SAR interferometry (InSAR) technique to identify surface changes which are the result of hillslope processes. In this study we present the results for the Kainama test site which has been subject to high landslide activity. The interferograms obtained by SAR interferometry analysis show very good coherence even though temporal resolution is more than 2 years over mountainous and vegetated terrain. Our InSAR derived results have been validated by field observations. It could be shown that InSAR analysis is capable to resolve the mobilization of mass movements in a quantitative way and thus indicate areas which are especially prone to experiencing landslide failures in the near future. The obtained results show the big potential of radar interferometry for monitoring of slope instabilities in Southern Kyrgyzstan.

1 Introduction  The area of high landslide activity is located in the Southern Kyrgyzstan along the eastern rim of the Fergana Basin Figure 1. The predominant type of landslides in this region is related to the presence of weakly consolidated sediments of Tertiary and Quaternary origin including loess units of up to 50m thickness [1], [2]. In case of slope failures within loess sediments the actual mass movement can happen within minutes and hours and affect thousands up to more than one million cubic me- ters in a very short period of time [3].

The area near to the town of Gulcha is especially affected by landslides Figure 2. In 2004 a large landslide occurred in the village of Kainama. The rotational slide resulted in a flow-type mass movement which reached a high speed and cov- ered part of the village of Kainama resulting in 33 victims. During the last 10 years about 15 big landslides with 20 000 to 950 000 m2 of affected area developed around the village of Gulcha [4].

[4] investigated this landslide.

Figure 1: Overview map of the study area in southern Kyrgyzstan. The Kainama test site is shown by the white box.

EUSAR 2014  ISBN 978-3-8007-3607-2 / ISSN 2197-4403 ? VDE VERLAG GMBH  Berlin  Offenbach, Germany    They found triggering factors to be most likely the seismic shaking and changes in the groundwater level that has caused this destructive mass move- ment [4]. Under these conditions, there is high demand for efficient and spatially differentiated assessment of the development of slope failures.

Since large areas with often limited accessibility are affected, satellite remote sensing plays an im- portant role in contributing to improved process knowledge in this region [1].

Figure 2: Overview map of study area SRTM DEM overplayed with optical Rapid-Eye data.

Map show   highlighted green to red colour patch- es indicate ALOS/PALSAR-based InSAR results have been obtained between 2007 and 2010.

In the presented work the potential of advanced remote sensing techniques based on Synthetic Ap- erture Radar (SAR) satellite data is investigated in order to understand processes and mobilization of mass movements.  Methodological focus has been put on using SAR Interferometry (InSAR) based on data from L-band ALOS satellite for detecting surface displacements as a consequence of slope instabilities in Southern Kyrgyzstan. In the pre- sented work we focus on a study site of high land- slide activity in the Osh province containing the Kainama slide.

2 Data and InSAR analysis  InSAR method has been successfully applied for landslide monitoring in several case studies [5], [6], [7], [8]. Landslides in southern Kyrgyzstan have been investigated using X-band German Ter- raSAR-X satellite [8].

In this study InSAR processing has been per- formed using ALOS/PALSAR radar data. PAL- SAR is an L-band sensor onboard the Japanese ALOS Satellite with a wavelength of 23.6 cm.

PALSAR uses a longer microwave wavelength which is known for achieving good coherence even in densely vegetated areas [9]. The ALOS da- ta used in this study were provided by the JAXA ALOS Research Program (Proposal P610).  A total of 26 ascending ALOS/PALSAR raw SAR data sets were received from JAXA covering the study area during the time period between 2007 and 2010. InSAR processing has been performed using the SarScape software.

The raw PALSAR scenes were processed to sin- gle-look complex (SLC) images. All SLC images were processed in the zero-Doppler coordinate system, simplifying the interferometric processing.

The best combinations for InSAR pairs with small baseline were chosen to derive the interferograms.

The SRTM DEM (90 m resolution) was used to remove the topographic phase. In order to exclude decorrelated areas from the study, we performed Goldstein filtering. During InSAR analysis, the da- ta were processed in the radar coordinate system obtained by the SAR satellite. In a second step the results were converted to the ground-based UTM coordinate system by using elevation data. In this process, pixels holding information about mass movements are rearranged according to their lon- gitude and latitude within the UTM coordinate system.

For InSAR analysis we selected data pairs with less than 300 m perpendicular baseline and a tem- poral baseline of less than 14 month. In total, 38 InSAR ALOS/PALSAR pairs from the ascending mode with an off-nadir angle of 34.3 degrees were processed and interferograms were calculated. In the ascending mode observations are made from the west. Applying the InSAR method, only one- dimensional displacements in the satellite's line of sight can be observed [10]. Therefore, the SAR in- terferograms only show such displacements where the surface moves towards or away from the satel- lite along this line of sight.

EUSAR 2014  ISBN 978-3-8007-3607-2 / ISSN 2197-4403 ? VDE VERLAG GMBH  Berlin  Offenbach, Germany    3 Results  Analysis of the processed interferograms shows that ALOS/PALSAR maintains very good coher- ence even during a long period of time of more than one year in this pronounced mountainous and vegetated area. The analysed time span comprises a three years period between June 2007 and Octo- ber 2010 Figure 3. The obtained results show that the data area suitable for mapping mobilization of slopes related to landslides. So far, a total of 18 slope instabilities have been identified for the ana- lyzed three years time period of ALOS-PALSAR data availability. The area of the Kainama land- slide system Figure 3 has experienced the highest landslide activity.

Figure 3: Kainama landslide system with field check sites in 2011 and 2012 (yellow and red cir- cles). The highlighted green to red colour patches indicate areas of surface deformation related to mass movements which have been obtained from ALOS/PALSAR interferometry for different time periods between 2007 and  2010.

Figure 4: The field photos of the Kainama land- slide system from September 2011 field-check.

The highlighted green and red colour outlines indi- cate the areas of slope landslide mobilization de- tected by InSAR analysis.

The obtained results on Kainama landslide system have been verified with field investigations carried out in September of 2011 and 2012 Figure 4. They still need to be verified using results obtained from interpretation of optical satellite remote sensing data. Thus, it can be concluded that the results ob- tained by the L-band ALOS/PALSAR satellite can be used in order to assess long-term landslide ac- tivity in this area. The obtained results add infor- mation in earlier studies from [4] on Kainama slide and will be used for slope mobilization mapping with future hazards assessment in the region.

References  [1] Roessner, S., Wetzel, H.-U., Kaufmann, H., Sa- magoev, A.: Potential of satellite remote sensing and GIS for landslide hazard assessment in Southern Kyrgyzstan (Central Asia) , Natural Hazards, Vol.35, 3, pp. 395-416, 2005.

[2] Roessner, S., Wetzel, H.-U., Kaufmann, H., Sar- nagoev A.: Satellite remote sensing and GIS for analysis of mass movements with potential for dam formation, Italian Journal of Engineering Geology and Environment, Special Issue 1, 103- 114, 2006.

[3] Wetzel, H.-U., Roessner, S., and Sarnagoev, A.: Remote sensing and GIS based geological map- ping for assessment of landslide hazard in Southern Kyrgyzstan (Central Asia) , Manage- ment Information Systems 2000 ? GIS and Re- mote Sensing, WIT-Press, pp. 355-366, 2000.

[4] Danneels, G., Bourdeau, C., Torgoev, I. and Ha- venith, H.-B.: Geophysical investigation and dy- namic modelling of unstable slopes: case-study of Kainama (Kyrgyzstan) , Geophysical Journal International, 175, 17-34, 2008.

[5] Squarzoni, C., Delacourt, C. and Allemand, P.: Nine years of spatial and temporal evolution of the La Valette landslide observed by SAR inter- ferometry, Engineering Geology, 68, pp. 53?66, 2003.

[6] Catani, F., Farine, P., Moretti, S., Nico, G. and Strozzi, T.: On the application of SAR interfer- ometry to geomorphological studies: estimation of landformattributes and mass movements, Ge- omorphology, 66, pp. 119?131, 2005.

[7] Colesanti, C. and Wasowski, J.: Investigation landslides with space-borne synthetic aperture radar (SAR) interferometry, Engineering Geolo- gy, 88, pp. 173?199, 2006.

EUSAR 2014  ISBN 978-3-8007-3607-2 / ISSN 2197-4403 ? VDE VERLAG GMBH  Berlin  Offenbach, Germany    [8] Motagh M., Wetzel H.-U., Roessner S. & Kauf- mann H.: A TerraSAR-X InSAR study of land- slides in southern Kyrgyzstan, Central Asia , Remote Sensing Letters, 4:7, 657-666, 2013.

[9] Massonnet, D., and Feigl, K. L.: Radar interfer- ometry and its applications to changes in the earth's surface, Reviews of Geophysics, 36(4), 441?500, 1998.

[10] Crosetto, M., Monserrat, O., Iglesias, R. and Crippa, B.: Persistent scatterer interferometry: potential, limits and initial C- and X-band com- parison, Photogrammetric Engineering & Re- mote Sensing, 76, pp. 1061?1069, 2010.

