

Abstract- Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are a tremendous godsend to wireless technology; they can be employed in  critical variety of vital applications such as health monitoring,  smart farming and battlefield surveillance. This makes it more  popular in emerging technologies that are used in our daily life.

While WSNs have many benefits, there are also a few  drawbacks. A big area of research into WSNs has concentrated  on creating routing protocols that are energy efficient. It is a  tremendous challenge to design routing protocols for  applications of WSNs, which are mobility centric and energy  efficient; because of network topology is often being changed.

The concept of clustering offers more benefit than the other  flat based routing protocols. A common side-effect of the  many-to-one traffic pattern is the hot spot issue, which  characterizes the majority of wireless sensor networks: nodes  having the optimal path to the sink become overloaded with  traffic from all other areas of the network which cause it to  lose energy at a faster rate than the other nodes. This research  work is aimed at evaluating and validating the proposed  Mobile Data Collector-based routing protocol (MDC  maximum residual energy LEACH) with A Novel Application  Specific Network Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks  routing protocol (Hybrid multi-hop LEACH). A computer  simulation was employed to obtain the results that have  indicated an improvement in the overall energy efficiency of  the network.

Keywords?WSN, LEACH, Mobile Data Collector, Energy  Efficient and Hierarchical routing protocol.



I. INTRODUCTION  Because of the advances recently made in wireless  communications and micro-electronics, wireless sensor  networks (WSNs) are expected to become ever-present in  the daily life of mankind [1]. Further, WSNs have already  surfaced as a hot area of research, which consist of many  sensor nodes that are low cost and have the ability to  process and communicate. WSNs must be able to operate  autonomously for extended lengths of time in the majority  of their applications even though their sensors are tiny  devices that possess power supplies which are limited.

Appropriate solutions are necessary at each layer of the  networking protocol stack so that the usage of energy can be  better managed and the network lifetime as a whole can be  increased. Most particularly, a tremendous amount of  attention has been given to routing protocols that are energy  aware at the network layer. This is because wireless  communication has been well established to be the key  cause of the consumption of power in WSNs.

The WSN?s network layer has the responsibility of  delivering packets and implementing an approach for  addressing to take care of this task. It primarily creates  routes for transmitting data throughout the network. Routing  in WSNs is more challenging than in the common ad-hoc  networks. This is because they possess resources that are  limited in regards to the available power, processing ability  and communication. These are considerable constraints to  all applications in the sensor networks. Moreover, route  maintenance is a difficult task because of frequent  modifications to the topology resulting from these  constraints [1, 2].

When considering the perspective of the network  organization, there are roughly two main categories for the  classification of routing protocols: hierarchical routing and  flat routing. Hierarchical routing protocols have been seen  as having greater scalability and being more energy-aware  in the context of WSNs. Nodes play various roles in the  network and are usually arranged into clusters in the  hierarchical-based routing. The technique of sensor nodes in  a network organizing themselves into groups in relation to  particular prerequisites or metrics is known as clustering.

Each cluster/group possesses a leader known as a cluster  head (CH) and other member nodes (MNs) that are ordinary.

The cluster heads can be arranged into further hierarchical  levels. On the other hand, in a flat topology, all of the sensor  nodes play the same role and have the same functionality as  each other in the network.  A flat routing protocol tries to  locate a path to the sink, hop by hop, making some form of  flooding whenever a node needs to transmit data. In  networks that are relatively small, flat routing protocols are  quite effective. On the other hand, they do not scale to large  and dense networks very well as, usually, all of the nodes  are alive and create greater processing and bandwidth usage  [3, 4 and 5].

Single-sink data collection naturally results in a many-to-  one traffic pattern from the sensing nodes to the sink. This  single-sink data collection is the normal use in WSNs. It is  usual for routing protocols to stay away from lossy links at  any cost, because WSNs are very resource limited.

Clustering approach provides a hierarchical architecture that  is more easily scaled and has less power usage; therefore, it  provides the entire network with a longer lifetime. Most of  the sensing, processing of data and activities involved in  communication can be carried out within the clusters.

However, flat and cluster based routing protocols have own  benefits but both created communication holes within the  network.

Energy and routing holes are the major types of  communication holes. The energy hole problem is a key  factor in WSNs which disturbs the lifetime of network  because sensor nodes normally perform as originator and  router of data. The communication obeys a many-to-one and  converge-cast pattern, where nodes transmit heavy  communication load near the base station, causing increased    energy dissipation rate. The primary and utmost objective in  communication network is efficient routing. The efficient  routing protocol in WSNs is to increase the quality of  network services and prolong the network lifetime. Two  types of ?routing holes? can exist in real time sensor  networks such as redeployable and non-redeployable holes  [6, 7 and 8].

The MDC maximum residual energy LEACH was  proposed for the validation of communication holes  arguments. It is a protocol for multi-hop cluster-based  routing for environmental applications in WSNs. It makes  use of a mobility model with a pre-defined trajectory and  transmits a beacon message at 5 sec intervals to the cluster  heads (CHs) and the base station (BS). This beacon message  has MDC location and the residual energy level of MDC.

When the CHs received the beacon message from MDC,  they choose the maximum residual MDC for the routing of  sensed aggregated data towards the BS or some central  location. The general network parameters are as follows:  firstly, they possess a fixed BS that is situated far away from  the area of the sensors; secondly, they are homogenous;  thirdly, they are controlled by energy and finally, the  communication process does not use any high energy sensor  node. Data fusion is the optimal way to avoid the duplicate  and overloaded data that is typically used in various existing  hierarchical protocols of cluster-based routing.

This paper has been arranged as follows. Related work of  energy efficient routing protocol is presented in Section 2. A  description of the proposed MDC maximum residual energy  LEACH protocol is given in Section 3. The performance  evaluation of the proposed protocol is given in Section 4.

Finally, the conclusions have been drawn in Section 5.



II. RELATED WORKS  The development of routing protocols in WSNs is experiencing a tremendous research effort presently. These protocols are being development on the basis of application specific needs and the particular architecture of the network.

Nevertheless, when creating routing protocols for WSNs, several factors must be considered. As energy efficiency directly affects the network lifetime, it is the most important factor of all. In the literature, it has been found that there has been some effort to pursue WSNs energy efficiency.

A. A Modified SPIN for Wireless Sensor Network  When the data-centric method is used as the basis of the routing protocols it is appropriate to be used in applications performing in-network aggregation of data to produce data dissemination that saves energy. In [9], an altered SPIN protocol was proposed named M-SPIN, Its performance was compared with the commonly used SPIN protocol that makes use of broadcast communication.

The Modified-SPIN (M-SPIN) protocol sends data to a sink node only rather than throughout the entire network. A substantial amount of total energy can be saved as the total number of packets being transmitted is less in the proposed protocol. The proposed M-SPIN protocol makes use of the hop-count values of the sensor nodes for WSNs. In a typical SPIN protocol, negotiation is also performed before the actual data is transmitted; however, in M-SPIN, the nodes closer to the sink node transmit REQ packets as a reply to an ADV packet transmitted by the source node. As a result, the dissemination of the data is towards the sink or to the  neighboring nodes on towards the sink node. The M-SPIN protocol gains energy savings by not transmitting packets to the direction that is opposite the sink node. The M-SPIN protocol is illustrated in Fig. 1.

Figure 1. The M-SPIN Protocol  B. Threshold Sensitive Energy Efficient Sensor Network  Protocol (TEEN)  Threshold sensitive Energy Efficient sensor Network  protocol (TEEN) [10] proposes a reactive routing protocol  specifically applicable to time sensitive applications. TEEN  adopts the principle of hierarchical clustering. Sensor nodes  are grouped together that is geographically close to each  other with one common cluster head. For the purposes of  this section, these cluster heads are seen as first layer cluster  heads. The first layer of cluster heads collect data messages  from the sensor nodes within its cluster, aggregate the data  messages and forward the aggregated messages to a higher  layer. The main disadvantage of TEEN is that if the hard  threshold is never reached, no data messages will be  forwarded towards the base station.

C. A  Novel Application Specific Network Protocol for Wireless  Sensor Networks  The newly developed self-organizing Hybrid Network  Protocol for WSNs has been created on the basis of a  cluster-based hierarchical architecture and multi-hop routing.

This basis has been used so that energy efficiency can be  improved and the lifetime of the network is extended. Multi-  hop routing is employed in the hybrid protocol for inter-  cluster communication between CHs and the BS rather than  direct transmission. In this way, the transmission energy can  be minimized and the energy load can be distributed  throughout the entire network in an even manner. In  addition, the same suppositions as created in the LEACH  protocol are created in this protocol; the Carrier Sense  Multiple Access (CSMA) MAC protocol, similar to the  network model, is employed to reduce the potential of a  collision taking place during the set-up phase. The node in  the network knows of its own location. This is important to  provide the multi-hop routing between CHs and is  accomplished by using the Global Positioning System (GPS)  technology. It makes use of a rotation of the local base  stations (CHs) that is randomized so that the load of the  energy can be allocated consistently among the sensors in  the network [11].

Figure 2. Architectural view of Hybrid multi-hop LEACH  Many frames make up the steady-state phase of the Hybrid multi-hop LEACH, same as LEACH routing protocol. Each member node stays in its own time slot to transmit its data to the CH. When a CH has any fused data to send to the BS, it attempts to locate a multi-hop route from among all of the CHs. Then it will send the data packet to the BS in accordance with the routing algorithm as illustrated in Fig. 2. This solution is one that is straightforward in the group of multi-hop routing algorithms. While a substantial advantage of this protocol is the decrease in the consumption of the transmission energy that directly enhances the overall network lifetime. The drawback of this Hybrid multi-hop LEACH routing protocol is facing energy and routing hole problems, since cluster head near the base station relaying heavy traffic load from another cluster heads in every round and relaying cluster head is died in current round because of energy depletion.

According to energy hole concern in Hybrid multi-hop LEACH protocol which directly impacts in routing mechanism of the network. The routing path from cluster head to the base station is not available any more due to heavy traffic loads from another CH?s and immediately drains the energy.



III. MOBILE DATA COLLECTOR MAXIMUM RESIDUAL ENERGY LEACH  In this section, a novel cluster based energy efficient routing protocol, named MDC maximum residual energy LEACH, is presented. This Protocol utilizes multi-hop communication and three-tier network architecture for data collection and communication from source to destination. It has been experiential that this type of architecture enhances the network scalability for large scale non-delay sensitive environmental applications; multi-hop communication is to reduce the channel disputation area and provide prospective energy savings by the help of long and multi-hop communication.

The MDC maximum residual energy LEACH protocol is divided into rounds and each round is followed by set-up phase for cluster formation and steady phase for data transmission from sensor nodes to the MDC and finally towards the base station as illustrated in Fig. 3.

Figure 3. Mechanism of One Round  A. Radio Model for Transmission of Data  There have been multiple studies carried out into low-  energy propagation radio models over the last few years.

The MDC maximum residual energy LEACH routing  protocol possessing a maximum level of residual energy  makes use of a basic First Order Radio Model. In this model,  the receiver and transmitter dissipate Eelec 50 nj/bit and  transmit the amplifier circuit !amp 100 pj/bit/m to obtain an  adequate Eb/No. The current state-of-the-art in radio design,  the First Order Radio Model parameters are slightly better  than the other models.

Consider that r is the energy loss within the transmission  of a channel when transmitting a k-bit message from a  distance of d using a radio model; the calculations for the  transmission end are seen in equations 1 and 2:     (1)  And the calculations for the receiving end are:     (2)  B. Setup Phase or Cluster Formation  In the period of cluster formation, each node is  autonomous and self-organized, and formed into clusters  through short messages using the Carrier Sense Multiple  Access (CSMA). MDC maximum residual energy LEACH  creates clusters by the help of distributed algorithm where  each node in the network must individually choose to  become a cluster head or not using the probability of Pi [12].

The Pi node is computed utilizing the LEACH algorithm:  (3)   While the set-up phase is initiated, each node employs  this formula to compute the probability of Pi. The expected  number of cluster heads for each round is guaranteed to be k.

Because of this, the entire network is grouped into k clusters,  the total number of nodes in the network is N. Each node  has been chosen to be a cluster head once after N/k rounds  on average and r represents the number of the round. Where  P is the desired percentage of the total amount of nodes to  function as a cluster heads at any given moment, the current  round is denoted as r and the set of nodes participating in  the selection of the cluster head that has not acted as a  cluster head in the last  rounds is denoted as G. Each node  chosen to act as a cluster head in the current interval cannot  be chosen to act as a cluster head in the following interval.

A CSMA protocol applies for an announcement by each of  the cluster heads in the network for all of the nodes.  This  message contains data like the position of the cluster head  and the kind of message that it is; for example, it is a short  message. Each of the nodes receives several announcement  messages from various cluster heads after t1 time. After  receiving these all messages, the neighboring node  determines which cluster head is nearest to it based on the  strength of the signal from the packet announcement. It will    then choose the cluster head that is the shortest distance  away.

C. Steady Phase of MDC Maximum Residual Energy LEACH:  After the cluster formation, the cluster head sets up the TDMA schedule for every node to send data to the cluster head. This scheduling is to avoid collisions and reduce energy consumption between the data messages in the cluster and enables each member of the radio equipment to be off when not in use. To reduce inter cluster interference, every cluster uses a unique spreading code; when the node is selected as a cluster head, it selects that unique code and informs all of the member nodes within the cluster to transmit their data using this spreading code.

Figure 4. Data Fusion Mechanism  Using Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) codes,  while not necessarily the most bandwidth efficient solution, does solve the problem of multiple-access in a distributed manner [13]. In data fusion mechanism towards the base station, all MDC?s transmits a beacon message for all CH?s which contained their current position and residual energy level. When CH received the beacon message from MDC, then CH selects the maximum residual energy MDC to route the data towards the base station (BS) in each round. Fig. 4 explains the detailed data fusion mechanism by the approach of maximum residual energy of MDC, in current round cluster head S1 and S2 received the residual energy level from MDC 1 and MDC 2 that is 25j and 23j respectively.

Cluster head S1 and S2 select MDC 1 for transmitting the data because the RE level of MDC 1 is higher than MDC 2.

In next round all cluster heads again received residual energy information along with MDC current location by beacon message from MDC?s. At this round the RE level of MDC 2 is 23j and MDC 1 is 22j, all cluster heads selects MDC 2 as a relay node for data collection at the base station. Same procedure will follow for data collection within the network at the base station till the residual energy of sensor nodes and MDC?s are accessible.

? Route 1 at Round 1: S1 and S2 ? MDC 1 ? BS  ? Route 2 at Round 2: S1 and S2 ? MDC 2 ? BS  ? Route 3 at Round 3: S1 and S2 ? MDC 1 ? BS   This approach clearly maintains the energy level of relay  nodes that is MDC?s throughout the network till the sensor nodes and MDC?s are alive.



IV. RESULT AND DISCUSSION  The simulation parameters of the MDC maximum residual energy LEACH routing protocol are based on environmental applications of WSNs. The main simulation parameters are summarized in Table 1.

Table 1. Simulation Setup  PARAMETERS VALUES  Number of Nodes Forty (40)  Simulation Area 1000 * 1000 (m)  Sensor Node  Deployment  Random Deployment  Number of Cluster Head Five (5)  Transmitter Electroics  (ETX-elec)  Receiver Electronics  (ERX-elec)    50 nj/bit  Transmission Amplifier  (Eamp)  100 pj/bit/m   Battery Initial capacity is assumed to  be constant  Data Rate 250 kbps  Packet size 288 bits/packet or 36 Bytes  MDC Beacon Message  Rate  5 sec/message  MDC Velocity 0.054 m/sec  Number of MDC?s 2   A computer simulation was used to measure the following  performance metrics. Since sensor nodes have a limited battery power source, the consumption of energy is the greatest metric in both static and mobile WSNs. A sensor node?s energy usage is the same as the sum of the dissipation of the energy during the states of receiving, transmitting, sensing, overhearing, sleeping and idling. This research work put emphasis on addressing the depletion of energy during communication for not only the process of transmitting but also receiving. Furthermore, the amount of energy dissipation from the sensor nodes directly impacts on network lifetime. More energy dissipation means less network lifetime and a smaller amount of energy dissipation means longer network lifetime.

Energy Consumption of Sensor Nodes and Network Lifetime:       Figure 5. Energy Consumption of Node 14       Figure 6. Energy Consumption of Node 21       Figure 7. Energy Consumption of Node 37  Figures 5, 6 and 7 show the usage of power of the individual sensor nodes, 14, 21 and 37, respectively. These were the results obtained upon running the simulations several times using the MDC maximum residual energy LEACH and the Hybrid multi-hop LEACH routing protocols. There was a random distribution of the sensor nodes throughout the network with the farthest, average and nearest distances from the BS. In addition, the MDC (mobile agent) was employed to provide communication towards the BS. A substantial variation in the level of the energy consumption of the sensor nodes is shown in the graphs. This variation had a direct impact on the performance of the network lifetime.

Figure 8. Network Lifetime  The simulated result of Fig. 8 exposed the considerable variation in the network lifetime. Therefore, the MDC maximum residual energy LEACH routing protocol is better than the Hybrid multi-hop LEACH routing protocol in terms of network lifetime because it stayed active, on the whole, longer and falling slightly faster.

The End-to-End transmission delay is the difference in the time from the moment a packet is transmitted until it is reached by the receiver. Normally this delay is determined by channel bandwidth, packet length and the coding scheme adopted.

Figure 9. End-to-End Transmission Delay  The End-to-End delay is the primary metric of the network latency. It can be specified as the channel access delay, time latency of the data packet and other possible delays from the source to the destination. The graph illustrated in Fig. 9 is of the average End-to-End transmission delay over time when the MDC maximum residual energy LEACH routing protocol and the Hybrid multi-hop LEACH routing protocol were simulated. The End-to-End transmission delay of the MDC maximum residual energy LEACH routing protocol was found to be very similar to the Hybrid multi-hop LEACH routing protocol. This was because the aggregated data packets took multiple hops and used up a greater amount of processing time to get to the BS or control center.



V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  The proposed algorithm is an improvement on the  clustering routing protocol. This improvement was brought  about by utilizing the MDC maximum residual energy    approach. A multi-hop communication between sensor  nodes to MDC and then to the BS is provided by this mobile  data collector. It reduces the consumption of the energy of  all of the nodes in the network. Further, it can be employed  in WSNs used in geographical areas that are large. The  simulation studies reveals that the proposed MDC maximum  residual energy routing protocol is better than the Hybrid  multi-hop LEACH routing protocol in terms of energy  consumption of sensor nodes and the extensive  improvement of network lifetime. In future work, the  authors will enhance and validate the multi-hop MDC based  clustering routing protocol by a multi-channel concept at the  base station to directly allocate the channel for the MDCs  instead of a single channel.

