?

Abstract? We propose a methodology for separating the  total stiffness of arteries, determined in vivo, into stiffness of the  arterial wall and stiffness of the surrounding tissue. An effective  perivascular pressure is considered which introduces a radial  constraint. Next, based on vivo data, acquired at diastolic  pressure, the cross-sectional area at zero pressure is estimated.

Finally, the stiffness of the arterial wall and of the surrounding  tissue are determined based on a model with two parallel  springs. By employing a reduced-order multiscale model, the  methodology is used for studying the global effects of  surrounding tissue support on arterial hemodynamics. The  main effects are: higher wave speed, earlier arriving backward  travelling pressure and flow rate waves, lower total compliance,  higher pressure pulse, and reduced arterial cross-sectional  areas. In a Big Data perspective, by combining this methodology  with arterial wall growth models and by comparing simulation  results and patient evolution over different time ranges, such an  approach is useful for predicting patient-specific disease  evolution and outcome.



I. INTRODUCTION  In recent years, there has been considerable focus on computational approaches for modeling the flow of blood in the human cardiovascular system. When used in conjunction with patient-specific anatomical models extracted from medical images, such techniques provide important insights into the structure and function of the cardiovascular system.

Depending on the requirements, models with different complexities and scales have been proposed, ranging from lumped (or 0D-models), to one-dimensional models and three-dimensional models.

While three-dimensional models have been used to analyze pathologic behavior of blood vessels in local geometries [1], one-dimensional blood flow models have been used extensively for modeling the entire arterial circulation [2]. When the focus lies on flow rate and pressure wave forms, one-dimensional models are an ideal approach since they have been shown to be able to accurately predict these quantities for patient-specific models [3].

One-dimensional models have been previously used to assess the effect of arterial stiffness [4], whose changes   The research leading to these results has received funding from the  European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under  grant agreement n? 600932.

This paper is supported by the Sectoral Operational Programme Human  Resources Development (SOP HRD), ID134378 financed from the  European Social Fund and by the Romanian Government.

We hereby acknowledge the structural funds project PRO-DD (POS-  CCE, O.2.2.1., ID 123, SMIS 2637, ctr. No 11/2009) for providing the  infrastructure used in this work.

L. M. Itu and C. Suciu are with the Transilvania Univeristy of Brasov,  Department of Automation and Information Technology, Brasov, 500036  Romania (0040741029888; lucian.itu@unitbv.ro, suciuc@unitbv.ro).

represent an early risk factor for cardiovascular diseases (hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, atherosclerosis, heart failure, etc. [5]).

Previous studies have suggested that, for a correct, model based assessment of arterial stiffness effects, the influence of the surrounding tissue has to be considered [6]. The surrounding tissue constrains the vessels radially, it reduces the wall strain and stress, and takes up a significant part of the intravascular pressure (wall stretch ratio was reduced by 15 ? 20% for the carotid and femoral arteries).

The effect of surrounding tissue on the proximal aorta hemodynamics has been analyzed using two different fluid structure interaction (FSI) modeling techniques and results have shown that the motion of the arterial wall, otherwise left free, is constrained, whereas the constraints for inlet and outlet regions are relaxed [7].

Recently, two idealized computational models have been proposed for studying the effects of surrounding tissue, the uniform thickness model and the histology image-based model [8]. Results have indicated that modeling of the surrounding tissue improves the  understanding of regional adaptation of the aortic wall at normal and pathological conditions. For the coronary arteries it has been shown that large epicardial coronary vessels have a greater tendency to become thicker in the absence of myocardial constraint [9].

In this paper we introduce a methodology for separating the total stiffness of arteries, determined in vivo, into stiffness of the arterial wall and stiffness of the surrounding tissue. The above described studies focused on local effects of surrounding tissue support through detailed in vivo, in vitro and in silico experiments. The methodology introduced herein is used for studying the global effects of surrounding tissue support on arterial hemodynamics by employing a one-dimensional blood flow model for a full body arterial model composed of 51 arteries.



II. METHODS  The one-dimensional blood flow model is derived from the three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations:  ),(),( ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ?  x  txq  t  txA ?? ? ????  ),(  ),(),(),(  ),(  ),(),(  txA  txq K  x  txptxA  txA  txq  xt  txq R?  ?  ? ?  ? ?  ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ??????  where x denotes the axial location and t denotes the time.

A(x,t) is the cross-sectional area, p(x,t) the pressure, q(x,t) the flow rate, and ? is the density. Coefficients ? and KR account for the momentum-flux correction and viscous losses due to friction respectively. A third equation is required to close the system: the state equation, which relates the  A method for modeling surrounding tissue support and its global  effects on arterial hemodynamics  Lucian Itu, Constantin Suciu, IEEE Member       pressure inside the vessels to the cross-sectional area. The vessel wall is modeled as a viscoelastic material.

, ),(  )( 1)(   ),( 0    P t  A  AAtxA  xA x  r  Eh txP  S ?  ?  ?? ?  ? ?  ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ? ?? ? ????  where E is the Young modulus, h is the wall thickness, r0 is the initial radius corresponding to the initial pressure P0, and  S ?  is the viscoelastic coefficient. The elastic wall properties  are estimated using a best fit to in vivo data [10]:    ))(exp()( kxrkkx r  Eh ???? ?? ????  where k1 = 2?10 g/(s  ?cm), k2 = -22.53 cm  -1 , k3=6.65?10    g/(s ?cm).We emphasize that the wall properties determined  with (4) contain the influence of the external tissue. To study the global effects of surrounding tissue, the material properties in (3) need to be adapted in order to exclude the influence of the surrounding tissue. Liu et al. [6] have shown that, at a reference pressure of 100mmHg, the radiuses increase by ~15-20% when the external tissue is not present.

To model the effect of the surrounding tissue, they considered an external pressure, called effective perivascular pressure (EPP), which introduces a radial constraint. As the tests with different arterial pressure values have shown, EPP represents a fraction of the arterial pressure, and can be expressed as:  aext PkP )1( ?? ?? ? ????  where Pa is the arterial pressure and k is a constant which is equal to 0.5 at physiological pressures (60 ? 120 mmHg).

When acquiring image data (magnetic resonance, computer tomography, etc.), arterial geometries are regularly reconstructed based on diastolic time frames, where motion artifacts are smallest. Hence, the measured radiuses and cross-sectional areas correspond to a non-zero pressure (the diastolic pressure). Generally the pressure inside an artery can be expressed as:  exttm PPP ?? ?? ? ????  where Ptm is the transmural pressure and Pext is the pressure exerted by the surrounding tissue on the arterial wall (EPP).

Hence, for the initial state, we can write  ? ? ? ? 000 exttmDia  PPPP ??? . Figure 1 displays the different  pressures inside the artery, in the surrounding tissue, and the transmural pressure for (a), the initial state, and for (b), a generic case with a higher pressure.

It is not possible to introduce the external pressure in (3), since the material properties of the elastic component already contain its influence. Hence, the initial state corresponding to pressure PDia and cross-sectional area ADia can not be used as a starting point for the separation of the arterial wall model from the external tissue model. The only state in which the external tissue has no influence on the arterial properties is the hypothetical case obtained with zero pressure. To determine the cross-sectional area value corresponding to zero pressure we use the method proposed in [11]. Thus we consider (3) without the viscoelastic term, and set P0 = 0 mmHg, while A0 is the cross-sectional area zero pressure.

? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ? ??  )(/  )( 1)()(   xrEh  xP xAxA  Dia Dia ?? ????  The viscoelastic term can be excluded if the diastolic and the hypothetical zero pressure states are considered to be steady-states. In reality, the diastolic state is not a steady state, since the geometry is usually acquired in vivo, but at the end of diastole the variation of the cross-sectional area is small and hence the viscoelastic term can be neglected.

To model the effect of the external tissue we consider the method introduced recently in [12], whereby the stiffness of the arterial wall and of the surrounding tissue are modeled separately as two springs in parallel, as is displayed in figure 2: K1D is the stiffness of the arterial wall and KST is the stiffness of the surrounding tissue. As a result, the total stiffness is computed as:  ST1Deq KKK ?? ?? ? ????  From (3), the equivalent stiffness is expressed as:   eq     rr  Eh K ? ?? ? ????  To determine K1D, we introduce the quantity  ? ? )(/ 0 xrEh w , whereas subscript w indicates the fact that we  only refer to the properties of the wall (excluding the surrounding tissue properties). Considering only the steady- state equation, we can write for a non-zero pressure P(x):  ? ?  ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ? ??  ),(  )( 1)(   )(   0 txA  xA x  r  Eh xP ??  ? ?????  ),()1( ),(  )( 1)(    )( ),(  )( 1)(   )(      xPk txA  xA x  r  Eh  xP txA  xA x  r  Eh xP  w  ext  w  ?? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ? ?  ? ?  ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ? ?  ?? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ? ?  ? ?  ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ? ?  ? ?????  where A0 is the cross-sectional area corresponding to zero pressure, determined in (7). Next, (10) is introduced in (11)  and, as a result:  )()(   x r  Eh kx  r  Eh  w  ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ? ?? ? ?????   Figure 1 . Absolute pressures in the arteries and in the surrounding tissue: (a)  in the initial state (at diastolic pressure), and (b) at a certain moment during  the cardiac cycle when the pressure is higher than the diastolic pressure.

Figure 2. Equivalent model of the total stiffness in the wall encountered by  the one-dimensional blood flow model: K1D is the stiffness of the arterial  wall and KST is the stiffness of the surrounding tissue.

Hence, the stiffness of the arterial wall and of the surrounding tissue can be expressed separately as:   1D     rr  Eh kK ? ?? ? ?????  ? ?  ST     rr  Eh kK ?? ?? ? ?????

III. RESULTS  Blood was modeled as an incompressible Newtonian fluid with a density of ? = 1.055 g/cm3 and a dynamic viscosity of ? = 0.045 dynes/cm  s for all the computations.

To evaluate the global effects of surrounding tissue on the arterial circulation, the arterial tree detailed in [13], and displayed in Figure 3a was used. It is composed of 51 arteries. A time-varying flow rate profile was imposed at the inlet [10] and three-element Windkessel lumped models were applied at the outlets.

Results are displayed in the following for both an elastic  and viscoelastic arterial wall model. The constant k in (15) was set equal to 0 (includes the effects of the surrounding tissue) or 0.5 (a value determined experimentally by Liu et al, which excludes the influence of the surrounding tissue).

Hence, four computational setups were obtained, and, to analyze the effect only for the large arteries, Windkessel boundary condition values were the same in all four cases.

The results are displayed in Figure 3b-e at the locations marked with a blue circle in Figure 3a. For the aortic root the pressure pulse is much smaller when the effect of the surrounding tissue is excluded, the difference being caused mainly by the change in systolic pressure. The decreased pressure pulse is given by the increased compliance of the system, and by the fact that the lower total stiffness of the wall leads to a lower wave speed and hence to reflections which arrive back later in the proximal part of the circulation (these reflections are no longer arriving at late systole, but during diastole). In terms of the cross-sectional area an increase of up to 30% is obtained for the aortic root,   Figure 3. (a) Representation of the 51 main arteries in the human arterial system; Time-varying pressure, flow rate and cross-sectional area with an  elastic/viscoelastic wall model and with/without the effect of surrounding tissue at (b) aortic root, (c) descending aorta, (d) abdominal aorta, and (e) femoral  artery.

confirming the finding of Liu et al., which indicated that the surrounding tissue prevents the arteries from overstretching.

Further downstream, the decrease in pressure pulse is not as pronounced as before, mainly because the reflections arrive earlier at the corresponding locations (the compliance is still increased). In terms of the flow rate, especially for distal locations, the oscillations increase, being very pronounced in the femoral artery. The decrease in wave speed, can be observed through the difference of the onset (the foot) of the flow rate wave for the distal locations.

Finally, when setting k to 0.5, the total systemic resistance decreases from 1.42e3 to 1.36e3 dynes?s/cm  and  is accompanied by a corresponding decrease of the arterial average pressure. This change is given by the fact that the radiuses are larger when the surrounding tissue is absent and the resistance of a vessel is proportional to the inverse of the radius at power 4. Although the radiuses increase by a considerable amount, the decrease in total resistance is only marginal because the large arteries contribute very little to the total arterial resistance, which is mainly located in the small arteries lumped in the Windkessel elements.

In the presence of a viscoelastic arterial wall model, the conclusions are similar as in the elastic case, the only difference is that the presence of viscoelasticity in the arterial wall model reduces the oscillations in the distal circulation.



IV. CONCLUSIONS  In this paper we have determined arterial wall and surrounding tissue properties from in vivo data and have studied the global effects of surrounding tissue on arterial hemodynamics. A one-dimensional blood flow model has been employed, which enables the assessment of the effects on pressure, flow rate and cross-sectional area profiles.

We determined the main effects of the surrounding tissue: higher wave speed and lower total compliance.

Consequently, backward travelling pressure and flow rate waves arrive earlier in the proximal part of the circulation and a higher pressure pulse is obtained. Secondly, cross- sectional area values decrease by over 30%.

To study local hemodynamic quantities of interest (wall shear stress, circumferential strain) in greater detail, the one- dimensional model can be coupled to a three-dimensional model employed for the region of interest [12].

The herein provided methodology is useful for predicting and studying the effect of local changes to the external tissue support on global hemodynamics. Moreover, the computed hemodynamic and mechanical quantities of interest can be used together with a growth model [14] to predict arterial wall growth and remodeling. In a Big Data perspective, by comparing simulation results and patient evolution over different time ranges, such an approach is useful for predicting patient-specific disease evolution and outcome.

This can also be combined with optimization based frameworks [15-17].

Our study has a series of limitations. First of all, due to lack of experimental data, we considered a uniform effect of the surrounding tissue along the large arteries. Secondly, we considered the influence of the surrounding tissue to be purely elastic and have attributed the viscoelastic properties solely to the arterial wall.

