Analysis of Postural Kinetics data using Artificial Neural  Networks in Alzheimer?s Disease

Abstract - Inertial measurement Units (IMU) (accelerometers and gyroscopes), placed in strategic parts of the human body, are a growing field on kinetic posture and imbalance study in Alzheimer?s Disease (AD). On the other hand, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) are a powerful statistical tool used on pattern recognition on big data such as IMU kinetic records. Still, on ANN research, issues like the best number of hidden layers and the best number of neurons in each hidden layer remain open. In our study we developed a software tool of Multilayer Perceptrons ANN analysis (Back Propagation and Scale Gradient Conjugate training algorithms) that automatically tests different configurations for the ANNs on the diagnosis of Alzheimer?s disease. Analysis was performed primarily on all 159 variables, biometrics and IMU records of 21 AD patients and 21 healthy subjects exposed to seven different tasks with increasing postural stress, and posteriorly on selected data derived from Mann- Whitney analysis. Multilayer Perceptron ANN reached a performance of 95% on the diagnosis of AD, proving to be a potential useful clinical tool.

Keywords?	 ? Alzheimer's disease; Artificial Neural Network; Inertia Measurement Units; Postural Stability    INTRODUCTION  I.

Around 30% of people aged older than 65 living in the community and more than 50% of those living in residential care facilities or nursing homes fall every year and about half of those who fall do so repeatedly (1). With the increase of the elderly population, the number of falls in this group has also been increasing (2). Postural instability, characterized by excessive and uncontrolled sway, degrades with ageing and is a factor for occurrence of falls, especially in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) (3). AD is a neurodegenerative cortical disorder that, besides memory deficits, also displays posture and gait disturbances that trigger more serious falls compared to non-demented elderly people. Thus it is highly commendable the development of diagnostic approaches that may help early, noninvasive detection of AD pathology. Studies on postural  kinetics and stability open a possibility because, as shown recently in (4), AD patients display a different kinetic profile.

Most of postural kinetics studies on AD are based on postural analysis of center of pressure on force plates. In contrast, Inertial Measurement Units (IMU), with integrated accelerometers and gyroscopes, are small, fully portable devices, that are independent of inclination in space and have proved to be equivalent to force platforms in the measurement of center of mass (COM) and stability analysis (5). Also, IMU have the advantage of measuring postural stability in several stability and environment scenarios, including inclined surfaces. However, because several factors can act simultaneously with complex and nonlinear interactions in the same patient it is necessary to collect a large amount of data.

Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are statistical machine learning models, inspired by the highly interactive processing functions of the human brain, that when exposed to complex data sets can recognize patterns, learn the relationship of different variables, and address classification tasks in a way that  can generalize its mapping to new data (6). Several works have applied ANNs on the diagnosis of AD, combining different variables such as demographic, neurological and psychiatric clinical evaluation, neuropsychological tests and more complex clinical diagnostic tools (eg. neuropathology, electroencephalography (EEG) and brain imaging), where hundreds of variables of recorded data are potentially clinically relevant on one single patient.

Mecocci et al (7), on a pharmacological clinical trial on 61 AD patients with the objective of discriminating responders versus non responders to a 3-month treatment with donepezil, with the outcome of clinician?s impression and neuropsychological tests scores, observed that ANNs were more effective, total accuracy in predicting the outcome of 92.59%, in comparison to linear discriminant analysis.

Buscema et al (8) showed that ANN models are better predictors than Linear Discriminant Analysis, in a longitudinal study of AD patients, where demographic data and the cognitive and functional variables of each subject during the last year of her/his life was correlated with postmortem brain     pathology expressed as Braak stages. Following this study and cohort of patients, comparing 26 AD and 36 healthy subjects? brains, the overall predictive capability of ANNs reached 100%.  Torabi et al (11) trained a feed-forward ANN using a sample of 50 normal brains and 25 brains with AD pathology, by means of Gray-Level Co-Occurrence Matrix texture analysis on Voxel-based Morphometry structural Magnetic Resonance brain imaging (VBM-MRI) of the gray matter of the brain. The ANN was able to identify AD patients with a performance of 95%. In another brain VBM-MRI study, in a sample of 10 AD patients and 12 healthy subjects, a three- layer feed-forward ANN, with a backpropagation algorithm, reached a performance of 100% (9).

The objective of our work was to build an model with high discriminative performance on the diagnosis of AD, based on clinical and postural kinetics data recorded by IMU on AD patients and controls subjected to increasing different postural stress tasks. AD patients display a different kinetic profile, but to the best of our knowledge it has not been investigated yet if such profiles can be used in ANNs for the diagnosis of AD.

In the development of ANNs models, while the number of neurons in the input and output layers are well defined by the problem at hand, the questions regarding the (best) number of hidden layer and (best) number of neurons in each hidden layer remain open, and can mainly be answered by trial and error, which can be a serious burden and very time consuming.

With the purpose to facilitate and streamline our work  we developed a software tool that automatically and systematically tests different configurations of ANNs (number of neurons in the first and second hidden layers, two training algorithms (Backpropagation (BP) and Scaled Conjugate Gradient (SCG)) to obtain the best possible performance. This tool is a very useful contribution.

MATERIALS AND METHODS II.

A. Study population   The study population, recruited from outpatient neurology department, consisted of 21 Alzheimer?s Disease (AD) patients (10) and 21 Controls (C) without orthopaedic, musculoskeletal, vestibular disorder or alcohol abuse.

Written consent was obtained from all subjects or their guardians, and the protocol of the study was approved by the local ethics committee. AD group (16 females/ 6 males) were 75.67?6.81 years-old and Control Group (9 females/12 males) 69.14?8.60 years-old. Biometric data was collected: weight (kg) (AD = 66.33?8.77; C = 72.64?11.23), height (cm) (AD = 153?6.85; C=160?11.51), body mass index (kg/m2) (AD=28.52?4.17; C=28.38?4.52), and anthropometric measurements (shank (ankle-knee); thigh (knee-iliac crest).

B. Kinetic acquisition and assessment system   Five kinetic sensing modules, harbouring an 8051  microprocessor embedded in CC2530 Texas Instrument SoC  (System on Chip), and a inertial measurement Unit MPU6000 (tri-axial accelerometer and gyroscope)(11) (see panel (a) in fig.1), operating with a sample rate frequency of 113 Hz on a SD card, were attached to five body segments: trunk (center of mass (55% of a person?s height above the ground) (12); both legs (middle of ankle-knee) and both thighs (middle of knee- iliac crest) by Velcro bands. Video capture (sample rate of 60 fps) and the data logging on the five kinetic sensors were synchronized by bidirectional radio signal transmission through an USB coordinator node connected to a PC (see panel (b) in Fig.1) with custom made Matlab? software.

Outputs from the accelerometers were filtered with a second order Butterworth low-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of 0.5 Hz (13), and the output from the gyroscopes filtered with a cut-off frequency of 5Hz (14). The kinetic sensor orientation in space was calculated using the Euler angles spatial representation for Pitch (?) and Roll (?) (15). Final pitch and roll angles were obtained by a complementary filter of accelerometer and gyroscope pitch and roll (? coefficient of 0.98) (16):  Pitch(? )= ?(Pitch(? )gyro) + (1-? )Pitch(? )accel   (1)  Roll(? ) = ?(Roll(? )gyro) + (1-? ) Roll(? )accel   (2)  These two angles were then used to compute the 2D displacement (xi, yi) of the Center of Mass (COM) as follows:  COMCOM ))H( (Rollsin  =  x;))H((Pitch sin  = ?? iiy         (3)  where HCOM is the height of the COM.

One of normal human?s mechanisms of maintaining balance is to vary the height and COM, and thus HCOM by bending knees and trunk. Therefore HCOM (being our initial 55% of height) was constantly adjusted, using the information derived from the length of the thighs and shanks (i.e. Lthigh and Lshank respectively) and from the kinetic sensors angles located on thighs and shanks (i.e. ?t and ?s respectively) by the formulas:  shank1 L * cos =T s?  (4)  thigh2 L * cos = T t?  (5)  T2) - (L  - T1) - (L - H= thighshankCOMCOM measuredH (6)  Where HCOMmeasured is the measured height of the COM.

We focused on kinetic measurements, derived from the IMU at COM, that emerged from a systematic review as predictors of falls among older people (17) (18), (19), (20) (see fig.1.): total displacement on the transverse plane (gray line on panel c)  ? ?+? ++ 2121 )()(=ntDisplaceme iiiitotal yyxx (7)   ; maximal displacement (cm) with respect to the origin on the transverse plane (green dot on panel  c)     22max ii yxof + (8)  ; mean distance (cm) in respect to origin on transverse plane (orange dot on panel (c)); dispersion radius (average distances relative to average point in both axes (X and Y axis) (blue line on panel (c)); maximal linear velocity (cm/s) (14); positioning (cm) on X (maximal (red dot on panel c ), mean and range) and Y axis (maximal (red dot on panel (c)), mean and range); roll angle (degrees) (maximal, minimum and mean) and pitch angle (degrees) (maximal, minimum and mean); time spent (seconds) on four transverse plane quadrants (combination of positioning on x and y axis relative to the origin in the beginning of the 30 seconds trial) (panel (d)).

(a)    (b)    (c)    (d)  Figure1. Panel (a): Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU). Panel (b): USB coordinator node. Panel (c): Different kinetic variables (see main text) represented on the displacement of the IMU located on the Center of Mass (COM). Panel (d): Time spent of the COM (red dot) on the four transverse plane quadrants.

C. Clinical tasks   Subjects were instructed to perform seven different tasks with increasing stability stress and need for postural correction, including visual suppression (18) and inclination (21) (fig. 2). On an experimental study in our laboratory, with 5 degrees steps of platform inclination, healthy subjects started to have significant change on kinetic measurements after 15 degrees of inclination, being approximate to the 20 degrees proposed on other studies (21). Tasks and kinetic capture were performed each for 30 seconds (22), with subjects standing quiet, their arms hanging at their sides and place their head in a normal forward-looking to a visual eye target height approximately 2 meters away.

Task 1 Task 2/3 Task 4/5 Task 6/7       Eyes  Open   Eyes  Closed     Figure 2. Center of Mass kinetic displacement plots (Alzheimer?s Disease (AD) (red colour) and Controls (C) (green colour) on increasing postural stability stress tasks: task 1 (stabilization after rising from a sitting position with a relaxed feets position); task 2/3 (Romberg test (feets closed together) with eyes open/closed); task 4/5 and task 6/7 (Romberg test in 15? inclined platform backwards/frontward respectively with eyes open/closed).

D. Collected variables   The collected variables in this study consist of: i) demographic and biometric data that have been  scientifically reported as influencing kinetic performance: age (23), weight (24) , height (25), Body Mass Index (24)) and gender); and  ii) all IMU kinetic variables recorded on the seven different tasks: 22 kinetic variables * 7 tasks.

This gives a total of 159 variables.

This large of set variables was afterwards analyzed in order to identify the variables with statistical significance. For this purpose we used a non-parametric analysis (Mann-Whitney test) with a level of statistical significance smaller than 5% (p <0.05). The result is a set of 35 variables, which are shown in table 1.

Table 1 Statistically different variables between Controls and Alzheimer?s Disease patients  Controls vs. AD * (p value) Demographic and biometric data  Age  p=0.011  Height  p=0.024  Kinetic variables Variables  Stabilization After Rising From a Sitting Position  Mean Positioning on X axis p=0.009  Range on Y axis P=0.038  Mean roll angle P=0.011  Time on 2nd Quadrant P=0.020  Romberg Test with Eyes Open  Total Displacement  P=0.006  Mean Positioning on X axis P=0.048  Range on X axis P=0.030  Average Linear Velocity P=0.006  Time in 1st Quadrant P=0.036  Romberg Test with Eyes Closed  Total Displacement  p=0.005  Maximal Displacement p=0.021  Maximal Positioning on X p=0.009  Range on X axis p=0.005  Average Linear Velocity p=0.004  Backwards Inclined Platform with Eyes Open Maximal Positioning on X axis  p=0.045  Range on X axis p=0.028      Backwards Inclined Platform with Eyes closed  Range on X axis  p=0.050  Maximal Linear Velocity p=0.039  Minimal Pitch angle p=0.014  Frontward inclined platform with Eyes Open  Total Displacement  p=0.036  Range on X axis p=0.016  Average Linear Velocity p=0.036  Frontward inclined platform with Eyes Closed  Total Displacement  p=0.015  Maximal Displacement p=0.01  Average Displacement p=0.022  Dispersion Radius p=0.042  Maximal Positioning on X axis p=0.045  Range on X axis p=0.006  Range on Y axis p=0.045  Average linear velocity p=0.015  Minimal Roll angle p=0.009  Minimal pitch angle p=0.050  Time in the 3td Quadrant p=0.018  * Significant p values on Mann-Whitney analysis    E. Neural network   The problem being handled in this study is a classification problem, discriminating AD patients from healthy subjects.

For this purpose we used Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs), which is the type of ANN among the best classifiers for large data sets [8]. We used a sigmoid activation function to represent the nonlinear behavior between the inputs and outputs. As training algorithms we used both BP and  SCG (26, 27). The output layer is composed by two neurons, one representing AD patients and the other the Control Group. The number of input neurons is defined by the number of variables.

F. Software developed to perform ANNs analysis   We developed an application in Matlab? for ANNs analysis (fig. 3). The application allows the automatic creation, training and testing of ANNs with different configurations (i.e. different number of hidden layers and different neurons in each hidden layer). The input vectors were of two different dimensions: (a) input vectors with all 159 variables (I=159), or (b) input vectors defined by the 35 selected variables (I=35).

Figure 3.  Software developed in Matlab? for creating, training and testing different configurations of the Artificial Neural Network    Uploaded data is divided into two groups, training and test, either automatically (randomly division of the data according to a user defined rate) or manually (user manually chooses which data is used for training and test). In our study, data was randomly divided on equal sizes training and test groups, and all ANNs used the same data thus enabling a consistent comparison. Data was preprocessed by a min-max normalization method (data transformed to a range of values between -1 and 1, avoiding the overlap of some data over others).

After selecting the learning algorithm (BP or SCG), the application begins testing the ANN with the minimum number of neurons chosen for the first hidden layer, incrementing until it reaches the maximum number of neurons. When this happens, a second hidden layer is included, first with one neuron, and the first hidden layer is set to its initial setup incrementing once again to the maximum number of neurons.

This autonomous process is cyclically repeated until the second layer reaches the maximum number of neurons defined by the user.

RESULTS III.

Herein we present the performance of the ANNs as a function of the number of neurons in the first and second hidden layers, for the two training algorithms (BP and SCG).

Section A presents the performance of the ANNs when all 159 variables are used as inputs, and section B the corresponding performance when the 35 selected variables are used as inputs.

In the following, all plots show on the on y-axis the performance of ANN, on x-axis the number of neurons in the first hidden layer, and the number of neurons in the second hidden layer is presented by performance lines with different colors.

A. ANN performance with all variables (I=159)   Performance results using the BP algorithm are depicted in  fig. 4. As can be seen the maximum performance achieved was 90%, which was obtained for an ANN with 90 neurons in the first hidden layer and 0 in the second layer (i.e. no second hidden layer).

Figure 4. Performance using the Backpropagation training algorithm, with all variables selected as inputs (I=159).

Next, Fig.5 shows the performance results based on the use of the SCG algorithm. The maximum performance obtained was 85%, which occurred for 80 neurons in the first hidden layer and 30 on the second layer.

Figure 5. Performance with the Scaled Conjugate Gradient training algorithm with all variables selected as inputs (I=159).

B. ANN performance with seletected variables(I=35)   Fig.6 shows performance results obtained for the training with the BP algorithm. The maximum performance achieved was 95%, with 60 or 70 neurons in the first hidden layer and 30 neurons in the second layer.

Figure 6. Performance using the Backpropagation training algorithm with selected variables as inputs (I=35).

The same performance was reached, 95%, when the SCG training algorithm was used. For the SCG algorithm, this performance was achieved with an ANN with 70 neurons in the first hidden layer and 30 neurons in the second layer (fig.7).

Figure 7. Performance using the Scaled Conjugate Gradient training algorithm with selected variables as inputs (I=35).

CONCLUSION IV.

Postural control and sensory organization are known to be critical for moving safely and adapting to the environment.

Kinetics measured by IMU is a growing tool of research of postural balance in AD patients. Albeit, hundreds of kinetic parameters have been used to represent postural body sway but, still, it has not been well established which best represents the mechanism of human balance, which provides the most useful information discriminating individuals with different medical conditions or even with elevated risk of falling (28).

To the best of our knowledge this is the first study applying ANN analysis on big data records obtained by IMU kinetic postural analysis on AD. We have shown that AD patients have an higher sway when compared to healthy subjects, as previously reported (18).  We also showed that a MLP ANN is a useful tool on pattern recognition on clinical and postural kinetics data, identifying AD patients with a high performance rate.

Reducing the number of input variables, based on a non- parametric analysis, for assessing the statistical relevance, the maximum performance increased to 95%. This is concordant with previous findings of the advantage of combining two methods of statistical analysis (linear to non linear analysis) (9,(29), in order to eliminate redundant features, excessive elements of input vectors and subsequently increasing performance of ANNs.

BP algorithm is the most representative and mostly widely applied in current ANN models (30). During its operation, input layer employs linear transfer function, while hidden layer and output layer use nonlinear transfer function, among which, the most often applied transfer function is the sigmoid function. SCG algorithm uses a step size scaling mechanism, avoids a time consuming line-search per learning iteration, which makes the algorithm faster than other second order algorithms (27) and less memory requirements (30). However, this does not implies that SCG performance is better than BP algorithm. Moreover, while the number of neurons in the input and output layers are well defined by the problem at hand, the questions about the (best) number of hidden layers, and (best) number of neurons in each hidden layer remain open. An    intelligent choice of the number of hidden units depends on whether you are using early stopping or some other form of regularization. If not, we must simply try many networks with different numbers of hidden units, estimate the generalization error for each one, and choose the network with the minimum estimated generalization error (31). We have developed a software tool that does this automatically. In our study, choosing the network with minimum estimated generalization error, we found no significant differences between BP and SCG training algorithms which regards to performance or the number of neurons in first and second hidden layer.

Currently, the diagnosis of AD is based on clinical and cerebral imaging criteria (10). Our work shows that postural kinematic analysis has the potential to be used as a future complementary diagnostic tool. Besides MPL-ANN, other data mining techniques have also proven to be usefull on diagnosis of AD based on other type of clinical data. Radial basis function neural networks has been used on visual graph analysis of EEG (32), and Support Vector Machines on MRI data(33). Future perspectives of our work are to compare MPL-ANN with other data mining methods and to collect a larger data set of AD patients and healthy subjects.

