

Abstract? We propose a comprehensive information processing, knowledge discovery and simulation platform for Big Data Healthcare. In addition, we present a related, well- defined workflow that promotes model-guided personalized medicine. We start by identifying disease signatures and homogeneous patient groups, whilst modeling case-based patient similarity. Then we analyze correlations between variables and patient groups to deliver accurate and reusable predictive statistical simulation models. Such a framework provides significant advantages on both the clinician's daily routine and targeted biomedical research.



I. INTRODUCTION Big Data Healthcare characterizes a fundamental shift in  the way biomedical data are collected and processed, as well as how biomedical research is performed. Bottom-up (evidence-oriented) analysis aimed to identify latent factors (disease signatures) that can explain and predict variabilities in drug therapies and disease evolution, revealing similarities among patients, is of fundamental interest in model-guided personalized medicine.

Such an approach goes beyond classical flat file data analysis, batch learning procedures, and simple classification, correlation analysis and clustering techniques commonly focused only on a few variables of interest. A Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) platform in this area should be able to handle massive volumes of uncertain, streaming heterogeneous biomedical data, to analyze them in an incremental/on-line fashion from multiple points of view and under different assumptions, as well as to include or exclude dimensions, combine different modalities and incorporate existing knowledge and previous beliefs.

Building upon, and extending existing research and related tools, we have developed a well-established expandable framework that provides advanced semi and unsupervised techniques, robust statistical simulation modeling and uncertainty handling capabilities. This platform is part of our on-going work on the MD- PAEDIGREE project [19] and supports an automated transformation, pre-processing/validation, information retrieval, knowledge, pattern and similarity discovery ? and eventually decision support, simulation and reasoning ? workflow.

The research leading to these results has received funding from the  European Union?s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n? 600932 (MD-PAEDIGREE).

All authors are with the Institute for the Management of Information Systems, Research Center ?Athena?, Artemidos 6 & Epidavrou, Marousi 151 25, Greece (corresponding author is H.D..; email: harryd@imis.athena- innovation.gr).



II. SUPPORTED WORKFLOW Fig. 1 demonstrates the supported workflow, related  steps, as well as inputs and outputs. It consists of the following well-defined steps/tasks. Each one of these tasks is handled by a specific module, described in section IV.

A. Data Preprocessing and Validation Preprocessing is the first step in the workflow, ensuring  that the raw data is validated, curated and appropriately transformed (e.g. discretized) for use by the data analysis system.

B. Disease Signature Identification, Patient Grouping and Similarity Detection  Disease signatures: refer to patterns that exist inside patient data and which can reveal related aspects of the disease, as well as related differentiations. Such patterns commonly only refer to expressions of the disease in terms of subjective (symptoms, clinical evaluation) and objective (labs, genes, proteins) examination ? and sometimes may include existing assessment characterization ? and do not usually include therapy and intervention. Nevertheless, intervention should be taken into consideration since it likely affects the expression of the disease.

Disease signature allocation on patients: we address this problem following a mixed membership approach. This means that a patient is not characterized solely according (or belongs) to a single disease signature (hard clustering), but rather has a specific distribution (proportion) on more than one disease signatures.

Patient Grouping and Similarity: based on the above- mentioned patient-to-disease signature allocation, we identify homogeneous groups among patients and model case-based patient similarity.

C.  Statistical Simulation Modeling Having identified homogeneous groups of patients  according to disease signatures, we go one step further towards personalized medicine, building highly accurate and reusable predictive ? patient or disease specific ? statistical simulation models combining a:  ? bottom-up data-driven process, i.e. analyzing heterogeneous, vertically-integrated demographic, phenotypic, clinical, molecular and genomic bio- medical data, images and streams; and a  ? top-down model/concept-driven process, i.e.

incorporating external knowledge coming either from domain experts, literature, or model-driven processes and relational/semantic models.

AITION: A scalable KDD platform for Big Data Healthcare Omiros Metaxas, Harry Dimitropoulos, Yannis Ioannidis, MD-PAEDIGREE       Thus, by combining disease signatures? analysis with other learning procedures that reveal important correlations between variables in all dimensions and scales, we can build statistical simulation models that include therapy planning (possible treatment plans, medications, etc.), as well as outcome. Such models could be validated and improved later through retrospective analysis.

D. Personalized Model-Guided Medicine The ultimate goal of this task is to provide personalized  disease prediction and prognosis, as well as adapted and individualized therapy plans. Utilizing statistical simulation models, a clinician or researcher can analyze multiple ?what if? scenarios supporting decision making. In addition, such models can support or validate already defined clinical workflows.



III. CHALLENGES IN BIOMEDICAL BIG DATA ANALYTICS Biomedical big data analytics and related data analysis  workflows impose several challenges and dimensions that have to be taken into consideration:  ? Vertical integration and heterogeneity:  analysis is performed on vertical integrated, heterogeneous, multi-modal biomedical data including demographic, phenotypic, clinical, molecular, and genomic bio- medical data, images and streams.

? A-priori knowledge incorporation:  medical practice is based on a continuous growing a-priori knowledge.

? Temporal modeling: there is also an inherited temporal dimension in medical practice and disease evolution that imposes dependencies in biomedical data.

? Spatial modeling: different genetic characteristics, as well as environmental factors across and within populations also impose additional dependencies.

? Online, dynamic, self-adapted models: we seek for dynamic models, able to capture distribution shifts accompanied with on-line learning techniques.

? Disease signatures and medication: as already mentioned, intervention should be taken into consideration, as it may alter the expression of the disease.

? Multi-modal analysis: we seek for models that can incorporate information from images and streams.

? Privacy preserving implications on KDD: we are trying to account for additional noise or information loss that may be imposed due to anonymization procedures.

? Clinical trials vs. daily routine: analyzing daily routine?s data imposes more sources of uncertainty.



IV. PROPOSED PLATFORM AND LOGICAL ARCHITECTURE  In the area of Big Healthcare Data analytics, it is  impossible to expect that one could develop methods that will validate or curate every data point, or apply specific KDD techniques that will reveal all patterns, or create a single ?valid? model for every biomedical process. On the contrary, we propose an expandable platform where many different techniques can be incorporated and a voting strategy can be used to combine the produced outcomes.

That way, outliers/inconsistencies are revealed, ?strong? patterns are discovered, and correct predictions prevail.

The proposed KDD platform consists of three well-  defined ?application? modules, each one responsible for a specific data analysis task, briefly described in section II, that are seamlessly integrated upon a scalable distributed processing and querying engine, as described in Fig. 2. The platform can access a federated data layer infrastructure, utilizing ADP/MADIS middleware for distributed querying (see ?D below), and can handle data in many forms (relational/DB, flat files, images, etc.). Thus, at this point we have developed a preliminary, but fully functional and integrated version of the whole platform, mainly focusing on the data preprocessing (A) and statistical simulation (C) modules described next:  Figure 1.   AITION data processing, mining and statistical simulation modeling workflow for supporting model-guided personalized medicine.

A. DCV: Data Curation and Validation Provides advanced techniques for data curation, validation and preprocessing. It is able to: validate data attributes; check for outliers, inconsistencies and mistakes in the data; automatically resolve many of the frequently missing/null values; compute medical scores, aggregates, and other derived variables; and perform attribute discretization when required. DCV?s curation mechanisms are based upon rules that can be modified/ added by the user.

B. AITION clustering module: Provides advanced multi-modal, mixed-membership clustering [10,13] and similarity analysis techniques, extending classical Bayesian parametric and non- parametric latent variable models [7,11], mixtures and ad- mixtures [2,20] targeting disease signature identification.

In addition, we calculate patient similarity based on their allocation (proportions) on discovered latent factors using several metrics (such as cosine similarity, symmetric Kullback?Leibler divergence and others), identifying hidden homogenous groups. We have also developed a force directed layout to visualize patient clusters [14] with simple constraints [8] and collision detection (Fig. 3).

C. AITION simulation module: Provides feature selection, variable correlation analysis, statistical simulation modeling and reasoning based on Graphical Probabilistic Models (GPMs). GPMs are a popular and well-studied framework for compact representation of a joint probability distribution over a large number of interdependent variables, as well as for efficient reasoning about such a distribution [15,21].

AITION [6] (Fig. 4) is one of the latest and most advanced systems in this area. Initially developed as part of an EC project [12], AITION implements state-of-the- art algorithms and techniques (exact [9,16,17] or approximate [1,3,4,22,24]) for Bayesian Network (BN) Structure and Parameter Learning, Markov Blanket induction and feature selection, and real-time inference.

Furthermore, ontologies and a-priori knowledge can be incorporated with the BN, defining topological constraints, in order to automate causal discovery and feature selection and provide semantic modeling under uncertainty [5]. This way, AITION presents a rich ?natural? framework for imposing structure and prior knowledge, providing the domain expert with the ability to seed the learning algorithm with knowledge about the problem at hand.

D. ADP/MADIS Middleware: Athena Distributed Processing (ADP) engine [23] with  MADIS [18] is a next generation data-flow language engine, capable of supporting distributed execution of resource/time- consuming algorithms related to knowledge discovery, simulation and data mining. Based on a flexible system architecture with multiple levels of abstractions, it offers efficient execution and optimized scheduling on a variety of distributed platforms, such as, ad-hoc clusters, grids, or clouds. In addition, it supports distributed querying over federated data sources. It provides a declarative language extending SQL, user-defined functions (UDFs), import filters and a rich library of operators for statistics, data cleaning and data mining.

Figure 3.   Using disease signature allocation to visually cluster patients using a force directed layout (nodes correspond to patients and edges to  similarities between them).

Figure 2.   Logical Architecture of the proposed platform: AITION consists of three application modules targeting preprocessing, clustering and statistical simulation that are seamlessly integrated upon a scalable distributed processing and querying engine.



V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE EXTENSIONS We are envisioning a day when a clinician or researcher will have the opportunity to extract useful knowledge by mining the daily routine's streaming data, and at the same time, be able to incorporate external knowledge, identify similarities and groupings among patients, and build/utilize statistical simulation models on a single platform that works in parallel with existing HIMS, RIMS, PACS, LIS, and other hospital information systems. We have proposed a KDD platform and a related workflow to support this vision.

