ICTON 2014  Mo.C4.2

ABSTRACT Delivering  scalable  packet-switched  interconnects  that can  support  the  bursty  Ethernet traffic, which is common in  many data  centre  applications   is  a  challenging  problem  that  is  only  getting harder.

Implementing  the  control  logic  capable  of  deciding  how  to  forward  each  packet  individually  in  current packet-switched  Ethernet  interconnects is not optimized and researchers are proposing hybrid optical/electronic Top of Rack (ToR) architectures to improve the performance towards an optimized operation. Emerging applications (e.g., Big Data) and potential cross-layer performance improvement is another interesting topic that should be properly addressed in future data centres. In this paper a summary of recent developments of optical networking in data centres will be presented. Our software-defined optical network emulation platform is introduced and initial WDM link modelling as a tool for cross layer investigation and optimization are presented.

A nonlinear optical signal propagation tool (as a network application) and related results are presented.

Keywords: software-defined optical network, network emulation, hybrid optical/packet switching, hybrid top of  rack, cross-layer optimization, application driven networking.

1. INTRODUCTION Ranging from small enterprises to large scale compute cloud providers, most of the existing IT systems and services are strongly depending on highly scalable and efficient data centres. These infrastructures still pose significant challenges on providers regarding computing, storage and networking [1]. Concerning the networking issues, data centres should be designed and deployed in such a way as to offer flexible and high cross-section bandwidth and low latency, QoS based on the application requirements, high levels of resilience, intelligent resource utilization to reduce energy consumption and improve overall efficiency, agility in provisioning network resources[2].

Existing data centres are typically designed with a fat-tree or oversubscribed fat-tree interconnection topology.

The number of racks per physical point of delivery (POD) is typically between 40 and 60, but even denser values can be found. Each rack is typically equipped with a Top-of-Rack switch (ToR) that provides southbound interfaces to the end hosts and northbound interfaces to the higher levels of the tree. Two approaches are followed in fat-tree networks: 1) the traditional fat-tree approach using higher rate ports towards the root of the tree, or 2) utilising low-port-rate commodity switches in a folded Clos topology in order to provide low-rate multiple  paths  between  the  physical servers. Although the cost of Clos is lower than the traditional fat-tree approach, it still scales super-linearly. Furthermore, the cabling of the huge number of switches becomes quite challenging and is error prone during setup and maintenance.

The emergence of software-defined networking (SDN) has been expected to change the current state of quo in networking. Early research efforts have indeed showed that data centre networking can significantly benefit from SDN in solving different problems such as live network migration, improved network management, eminent failure avoidance, rapid deployment from development to production networks, troubleshooting, and optimization of network utilization. SDN can also offer networking primitives for cloud applications, solutions to predict network transfers of applications, mechanisms for fast reaction to operation failures, network-aware VM placement, QoS support, real-time network monitoring and fault detection, security policy enforcement services and mechanisms, and enable programmatic adaptation of transport protocols. SDN enables providers to expose more networking primitives to their customers, by allowing virtual network isolation, custom addressing, and the placement of middle boxes and virtual desktop cloud applications [3].

In this work we provide a condense survey on hybrid data centre networking and then introduce our software- defined optical network emulation platform as a tool for cross-layer optimization and application driven networking.

2. HYBRID DATA CENTRE NETWORKING The main limitations of current data centre architectures can be summarized as: i) super linear scaling, ii) High load independent energy consumption, iii) Cumbersome and complex cabling, iv) High (on average) CAPEX and OPEX due to underutilized network (oversubscribed fat-tree can exhibit congestion problems while is still underutilized and full fat-tree is expensive), v) rigid bandwidth allocation, and vi) large latencies for east-west traffic, which is dominant (due to north-south travel path). These  limitations  are  further  exacerbated  by  the    ICTON 2014  Mo.C4.2    emerging  concept  of  Resource  Disaggregation. The core idea of disaggregation is to share computing, memory, storage, and networking resources among the data centre?s racks and use them on-demand.

Disaggregating the system resources causes inordinate requirements to the interconnection network. Network interconnects are facing the challenge to meet the emerging demands for high bandwidth and low latency across the physical distance of the distributed components into the data centre. Optical networking not only as a forwarding plane but also for switching can offload the processing burden from power-hungry electronic switches and also enable flatter network architectures.

Hybrid electro-optical networks are considered as a viable migration path in order to meet the rising networking demands in the data centre. Optical switching has been investigated for transferring aggregated traffic between racks or collections of racks, partly or  entirely  replacing  the  higher  levels  of  the  electronic tree  networks [4].  These proposals exploit protocol and rate-transparency, relatively low cost per port, and re- configurability of features of optical switching. To ensure a realistic deployment scenario, commercial off-the- shelf optical switches have been mainly investigated such as Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS), tuneable lasers and AWGs. Hybrid data centre networking paves the way for long-lived flows to be handled by the optical switched network whereas short, bursty traffic is accommodated by the electrical packet switched network. This MEMS-based hybrid electronic-optical network approach is followed by Helios, Calient, REACToR [5]. Mordia [6] introduces the use of WDM transmission with fast Wavelength Selective Switches (WSSs) for network reconfiguration. The Mordia WSSs achieve switching times in the order of 10?s which is substantially faster than the speed of MEMS. The hybrid data centre networking can be complemented by SDN to address the requirement of emerging applications. Centralized  SDN  controllers have  been  considered  to meet  the  traffic  requirements  of  a  datacentre  by analysing  the  entire  datacentre  network  as  an  abstracted and  virtualized  representation,  simulating  any  network changes  ahead  of  time  and  then  automatically configuring  multiple  switches  on  demand. Hybrid electrical (packet switching)/optical (circuit switching) architectures explore the potential of combining electronic packet switching with optical circuit switching and provide hardware re-configurability [7]. Circuits are utilized with crossbar MEMS switches and are established where bandwidth is required enabling a hardware-type sharing of resources, as a way to reduce cost and address energy and cabling complexity issues.

Application Defined Network (ADN) is the last piece of the data centre optimization puzzle to address the dynamic requirements of applications by influencing the network behaviour (i.e., efficient resource allocation, dynamic networking control) through northbound APIs. PANE (Participatory Networking) provides  a  simple text-based  protocol  that  end-users  can  use  to  request  network  resources, query the state of the network, or provide hints about future traffic patterns [8]. Cloud weaver (by Lyatiss) and Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI) (by Cisco) are other examples of similar attempts to translate the application needs to a cross-layer optimization approach.

3. SOFTWARE-DEFINED OPTICAL NETWORK EMULATION Extending the notion of SDN from packet switching (L2+) to transport (circuit switching) (L0/L1) networks, can help SDN demonstrate its real power by managing multiple elements from multiple vendors across multiple layers of the network, including the IP and Ethernet layer, the optical switching layer, and down to the optical transmission layer. While there are several software tools and utilities, in particular network emulation tools (e.g. mininet), for researchers in the packet switching domain of SDN/OpenFlow, researchers with interests in modelling optical network have no access to similar tool-chain to be able to evaluate their innovative idea using an emulation environment. The overall architecture of our Software-Defined Optical Network Emulation Platform (SONEP) is depicted in Fig. 1a. The emulation manager is running in the user space and interfaces with the end user through a command line interface (CLI). It also includes the namespace node manager and commander to manage the namespace lightweight system virtualization nodes. Typical Linux networking tools (e.g., ip, TC/Netem, brctl, ebtables, iperf) running in user space are available to control the various characteristics of the emulated network. The key building blocks of these emulated networks are SDN-based hybrid optical/packet switches, emulated (D)WDM and/or virtual Ethernet links, emulated hosts. The emulated hybrid switch works with any SDN controller via the OpenFlow protocol (or extended OpenFlow). Applications can utilize the northbound API of the SDN controller to request provisioning of circuit cross-connects or aggregation of packet interfaces into optical trunks with the required capacity. Using the network isolation feature of namespace containers, we modelled the emulated WDM links by creating virtual Ehernet ports (i.e., veth interfaces) with one end in the host system and the other end in the namesapce node corresponding to the number of required channels per WDM link. Each of these virtual interfaces play the role of individual WDM channel that can be controlled by SDN controller.

ICTON 2014  Mo.C4.2     (a) (b)  Figure 1: a) The overall architecture of the SONEP; b) The experiment setup.

4. NETWORK EMULATION SETUP The network emulation setup is depicted in Fig. 1b. Two virtual hybrid switches along with end-to-end test terminals are connected using an emulated WDM link with 16 channels. Each channel is assigned to a separate IP network and therefore by changing the IP address of test terminals the connectivity of individual channels can be tested. Our custom SDN controller is responsible for establishing the extended OpenFlow session with the hybrid switches. Also a network and link state database is maintained inside the SDN controller. In order to estimate the QoT of the end-to-end WDM link, we have developed a network application, which runs on top of the SDN controller. The initial functionality of this network application is to evaluate the group velocity dispersion (GVD) and self-phase modulation (SPM) of the WDM links. This functionality will be extended to consider other physical layer impairments and to estimate the quality of the deployed signal in terms of Q-Factor. This feature can be later used by other applications to achieve a cross-layer optimization scheme.

In this setup, the signal in the hybrid switches can be directly managed from the SDN controller and the QoT estimator. The involved steps are: 1) Discovery of the interfaces (transponder profile) in the SDN controller; 2) Using the centralized view, the QoT estimator computes the proper transmission parameters; 3) configuration of interface parameters; and 4) based on the estimated QoT, the SONEP manager properly updates the parameters of the emulated WDM link. The degradation of the emulated link can be updated in run time and this can be reflected in the end-to-end session of test terminals in terms of increased packet loss or lack of connectivity due to unacceptable (i.e., below threshold) QoT of the WDM link.

5. RESULTS In order to properly report the QoT of the optical signal propagation, a Non-linear Schr?dinger Equation (NLSE) solver is implemented, which can model the non-linear impairments as the optical signal propagates through the WDM link. The impact of self-phase modulation (SPM) describes the propagation behaviour realistically only for relatively long pulses (T0 > 100 ps). In these cases the dispersion length (LD) is much larger compared with length of fiber (L) and the nonlinear length (LNL). As pulses become shorter and the dispersion length becomes comparable to the fibre length, the impact of Group Velocity Dispersion (GVD) and SPM should be properly considered. Our results consider the temporal and spectral changes that occur when the effects of GVD are included in the impact of SPM. Using the NLSE solver (network application) Fig. 2 depicts the evolution of pulse shapes and optical spectrum over a distance of 5LD for an initially un-chirped Gaussian pulse propagating in the normal-dispersion regime of the fibre with parameter N = 1.

The practical significance of the parameter N (defined as N2 = LD / LNL) is that solutions of NLSE obtained for a specific N value are applicable to many practical situations. In fact N governs the relative importance of the SPM and GVD effects on pulse evolution along the fibre. Dispersion dominates for N << 1 while SPM dominates for N >> 1. For values of N ~ 1, both SPM and GVD play an equally important role during pulse evolution. The qualitative behaviour is quite different from that expected when either GVD or SPM dominates.

In particular, the pulse broadens much faster compared with the case, in which N = 0 (ignoring the impact of SPM). In fact SPM generates new frequency components that are red-shifted near the leading edge and blue- shifted near the trailing edge of the pulse. The situation is different for pulses propagating in the anomalous- dispersion regime of the fibre. Figure 2b shows the pulse shapes and spectra under conditions identical to those of Fig. 2a except that the sign of the GVD parameter has been reversed (?2 < 0). In the NLSE, the parameter ?2 controls/defines the normal or anomalous GVD. The pulse broadens initially at a rate much lower than that expected in the absence of SPM and then appears to reach a steady state for z > 4LD.

ICTON 2014  Mo.C4.2    (a) (b)  Figure 2. Evolution of pulse shapes and optical spectra over a distance of 5LD (un-chirped Gaussian pulse)in the a)normal-dispersion regime (?2 > 0) with N = 1 and b) anomalous-dispersion regime (?2 < 0) of the fiber.

At the same time, the spectrum narrows rather than exhibiting broadening expected by SPM in the absence of GVD. This behaviour can be understood by noting that the SPM-induced chirp is positive while the dispersion induced chirp is negative for ?2 < 0. These two chirp contributions cancel each other along the centre portion of the Gaussian pulse when N = 1 (i.e., LNL = LD).

6. CONCLUSIONS We have reported on a new tool dedicated to the design and development of an SDN-based optical network emulation. The SONEP tool was used to successfully report on the performance of a use-case scenario where the impact of SPM and GVD was evaluated for cross-layer optimizations. Further work will be done to extend the evaluation to other physical layer impairments and to estimate the quality of the deployed signal in terms of Q- Factor and interfacing with Big Data (e.g. MapReduce) applications for cross-layer optimizations in data centres.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research has been partially funded by EC FP7 (agreement no. 605243, MOMoT/GN3plus).

