Automated Analysis of Power Systems Disturbance

Abstract? Analysis of faults and disturbances play crucial roles in secure and reliable electrical power supply. Digital fault recorders (DFR) enable digital recording of the power systems transient events with high quality and huge quantity.

However, transformation of data to information, expectedly in an automated way, is a big challenge for the power utilities worldwide. This is a key focus for realizing the ?Smart Grid?. In this paper, the architecture and specifications for the primary and the secondary information for the automated systems are described. This provides qualitative and quantitative guidelines about the information to derive out of the disturbance data.

A quantified estimate of big data for the substations, has been estimated in the paper. Possible ways of reducing the big data by utilizing intelligent segmentation techniques are described, substantiated by real example. Utilization of centralized protection and remote disturbance analysis for reducing big disturbance data are also discussed.

Index Terms?Analytics, big data, centralized protection, fault analysis, high voltage, HV, medium voltage, MV, radial network, remote relay testing, smart grid, web service.



I. INTRODUCTION  For secure and reliable electrical power supply, analysis  of faults and disturbances is crucial. This is becoming even  more important in the ?Smart Grid? initiative, with focus  on blackout prevention, fast system restoration [1], better  estimation of fault location, integrating communication in  protection, condition monitoring and diagnostics, etc.

Application of the digital recording technology in the power  systems transient events results in high quality and huge  quantity of disturbance records. Information from the analysis  of digital records are required to get an insight into the  behavior of the power system as well as the performance of  the protection equipments. However, manual analysis of the  records is both time-consuming and complex. One of the major  challenges in the ?Smart Grid? initiative is to automatically  convert data into knowledge. This will allow more time and  flexibility of the human resources to implement corrective or  preventive action [2].

Secondly, the transformation of the power systems distur-  bance data to information in an automated way is an even  bigger challenge for the power utilities worldwide. The huge  amount of disturbance data are practically never analyzed.

Therefore, with intelligent techniques if this huge amount of  data could be reduced to meaningful information at source,  that is of great interest. This paper will highlight the nature  and source of such big data, and possible ways to reduce it.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-  tion II describes the current best practices in power systems  disturbance analysis, e.g., protection devices, characteristics of  those, major manufacturers and common mode standard. Sec-  tion III describes the automated analysis system?s architecture,  specifications for primary and secondary information, needed  for deriving a complete and meaningful information. Section  IV discusses about the quantified source of the big disturbance  data and presents a signal processing-based method on reduc-  ing it, with discussions on centralized protection and remote  disturbance analysis. Discussions are mentioned in section V,  followed by conclusions in section VI.



II. POWER SYSTEMS DISTURBANCE ANALYSIS  A. Protection Devices  Historically, the following types of equipments are typically  used in modern substations:  ? Digital protective relays (DPRs)  ? Digital fault recorders (DFRs)  ? Sequence of event recorders (SERs)  ? Remote terminal units (RTUs) of a SCADA system  ? Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs)  ? Fault locators (FLs).

However, most of these different protection devices are now  increasingly being merged into the DFRs, as different func-  tionalities into one device. Major power utilities are equipped  with the DFRs (also referred as IEDs) on the feeder bays,  with an additional few installed on the static var compensators  (SVCs).

The DFRs trigger due to reasons such as power network  fault conditions, protection operations, breaker operation, etc.

Most of these devices are remotely accessible via X.25  communication systems [3]. In future, communication stan-  dards like IEC 61850-9-2 [4]?[6] are expected to enhance  the communication, data availability more flexibly. Besides  standard Internet-based communication, potential utilization  of the wireless LAN with IEC 61850 [7] for substation and  distribution automation applications is under investigation.

2014 IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies - Asia (ISGT ASIA)     B. Characteristics  The protection devices can be characterized typically by the  following parameters.

? Recording channels: Each DFR recording typically con-  sists of 32 points binary information and analog infor-  mation in the form of voltages and currents per phase  as well as the neutral current. It could have additional  diagnostics and binary inputs, ranging up to 40 channels,  ? Sampling frequency: It varies from about 1 kHz (for  LV systems), typically 4?8 kHz, up to about 15.36 kHz  (corresponding to maximum allowed 256 samples/cycle  for 60 Hz nominal frequency [4]),  ? Fault record time: typically between 3?5s,  ? Number of transient records storage: typically about 100,  ? Sensor inputs: Typically about 10 (5 current transform-  ers or CTs, 5 voltage transformer or VTs), along with  optional sensors like temperature, etc.,  ? Input accuracy: 0.5?5% (0.5%: metering, 5%: protection).

C. Major Manufacturers  The list of manufacturers of protective relays is a growing  one. Some of the leading manufacturers are ABB, Siemens,  GE, Alstom, Schweitzer Electrical Laboratories (SEL), Eaton,  etc. (the order does not signify any relative measure).

D. COMTRADE Standard  The variety of sources of transient data, such as DFRs,  DPRs and transient simulation programs (e.g., EMTP [8]) from  different manufacturers using proprietary or different standard  formats, made it necessary to introduce the IEEE Standard for  Common Format for Transient Data Exchange (COMTRADE)  for power systems as specified by the IEEE standard C37.111-  1991 [9].

The standard files are ASCII files. Each event has three  types of files associated with it. Each of the three types carries  a different class of information: header (*.HDR), configuration  (*.CFG) and data (*.DAT).

The header file includes the following information.

1) Description of the power system prior to disturbance  2) Name of the station  3) Identity of the line, transformer, reactor, capacitor or  circuit breaker that experienced the transient  4) Length of the faulted line  5) Positive and zero sequence resistances and reactances  6) Capacitances  7) Mutual coupling between the parallel lines  8) Locations and ratings of the shunt reactors and the series  capacitors  9) Nominal voltage ratings of the transformer windings  10) Transformer power ratings and windings connections  11) Positive and zero sequence impedance of the source  12) Description of how the data was obtained  13) Description of the anti-aliasing filters used  14) Description of analog mimic circuitry  15) Number of discs on which the case data is stored  16) The format in which the data is recorded  17) The headings of the columns of the data table.

The intent of the configuration file (*.CFG) is to provide  the information necessary for a computer program to read and  interpret the data values in the associated data files, consisting  of the following contents.

1) Station name and identification  2) Number and type of channels  3) Channel names, units and conversion factors  4) Line frequency  5) Sample rate and number of samples at this rate  6) Date and time of first data value  7) Date and time of trigger point  8) File type.

The data file (*.DAT) contains the data values in rows and  columns where each row consists of a set of data values  preceded by a sequence number and the time for that set of  data values. No other information is contained in the data file.

The first column contains the sample number of the data set  in that row. The second column gives the time of the data  in microseconds from the beginning of the record. The third  and remaining columns contain the data values that represent  voltages, currents and status information. Fig. 1 shows a  typical COMTRADE fault record.

Fig. 1. Typical COMTRADE fault record.



III. AUTOMATED DISTURBANCE ANALYSIS  A. Architecture  Following IEEE COMTRADE standard [9], the DFR  recordings are used for disturbance analysis, frequency anal-  ysis, state estimation, etc. [3],[10],[11]. However, most of the  tasks performed are dependent on human experts, typically  at the network control centers. Even though semi-automatic  network management systems (NMS) are evolving, fully au-  tomated disturbance analysis is still a wish. The aim of the  automated analysis system [12]?[15] would be to transform  data into knowledge. Recently, multi-agents technology [16]  and data mining [17] are also applied for transforming distur-  bance data into knowledge.

Fig. 2 shows the disturbance analysis scheme typically  employed at the utility network control (NC) centers. In Fig.

2, the blocks in solid-lines indicate the existing systems,  whereas the blocks in dotted-lines indicate proposed automatic  disturbance recognition and analysis systems.

2014 IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies - Asia (ISGT ASIA)     Fig. 2. Typical disturbance analysis scheme employed at network control centers.

As per Fig. 2, when a transient event (Tx-event) takes places  in the power transmission network, the NC gets informed  via a SCADA (Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition)  network and also the DFRs will be triggered. The protection  engineers provide a 24-hour support through the analysis of  these records.

It is possible to download the fault record via the X.25  communication network. The protection engineer has to do  manual analysis to create a report for the NC, which is  cumbersome. It takes a lot of time, typically from 1 hour to 10  hours or more, depending on the complexity and severity of  the event. Additionally, an automatic scanning PC downloads  the records. The records need to be saved manually at a file  server. Results from the analysis of the digital fault records  are also captured in the transient information processing and  protection systems (TIPPS) database [2]. Due to large amount  of historical data available, trend analysis on the performance  of primary and secondary equipment can be done.

An automated analysis system (AAS), shown in dotted lines  in Fig. 2, would be much faster. It could be placed in two  different ways. The more efficient way is to do the automated  analysis directly at the substation, transmitting only a report  to the NC. This is the fastest way to do it but additional PCs  and communication infrastructure are needed. Standards like  IEC 61850-9-2 [4] would facilitate more communications in  future. The other way is to run the automated analysis on a  central PC. The automated analysis system should also be able  to write the analysis results to the TIPPS database.

B. Specification: Primary Information  The first requirement for the AAS is that it must be able  to read a COMTRADE file. The AAS must be able to  automatically import the COMTRADE file from a user defined  directory, do the analysis and produce the results in a format  which can be viewed by any text editor. The distribution of the  results should be done through any of the following media:  email, SMS, print or Web. The AAS must extract from the  COMTRADE file the following information.

? Faulted phase(s),  ? Fault type,  ? Total fault duration,  ? Main 1 protection operating time,  ? Main 2 protection operating time,  ? Fault location,  ? Fault resistance,  ? DC offset,  ? Breaker operating time,  ? Auto re-close time.

C. Specification: Secondary Information  Besides the above mentioned parameters, the AAS must also  determine and report on the following information.

? Was the fault on the specific feeder?

? Did the main 1 relay operate?

? Did the main 1 relay operate correctly?

? Did the main 2 relay operate?

? Did the main 2 relay operate correctly?

? Was the main 1 permissive carrier signal sent, and was  this correct?

? Was the main 2 permissive carrier signal sent, and was  this correct?

? Was the main 1 permissive carrier received, and was this  correct?

? Was the main 2 permissive carrier received, and was this  correct?

? How did the breaker operate, 1 pole or 3 poles?

? Did the breaker auto re-close (ARC)?

? What was the magnitude of the fault current?

? What was the magnitude of the neutral current?

? What was the magnitude of the healthy phase currents  during the fault?

? What was the depression in voltage on the faulted  phase/s?

? What was the depression in voltage on the healthy  phase/s?

? What were the dominant frequencies before and during  the fault?

? Did any of the breaker poles re-strike?



IV. BIG DATA: AMOUNT & REDUCTION  A. Size of Disturbance Big Data  The total size of the disturbance data basically depends on  the typical COMTRADE file size. The file size mainly depends  on the sampling frequency and length of the records. Current  power systems disturbance data communication standard [4]  allows for maximum of 256 samples/cycle. For the maximal  systems frequency of 60 Hz, this will translate to 15.36 kHz  for possible maximum sampling frequency. For typical data  recording for 5s, it would provide 76800 samples. There will  be additionally overhead information as described in section  2014 IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies - Asia (ISGT ASIA)     Fig. 3. Wavelet transform-based segmentation of the voltage (left) and current (right) signals during power systems disturbances.



II.D. This typically leads to about 1?3 megabytes (MB) of  file size for each data record. There could be several thousand  disturbance records in a particular substation. Depending on  the protection settings, many relays are placed. If the relays  typically record about 100 records in a particular time period,  and there are 1000 relays (which will cover relatively reason-  able area), this will lead to 3?100?1000 = 300, 000 MB, i.e.,  about 300 GB of data for a typical substation area (please note  this is an empirical rough estimate). This figure multiplied by  the exact number of DFRs in a substation and total number  of substations would provide an idea about the total amount  of data being generated.

B. Steps to Reduce Big Data  The first step in such disturbance analysis is to identify the  fault. Here, a fault generally means an overcurrent [1], mainly  from a short circuit.

In power systems, the protection follows sequential steps.

For example, there is normal prefault condition, then fault  inception takes place, which is followed by fault identification.

If the fault is persistent, CB opening is done. As many  disturbances in power systems are rather temporary and self-  clearing, an auto-reclosing of the CB is done after pre-defined  period, which might result in successful system restoration  or opening of CB again due to permanent fault. The DFR  recordings typically cover the entire sequence of events.

The first step in automated analysis is to perform a seg-  mentation of the disturbance signals according to the se-  quential protection events. There are different approaches to  achieve the segmentation, using abrupt change detection meth-  ods [20],[21]. Amongst these, the wavelet transform-based  method [2], [10]?[18], and system identification-based method  [19],[21] are particularly useful. However, in power systems  disturbance analysis, the speed of operation is very important.

From that perspective, the wavelet transform performs much  better than the system identification approach [10],[11],[19].

Once the segmentation is done, as in Fig. 3, the fault  section can be considered instead of the whole signal. For  example, in Fig. 3, the total signal length is 6500 samples.

However, for subsequent analysis, one would be interested in  the fault section, which is segment B, about 200 samples.

Fig. 4. Architecture of the Automated Analysis System.

Fig. 5. Semi-parametric approach based feature vector construction.

Therefore, instead of saving the whole signal, the segment  information and sections of particular interest could be saved.

For example the long part C (after CB opening), which is  about 1100 samples, could be removed and only the beginning  and end point of segment C could be kept. This will reduce  the disturbance file size by 20%. Further intelligent reductions  could be achieved.

Then, we would construct the appropriate feature vectors  for the different segments, e.g., using semi-parametric method  [22],[23]. And finally the pattern-matching algorithms would  be applied using those feature vectors to accomplish the  fault recognition and associated tasks [2],[3]. The flowchart  is shown in Fig. 4, and the semi-parametric feature vector  construction in Fig. 5. These steps would contribute to derive  the required information, as described in section III.B?C.

C. Centralized Protection  In power distribution systems, radial and ring-main sub-  transmission systems are commonly used topology. Typically,  a nondirectional time-delay protection logic is used to protect  2014 IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies - Asia (ISGT ASIA)     Fig. 6. Centralized protection in distribution systems.

the line. But it will be difficult to identify effectively the  affected zones only and accordingly cut out minimal sections,  without interrupting customers who are outside the faulty  zones.

In comparison, effective protection in terms of optimal  section breaking could be offered with current-only directional  relays [24]?[26]. Fig. 6 shows the distribution topology with  centralized protection scheme. In case of faults, the relays at  G, H, R can communicate the directional judgment relative  to their own position to a central computer (substation) or  controller unit. The decision levels are ?Forward as 1? (fault  between source to relay point), ?Reverse as ?1? (fault between  relay point to line), ?Neutral? (e.g., outside directional sensi-  tivity) or Normal as 0.

The central computer or unit has to identify which of the  contiguous relays provide contradicting decisions. The fault  section would be between those. This way, we can ensure  optimal fault sectionalization which is only possible with the  position-aware sensing by the novel current-only directional  relays [24]?[26] along with the decision logic.

The centralized protection scheme would leverage the IEC  61850 standard [4] for digital substation. Transmitting the  disturbance data to the central computer would increase the  system reliability. It would also reduce the big data, as data  accumulation and analysis could be done concurrently, with  the help of the central computing resource. This is currently  not possible with the nodal and local computations using the  relays, which have limited computational power.

D. Remote & Distributed Disturbance Analysis  The big data from power systems disturbances could be  effectively reduced by performing the analysis remotely in a  distributed manner. This could be effectively realized using  the application service provider (ASP) technologies [27],[28].

Fig. 7 shows the schematics of the remote disturbance analysis  using the ASP service.

The automatic analysis system could be available for use  via the ASP technology over the Internet in two modes. In  the Indirect mode of use, users will need to upload their fault  signals via the Internet into the analysis system and will get  back the analysis report via the Web and e-mail. In the Direct  mode of use, users will be able to use the analysis system  Fig. 7. Remote disturbance analysis using application service provider (ASP) backbone.

remotely (hosted in a central server computer) via the Internet  after logging into the system using their login id and password  [27],[28].

It will be required to web-enable and integrate various  systems in the indirect mode, e.g., the fault analysis engine, the  web interface, feedback system etc which are cross-platform  from the point of view of operating system and programming  languages. So, the Web service would be the perfect technol-  ogy to integrate and implement the indirect mode of the ASP  of the automatic fault analysis system [27],[28].

Using the ASP, low level relay testing could be done.

Test results are reported in [28]. As the disturbance analysis  is done remotely and in a distributed manner, this scheme  would effectively reduce the large volume of disturbance data.

Besides, it will effectively create valuable information from  data, which most of the power utilities are lacking today.



V. DISCUSSIONS  The following comments are cited.

1) The intelligent signal processing techniques, e.g., the  segmentation and selection would need to be applied in  an embedded manner in the DFR, so that the disturbance  record file size can be reduced.

2) Further file size reduction could be done by computing  the parameters required in the automated analysis as  specified in the sections III.B?III.C. Those values could  be stored in the DFR and communicated accordingly.

3) For communicating reduced and processed information,  some adjustments in the standard would be necessary.

This is because, currently standard like IEC 61850-9-  2 [4] defines requirements for the sample values only,  not for processed or modified information. However,  the nature of the processed information, as demon-  strated in this paper, is not critically different. It is  just rejecting unnecessary parts of the complete records.

Therefore, existing standard like IEC 61850-9-2 [4] is  well applicable. The reduced data would require reduced  communication bandwidth as well.

4) As the change in modus operandi would require signifi-  cant computation, the DFRs would need more computa-  tional resources, e.g., processor speed, etc. On the other  2014 IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies - Asia (ISGT ASIA)     hand, less storage would be required. And subsequently,  the problem of huge amount of data residing at the  network control centers, which never practically gets  analyzed, could be improved.

5) Besides storing the computed information, those could  be communicated to the operating and the maintenance  personnel via sms, email, etc.

6) Besides the signal processing-based methods presented  in this paper, data compression techniques could be  applied to compress the data [29]. However, for dis-  turbance analysis that might not be preferred. Also,  the interoperability of protective devices by different  vendors with the compressed data might be a problem.



VI. CONCLUSION  The analysis of faults and disturbances plays a central role  for a secure and reliable electrical power supply. This is  becoming even more important in the ?Smart Grid? initiative,  with focus on blackout prevention, fast system restoration,  better estimation of fault location, etc. DFRs enable digital  recording of the power systems transient events with high  quality and huge quantity. The transformation of the power  systems disturbance data to information, expectedly in an  automated way, is a big challenge for the power utilities  worldwide, but a key focus for realizing the ?Smart Grid?.

The architecture and specification for the primary and the  secondary information for the automated systems are described  in this paper. This will provide a guideline what to derive  out of the big data. Furthermore, a quantified estimate of big  data, typically in the order of 100?300 GB for a particular  substation, has been estimated empirically in the paper. Finally,  possible ways to reduce the big data by utilizing intelligent  segmentation techniques are described with real example.

Big data in the distribution side could be reduced by  adopting the centralized protection scheme. Transmitting the  disturbance data to the central computer, e.g., using the IEC  61850 standard, would increase the system reliability. It would  also reduce the big data, as data accumulation and analysis  could be done concurrently, with the help of the central  computing resource. This is currently not possible with the  nodal and local computations using the relays, which have  limited computational power.

Furthermore, the big data from power systems disturbances  could be effectively reduced by performing the analysis re-  motely in a distributed manner, using the application service  provider (ASP) technologies. This scheme would effectively  reduce the large volume of disturbance data. Besides, it will  effectively create valuable information from data, which most  of the power utilities are lacking today.

