Small Signal Performance of VES-BJT  Piotr Mierzwinski

Abstract?VES-BJT is a novel bipolar device in VESTIC technology proposed by W. Maly. This paper extends previously published considerations about expected features of such a device. It contains important information about using earlier introduced definitions in context of calculating small signal parameters of VES-BJT i.e. an unit gain frequency and an unit power gain frequency. Theoretical considerations are illustrated with simulation results. Presented data and methodology are the basis for future development of complete compact model of VES- BJT. Simulation and analytical results confirm the big potential of bipolar devices in VESTIC technology.

Keywords?VESTIC; bipolar transistor; small signal; compact model;

I.  INTRODUCTION The VES-BJT transistor is a bipolar junction transistor in  VESTIC technology [1], previously presented in [2], [3]. It is fully compatible with production process of VES-FET transistor [4] and may be incorporated in the same integrated circuit. Similar outlines and dimensions of devices should simplify production process, i.e. by simplified patterning. The ability to fabricate many different kinds of active devices with minimal changes in the cell structure and manufacturing process is the unique feature of the VESTIC technology. By limiting the number of masks needed VESTIC technology may be the answer for limitations in integration of unipolar and bipolar devices.

The main difference in the physical structure of VES-BJT in comparison with VES-FET is absence of insulating layer. It results in n-p-n or p-n-p structure with gate regions serving as an emitter and a collector while a slit between them serving as a base region. Each region is uniformly doped, moreover emitter and collector have the same doping level. None of junctions is plane-parallel, and the base region has a minimum width wb0 in the middle and increases towards the two base contacts. Technological compatibility requires that emitter and collector regions should be made of doped polysilicon. The device structure is designed to be fabricated on a SOI substrate in a top silicon layer of given thickness. Resulting structure may be compared with lateral bipolar devices reported in [5].

The outline of the device is presented in Fig. 1. As can be easily noted the basic shapes are circles and rectangles with rounded corners.

The VES-BJT transistor is significantly different from well- known modern vertical devices and even lateral one (i.e [5]).

Typical relations are no more adequate, i.e. because of non- plane-parallel junctions and polysilicon emitter and collector regions, but as it was presented in previous papers ([2], [3]) it is possible to overcome those shortcomings by proper adjustments. The main idea of accommodating typical bipolar equations is based on an idea of the effective base width. This paper extends this idea for the analysis of basic small signal parameters.



II. PROBLEM OUTLINE  A. Background The VES-BJT was not manufactured yet, but to support this  development the information about small signal performance is very crucial. To overcome a lack of real device the numerical simulations were provided. Simulations were conducted with Synopsys TCAD simulator. The subject of the simulation was the device with structure depicted in Fig. 1. It was the same structure as in earlier presented papers. Simulation outcome was several data sets with calculated collector current IC and frequencies fT and fmax.

Fig. 1. VES-BJT outline with basic geometry parameters indicated. Regions denoted with capital letters are polysilicon emitter (E) and collector (C). and monocrystalline base (B). Contacts are placed in corners.

This publication is a part of work which was supported by the National Centre for Research and Development in the frame of PBS programme under Research Project ?VESTIC?, project no. 177244.

This publication has been co-financed with the European Union funds by the European Social Fund    MIXED DESIGN       To describe the potential value of new device it is important to present its small signal performance. The most commonly used figures of merit are the unit gain frequency fT and  the unit power gain frequency fmax. This two values allow to compare different devices, especially for analog circuits.

B. Definitions The unit gain frequency fT (also called the cutoff frequency)  is defined as the frequency at which the current gain of small signal becomes unity. The general well known relation [7] is    Tin  m T C  g f  ?2 ? , (1)   where CTin is a total input capacitance, and gm is a transistor transconductance. The total input capacitance can be considered as the following sum,  scDCDEdpdnparTin CCCCCCC ?????? , (2)   where each symbol is described in Table I. After obtaining all capacitances and after calculating fT the unit power gain frequency is easy to obtain. The simple fmax relation is   ? ?scDCB T  CCR ff  ? ?  ?8max ,  (3)   where RB is a base resistance.

TABLE I.

SUMMARY OF CAPACITANCES CONSIDERED IN ANALYSIS  Parameter description Symbol Total diffusion capacitance due to electrons (into base) Cdn Total diffusion capacitance due to holes (into emitter) Cdp  Total emitter-base depletion capacitance CDE Total collector-base depletion capacitance CDC  Total space-charge capacitance in collector, due to injected electrons Csc  C. Simulation results Fig. 2 contains the results of the fT simulations for several  values of VCE, and Fig. 3 contains results of the fmax simulations. The basic structure of VES-BJT is very rough and it does not contain any additional features that could improve its characteristics. But as can be seen from Fig. 2 and 3 overall small signal performance is quite good i.e. fT = 43 GHz and fmax = 124 GHz. Further enhancements can make it even better.



III. ANALYTICAL DERIVATIONS The analytical derivation of collector current with adoption  of the effective base width approach presented in [2], [3] cannot be used directly to estimate basic frequency parameters, i.e. the unity gain frequency (fT) or the unity power gain frequency (fmax). The limit of this approach is caused by the way the effective base width was introduced. Earlier proposed relation for effective base width was  bbe kw 1?  (4)  and  ? ??? r  b b xw  dx r  k  1 , (5)   where a base width is defined as follows (eq. 6):    ? ? 220 22 xrrwxw bb ????  (6)   The main problem with this definition of effective base width is that the integrated function (in eq. 5) is reciprocal of actual base width function (eq. 6). Thus it cannot be used in equation where nonreciprocal function is used (see further).

However, basing on an idea of decomposing VES-BJT into a set of plane-parallel transistors, it is possible to introduce similar effective widths for purposes of this paper.

Fig. 2. Unity gain frequency characteristics of the VES-BJT device (Synopsys Sentaurus TCAD simulator) for two values of VCE, lower 1.5 [V], upper 2 [V].

Fig. 3. Unity power gain frequency characteristics of the VES-BJT device (Synopsys Sentaurus TCAD simulator) for two values of VCE, lower 1.5 [V], upper 2 [V].

A. The unit gain frequency The unit gain frequency is a well-known figure of merit for  active devices. For our analysis it is useful to refer to the derivation of this quantity based on Y matrix parameters (cf.

[6]). The value of fT is calculated from following relation    ? ?222       ?      ?     CC g  Cg Y Y  T m  Tm  ??  ? ??  , (7)   where 	? CCCTin ??   and  scDC CCC ??	 .

After factoring out fT and with some simplifying assumptions (cf. [6]) one obtains the well-known relation   ? ?   ?  ??   ? ?? ?  ? ?  ? ?  m  Tinm T g  C CC  g f ?  ? 	? . (8)    B. The Y-matrix calculation advantages The most important notion is that the parameters in (8)  come from Y matrix parameters. Therefore, if we consider the approach to decompose VES-BJT to the parallel connection of infinitely narrow plane-parallel elementary transistors, than we can calculate Y parameters of VES-BJT (especially two of them needed to derive frequencies estimations) as sum of respective Y parameters of each elementary transistor.

? ? ? ? ? ?  ? ? ? ? ? ?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ????  ???  ??  ????????  ?????  n  i  i m  n  i  i n  i  i m  nn mmm  nves  gCjg  CCCjggg  YYYY              ?? ?  (9)    ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?? ? ? ?  ? ? ? ? ? ????  ???  ??  ????????  ???   ? ?? ?  ? ????????  n  i  i Tin  n  i  i Tin  n  i i  i m  nn  mmmnves  CjCjg  CCCCCCj  gggYYYY  111 0               ?     ???  ??? ??  ??  (10)   where each value with an index in brackets (eg. gm(i)) is value corresponding to the elementary transistor (in the given example it is transconductance). The sum of each respective parameter of all the elementary transistors can be calculated with use of the adequate integral. The basic assumption about this procedure is that the only difference between each elementary transistor comes from varying base width wb(x).

Thus the summing in eq. (9) and (10) can be replaced with integration over x. Thus the relation (8) takes form    ? ?  ? ? ? ? ? ?      2lim2 ??  ? ?? ?  ?   ? ? ? ?  ? ???    ? ?? ?  ? ??? ??  r  m  Tin n  i ii  m  i Tin  nT dx  xg xCx  g Cf ?? , (11)    where integrations is performed only over half part of wb(x) function domain due to the symmetry of this function (cf.

[1,2]). Note that CTin(x) and gm(x) are not the same as in (8), here they are functions of x.

To calculate this integral the following definitions were used. They come from modification of a commonly recognized relations (cf. [7]). The only difference is substitution of constant base width with the wb(x) function. Here they are presented in the form of the capacitances of one elementary transistor divided by respective transconductances because this form is the most suitable for substitution to relation (11):     ? ?  n  b  m  dn  D xw  g C    ? , (12)    ? ? nE  bEB  m  dp  DN xwWN  g C  ? , (13)     ? ?  ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ???    ? ?? ?  ? ??  1exp2 kT  qU nqDd  xwVN dg  A g  C  BE ieBnEB  bTBSi  EBm  SiEB  m  EB ?? , (14)    similarly:     ? ?  ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ???    ? ?? ?  ? ??  1exp2 kT  qU nqDd  xwVN dg  A g  C  BE ieBnCB  bTBSi  CBm  SiCB  m  CB ?? , (15)     s  CB  m  sc  v d  g C  ? . (16)     As can be easily noted, all relations except last one are functions of x proportional to wb(x) or to squared wb(x). Thus summing all those elementary capacitances is equal to finding integrals similar to previously introduced (4) effective base width value. To calculate respective effective widths integrals defined as follows must be found:   ? ??? r  bclinb dxxwr w  _  1  (17)       ? for linear relation of wb(x), and   ? ??? r  bcsqrb dxxwr w   _  1  (18)  ? for squared relation of wb(x) where    ? ? ? ? EBCBbbc ddxwxw ??? .  (19)   The main difference in comparison with earlier derivations is in the form of integrated function. Previously it was the reciprocal of base width, here it is only wb(x) and squared wb(x) respectively. Now by substituting proper width i.e. (18) in (12), and (17) in (13), (14) and (15) ? we can calculate frequency parameters of VES-BJT with (11) using following substitution.

? ?  ? ? ?  ? ??   ?  ? ? ?  ??  ?  ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ??   ?  ? ? ?  ??  1exp  1exp   __   __  kT qUnqDd  wVN v  d DN wWN  kT qUnqDd  wVN D  w g  C  BE ieBnEB  linbTBSi  s  CB  nE  linbEB  BE ieBnCB  linbTBSi  n  sqrb  m  Tin  ?  ?  (20)    After obtaining fT to calculate the unit power gain frequency with the relation (3) only the base resistance remain unknown. It may be estimated with a following equation for the elementary transistor    ? ? ? ?xwxR b b  Bel ?   ?  (21)    where ?b is a base resistivity, and a factor 1/12 comes from a geometry of the base with two contacts cf. calculation of the equivalent base resistance [7]. The total base resistance can be now calculated by integrating (21)    ? ? be b  r  b  b B w  dx xwr  R 1  12 0  ?? ?? ? . (22)    This is only one integral where defined in (4) effective base width can be used.

On the basis of the above derivations the respective characteristics were calculated and are presented in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 together with earlier presented simulation results. The obtained values of fT and fmax are in good agreement with simulation results. The most important factors influencing the results are the values of depletion regions widths dEB and dCB.

0,0000001 0,000001 0,00001 0,0001  fT [G H z]  IC [A]   Fig. 4. Comparison of the unit gain frequencies calculated by the means of presented analysis (solid lines) and by TCAD simulations (dashed lines) for two values of VCE, lower 1.5 [V], upper 2 [V].

1,00E-08 1,00E-07 1,00E-06 1,00E-05 1,00E-04  fm ax [G H z]  IC [A]   Fig. 5. Comparison of the unit power gain frequencies calculated by the means of presented analysis (solid lines) and by TCAD simulations (dashed lines) for VCE = 2 [V].



IV. DISCUSSION The most important notion of presented analysis is that the  introduction of effective base width in earlier papers ([2], [3]) is not sufficient to solve all the calculation problems. It is important to remember the limits of this derivation which is suitable for calculating collector current or C-V characteristics.

To obtain correct values for calculating small signal parameters e.g. fT the modified values are needed. It is easy to check that using effective base width from [2], [3] gives much higher values than obtained with use of relations (17) and (18). Thus the unit gain frequency and the unit power gain frequency could be overestimated.

Of course it may turn into that calculating effective widths for each purpose is too complicated and some simplifications will be needed. Nevertheless the use of the proposed effective widths allows to obtain results which stay in good compliance with simulation data. Moreover presented data give some insight into the small signal performance of VES-BJT device.



V. CONCLUSIONS The results of analytical calculations depart from the  simulation results in the shape and slope of the characteristics.

This indicates that the relations for calculating capacitances need further investigation. The influence of parasitic capacitances was in this analysis neglected also. However earlier presented analysis and presented here calculations clearly show that a compact model of bipolar device in the VESTIC technology can be constructed with proper accommodation of well-known relations.

Presented results, both analytical and simulation, are very promising. The unit gain frequency and the unit power gain are comparable with the standard contemporary BJT devices.

Presented device can be further improved, but a comparison with experimental data is crucial.

ACKNOWLEGMENT Collaboration with Prof. Wojciech Maly and Prof. Andrzej  Pfitzner is gratefully acknowledged. I would especially like to thank Prof. Wieslaw Kuzmicz for inspiration and support.

