An Artificial Immune Algorithm for Association  Rule Mining among Concepts with Uncertainty

Abstract?During a design procedure of association rule mining approach, there are two common issues: the transformation method from continuous quantitative attributes to qualitative concepts, and efficiency of data mining. In order to acquire association rules in a database with different types of attributes, the cloud transformation which is included in the cloud model theoretical framework is applied as an uncertain concept extraction tool in this paper. By the feature analysis of association rule mining in uncertain concept space, the frequent item-set generation is converted to a combination optimization problem. A modified object function and artificial immune algorithm for association rule mining are designed accordingly. A novel method of non-frequent item hyper set detection is introduced to reduce the number of database scanning and improve the efficiency. The numerical experiments show that the proposed algorithm can accomplish the association rule mining by global random search, with the robustness that the computational cost is insensitive with the variation of threshold parameters.

Index Terms?Association rule, cloud model, artificial immune algorithm, non-frequent item hyper set.



I. INTRODUCTION Association rule mining is an important technique of data  mining. From a large scale database, it could extract hidden correlations among qualitative concepts, which could be regarded as background knowledge of business decision making, market analysis, and inventory management. What?s more, it has great potential in pattern recognition and signal processing. Since the Apriori algorithm was proposed by R.

Agrawal [1, 2], many association rule mining approaches and efficiency increasing methods had been researched [3, 4], such as FP-growth(Frequent Pattern growth), DHP(Direct Hashing and Pruning), tree projection, genetic algorithm, sampling, parallelization, et al. All of these association rule mining techniques have to solve two basic problems: The first is how to get qualitative concepts from quantitative attribute data by an inductive process which could transform the continuous attribute into concept space, so that different type of attributes can be mined. The second is how to reduce the computational cost in large scale data mining, i.e. how to improve the mining efficiency.

Language is the carrier of thought and representation of concept, hence linguistic terms or concepts are usually treated as the basic units in human cognition procedure. Nevertheless the concept expressed by linguistic words has uncertainty characteristics [5]. Traditional classification method, which can be called hard partition, usually divides continuous attribute into discrete concepts by distinct thresholds. The hard partition method is not in accord with cognitive habits in many fields; therefore many granular computing methods, such as fuzzy set, rough set, cloud model, type-2 fuzzy set, quotient space theory, and so on, are developed to externalize the uncertainty [6]. The cloud model, which was proposed by Deyi Li [7, 8], was widely researched in recent years because it has the ability of synthetically describing both the randomness and fuzziness of concepts with uncertainty. In the theoretical framework of cloud model, the cloud transformation is applied in this paper as a tool that convert quantitative attributes into concepts with uncertainty, thus the association rule mining could be implemented in an uncertain concept space.

Apriori is a classic association rule mining algorithm, which has two phases: frequent item-set generation and rule confidence examination. Because the stepwise traversal search method is used in the frequent item-set generation, the database needs to be scanned repetitively that became the bottleneck of this algorithm. Artificial immune algorithm is an effective stochastic global optimization search method [9], which has features of robustness and implicit parallelism. If the frequent item-set generation could be converted to a combination optimization problem, the application of artificial immune algorithm would improve the efficiency of association rule mining. Some attempts in the similar way [10, 11] gained satisfied results.

In this paper, the cloud transformation method, which could extract concepts with uncertainty, is introduced. The features of association rule mining in uncertain concept space are analyzed.

Based on these features, an optimization object function is proposed, and an artificial immune algorithm is designed correspondingly. Furthermore, a modification method, which is called non-frequent item hyper set detection, is applied to reduce the number of databases scan operation.

2015 IEEE 11th International Colloquium on Signal Processing & its Applications (CSPA2015), 6 -8 Mac. 2015, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

II. CLOUD MODEL AND CLOUD TRANSFORMATION Cloud model is proposed by Deyi Li as a bidirectional  transformation tool between numeric values and linguistic concepts [7, 8]. It is defined as below U is a qualitative universe described by precise numeric values, and C is a qualitative concept on U. If a quantitative value x U, and x is a random instantiation of concept C. The certainty degree  (x,C) [0, 1], which describes that x belongs to C, is a random number with a stable tendency  : [0,1] ( , )U x U x x C?     ? ?     ?  (1)  then the distribution of x on universe U is defined as a cloud, and x is called as a cloud drop. It?s obviously that a cloud is the representation of a concept with uncertainty.

In the cloud model, a cloud concept can be described by three numeric measures: expected value Ex entropy En, and hyper-entropy He, denoted as C(Ex, En, He).

A. Normal Cloud Model In practical applications, due to most of random variables  obey normal or approximate normal distribution, the normal cloud model is widely used [12]. When the cloud drop x obeys a normal distribution x~N(Ex, En?2), and the variance obeys another normal distribution En?~N(En, He2), if the certainty degree (x, C) of x to concept C  satisfied    ( )( , ) exp 2( ) x - Ex  x C En'  = ?  (2)  then the distribution of x on universe U can be called  a normal cloud model.

Especially when He=0, the certainty degree (x, C) of cloud model C will degenerate to a fuzzy membership function, it can be regarded as the mean expectation curve of cloud C, denoted as    ( )( ) exp  2C x Ex  MEC x En  ?= ?  (3)  MECC(x) represents the fuzzy nature of a cloud model under the two-fold random, and it also describes the basic characters of a linguistic concept.

B. Cloud Transformation and Concept Extraction According to Bernoulli?s law of large numbers, when  enough random instantiation data were acquired, the probability density function of data could be estimated by frequency distribution histogram with small interval. The function of frequency curve can be regard as an approximation of the probability density function f(x).

The distribution of cloud drops, which belong to the cloud concept C, can be described by MECC(x), so MECC(x) can be regarded as the expected probability density function of x. In the database, if the f(x) of a quantitative attribute x is known, it  can be divided into multiple clouds? mean expectation curves, which is called cloud transformation, as shown in Eq. 4.

( )  ( ) [0,1] i  n  i C i i  Amp MEC xf x Amp =  ? ?         ?      (4)  Where Ampi is an amplitude coefficient, n is the total number of cloud concepts.

The curve fitting method is used in cloud transformation to determine the value of Ampi, Exi, and Eni. Furthermore, the value of Hei is estimated by the fitting error. The attribute x is reflected to n cloud concepts by the cloud transformation, and each Ci has a certainty degree (x, Ci). As shown in Fig. 1, the frequency curve is converted to a superposition of two clouds.

Fig. 1.  Cloud transformation

III. ASSOCIATION RULES ON UNCERTAIN CONCEPT SPACE According with the association rule definition in distinct  attributes, an association rule in uncertain concept attributes can be defined as follows: Let I={I1, I2, ?, Im} be a set of m uncertain concept attributes, T be a transaction that contains a subset of items (T I), D be a database of transaction records.

If two item-sets CA and CB are contained in T (CA T, CB T), and they do not have any common concept item (CA CB = ?), then an association rule is an implication in the form of CA CB, CA is called antecedent while CB is called consequent. When a rule mining task concerns the state of CB, CA contains decision attributes while CB contains task attributes.

Quantitative attributes could be mapped into uncertain concept space by cloud transformation that proposed in the above. Hence every quantitative decision attribute Ai can be expressed as a combination of Pi concepts CAi ={CAi1, CAi2, ? CAij, ? CAiPi} on the universe UAi, meanwhile the task attribute B can be expressed as a combination of Q concepts CB={CB1, CB2, ? CBk, ? CBQ} on the universe UB. Association rule mining is implemented in a space of uncertain concepts CR= {CA11, CA12, ? CAm-1Pm-1 , CB1, CB2, ? CBQ}.

Support and confidence are two basic measures for an association rule. Support (S) of CAij CBk is defined as the  2015 IEEE 11th International Colloquium on Signal Processing & its Applications (CSPA2015), 6 -8 Mac. 2015, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia     occurrence probability shown in Eq. 5, which can be calculated by the fraction of the number of records that contain CAij CBk to the number of all records in the database.

( ) ( )Aij Bk Aij BkS C C P C C=   (5)  Confidence (T) of CAij CBk is defined as the conditional probability shown in Eq. 6, which can be calculated by the fraction of the number of records that contain CAij CBk to the number of records that contain CAij.

( ) ( | ) ( ) / ( )Aij Bk Bk Aij Bk Aij AijT C C P C C P C C P C= =  (6)  The threshold of support (Smin) and the threshold of confidence (Tmin) are usually predefined by users to determine whether a rule is useful or interesting. However in the uncertain concept space, it should be noticed that only when the certainty degree of a record x to a concept Cij is greater than or equal to Tmin, i.e. (x, Cij) Tmin, the record x can be regarded as a realization of Cij.  For a high-dimension uncertain concept combined by some low-dimension concepts, the certainty degree of high-dimension concept is determined by the minimum certainty degree of low-dimension concepts, as shown in Eq. 7.

1 2 1 2( , ) min( ( , ), ( , ))x C C x C x C=  (7)  Accordingly, only when (x, CAij) Tmin and (x, CBk) Tmin, record x can be regarded as a realization of rule CAij CBk.



IV.  AN ARTIFICIAL IMMUNE ALGORITHM FORASSOCIATION RULE MINING  Frequent item-set generation method is the determinant of efficiency in all association rule mining approaches. If the task attribute of a rule is fixed, finding the decision attributes combination, which is built up by frequent items, is an optimization problem. Artificial immune algorithm has the ability of global optimization in an implicit parallel search procedure, so that it can be applied in association rule mining.

In this section, an artificial immune algorithm for association rule mining (AIARM) is designed, and the implementation and modification processes are introduced.

A. Artificial immune optimization algorithm Learning the mechanism of specific antibodies generation  in biological immune response produce, artificial immune algorithm is a novel optimization algorithm that modifies the simple genetic algorithm (SGA) by utilizing the characteristic information of object problem to avoid degeneration. In the application of association rule mining, rules can be regarded as antibodies, while the evaluations of rules in a database can be regarded as antigens. Since the sequence arrangement of concepts in a rule?s antecedent has no effect with the rule?s establishment, all concepts that might occur in the antecedent and consequent can be arranged in a binary code string to  represent the rule. The antibody coding is shown in Fig. 2.

When the value on a coding position is 1, it means the concept of this coding position is an element of the rule. Otherwise, when the value is 0, it means the concept of this coding position is not an element of the rule. Hence each association rule can be represented by an antibody?s binary code string.

Fig. 2.  Antibody coding  In immune optimization searching procedure, the initial antibody population is randomly generated, and the clone and mutation are used as two main operators to generate next generation of antibody population. According to the evaluation result of affinity between antigen and antibody, the antibody population is updated after the better antibodies are stored in the antibody memory. The antibody memory is designed to transmit concept item sets of better rules to next generation, which is a simulation of biological immune memory phenomena. Meanwhile a rule memory is built to save all rules that satisfy the thresholds examination of support and confidence in the search history. When the iterative search is terminated, the best antibody in the antibody memory is the optimal solution, and all association rules are stored in the rule memory.

B. Affinity function design Mutual recognition between antigen and antibody is the  foundation of specific immunity. This recognition is simulated by affinity function calculating in artificial immune algorithm design processes. Affinity describes the degree of gene matching between antibody and antigen, or between two antibodies.  The aim of optimization is to find the antibody that has the biggest affinity with antigen. Since an association rule is represented by an antibody Rx, the comprehensive performance measure of the rule can be treated as the antigen affinity AF(Rx), i.e. the object function of the optimization problem.

Besides support and confidence, the coverage (N) is another important measure for a rule. It?s defined as the conditional probability shown in Eq. 8, which can be calculated by the fraction of the number of records that contain CAij CBk to the number of records that contain CBk. The confidence measures the sufficient degree while the coverage measures the necessary degree of a rule.

( ) ( | ) ( ) / ( )Aij Bk Aij Bk Aij Bk BkN C C P C C P C C P C= =   (8)  Because support, confidence and coverage are probability calculations, their product can be treated as a comprehensive performance measure. Meanwhile the threshold constrains should be considered, thus the antigen affinity function of Rx is designed in the form of Eq. 9.

2015 IEEE 11th International Colloquium on Signal Processing & its Applications (CSPA2015), 6 -8 Mac. 2015, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia     ( ) ( ( )) ( ( )) ( )AF Rx hs S Rx ht T Rx N Rx= ? ?  (9)  Where hs(?) and ht(?) are threshold limitation functions, they are shown in Eq. 10 and Eq. 11.

min  min  ( ) , ( ) ( ( ))  0 ( ) S Rx S Rx S  hs S Rx S Rx S  ? =  ,         <   (10)   min  min  ( ) , ( ) ( ( ))  0 ( ) T Rx T Rx T  ht T Rx T Rx T  ? =  ,         <  (11)  The antibody affinity is a measure of similarity degree of two rules. Two antibodies Rxv and Rxw represented by two binary code strings has an antibody affinity AF?(Rxv, Rxw), as shown in Eq. 12.

( ) , ,  1, M  v w v j w j j  AF Rx Rx Rx Rx M =  ? = ?         (12)  Where Rxv,j and Rxw,j are the values on the j coding position of Rxv and Rxw respectively; ? is an XOR operator.

C. Clone probability calculation In biological immune systems, an antibody have a higher  antigen affinity can be cloned to next generation with a bigger probability. At the same time, the effect of competitive exclusion restrains the antibodies with high density, so that the diversity is not easy to be lost in the antibody population. The density of an antibody Rxv can be calculated by antibody affinities, as shown in Eq. 13.

1,  1 1,  ( )  ( )  A  A A  S  v k k k v  v S S  v k v k k v  AF Rx ,Rx D(Rx )  AF Rx ,Rx  = ?  = = ?  ? = ?  ? (13)  Where SA is the scale of antibody population.

Both the antigen affinity and density of an antibody Rx are  considered, the clone probability can be calculated in Eq. 14.

( ) ( ) ( ) /CP Rx AF Rx D Rx=  (14)  The clone operation is executed by this probability, so that the antibodies with high antigen affinities are stimulated in the population, as well as the diversity is maintained.

D. Algorithm implementation process The algorithm implementation process of AIARM is  described as follows: ? Step1. Initialization: initialize the antibody population  with a scale of SA, and randomly sample SM antibodies to build the antibody memory.

? Step2. Antibody evaluation and rule extraction: calculate the antigen affinity AF(Rx) and density D(Rx) of each Rx, so that the PC(Rx) can be gotten. After removing duplicate rules, all rules satisfied AF(Rx) 0 would be stored in rule memory.

? Step3. Antibody memory updating: arrange all the antibodies in descending order of clone probabilities, use the top SM antibodies to rebuild antibody memory.

? Step4. Iterative termination determination: if the termination condition is satisfied, quit the iteration process. Otherwise, go to Step 5.

? Step5. Antibody population updating: implement the clone selection of antibodies by PC(Rx). If an antibody is not selected to be clone, it mutates with a predefined probability. Go to Step 2.

AIARM transfers the information of better antibodies directly to next generation by clone operation, and realize the global random search by mutation operation. The antibody memory eliminates the degeneration of antibody population, and the rule memory save all interesting rules that were found in the iterative search.

E. Non-frequent item hyper set detection When AIARM evaluates an antibody, the database needs to  be scaned once. Since new rules are generated by random search in AIARM, there will be a lot of rules combined by non- frequent items and AF(Rx)=0. To decrease the database scan number, the non-frequent hyper set detection is designed as a modified method of AIARM.

According to the basic logic law in Apriori that a high order frequent item is combined by some lower order frequent items, it can be known that the support value of a rule Rx which includes a non-frequent item in item-set must be lower than Smin, then the antigen affinity AF(Rx . Because an antibody is coded in the form of binary string which represents a combination of concepts, an antibody is exactly an item-set, and the relationship of two antibodies can be described by sub- set or hyper-set.

For an antibody Rx whose consist item codes are not all 0, if any concept item whose value is 1 in Rx is also values as 1 in another antibody Ry, then Rx is defined as a hyper set of Ry, while Ry is a sub set of Rx. The relationship can be denoted in Eq. 15.

Ry Rx?   (15)  If there is a relationship Ry Rx of two antibodies, in support calculating they must fulfill the inequality:  ( )( )  S Ry S Rx?  (16)  Furthermore, if Rx is a non-frequent item set (S(Rx)<Smin), it?s sub set Ry must be a non-frequent item set, and the antigen affinity of Ry must be zero.

A non-frequent item hyper set memory can be built to save the common hyper sets of antibodies that are non-frequent item  2015 IEEE 11th International Colloquium on Signal Processing & its Applications (CSPA2015), 6 -8 Mac. 2015, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia     sets. Thus for a new antibody Rx need to be evaluated, the non- frequent item hyper set detection can be implemented before antigen affinity calculation. If Rx was a sub set of a record in the memory, then AF(Rx)=0, so that the database scan in antigen affinity calculation could be canceled. Only the antibodies that are confirmed as not sub sets need to calculate the antigen affinities. If a new non-frequent item set was found during the antigen affinity calculation, a common hyper set extraction method could be used to update the memory.

The non-frequent item hyper set detection is realized in binary coding space. With small computational cost, this method could decrease the database scan number significantly and improve the efficiency of AIARM.



V. CALCULATION EXAMPLE ANALYSIS The abalone database in UCI machine learning repository  [13] is selected as a calculation example to test the performance of AIARM. In this database, there are 4177 records. Every record has 8 quantitative attributes and one classification information of 3 classes. By the means of cloud transformation, 8 quantitative attributes can be converted to 21 cloud concepts. Moreover, when both the entropy and hyper- entropy are equal to zero, a cloud can represent a qualitative concept of hard partition. Hence the classification information can be expressed by 3 cloud concepts. Thus every record can be transformed to certainty degrees of 24 cloud concepts, and every association rule consists of a combination of 24 cloud concepts.

The sex classification attributes of abalone database are selected as task attributes. Within constrains of different Smin and Tmin, Apriori and AIARM are used to mine the rules in abalone database. The numbers of rules mined by two algorithms are compared in TABLE I. The numbers of rules in the column of AIARM are average results of 20 times operation.

TABLE I.  COMPARISON OF MINED RULES? NUMBER Threshold  Number of rules  support confidence Apriori  AIARM 10% 50% 58 57.4  10% 60% 34 33.8  15% 50% 20 20  15% 60% 9 9  20% 50% 8 8  20% 60% 2 2  Apriori uses the stepwise traversal search method to generate frequent item-set and it can get all association rules without any missing. In TABLE I, it can be seen that AIARM can get most of the rules by a random search.

The database scan number of Apriori and AIARM are shown respectively in TABLE II. In the low support threshold conditions, the number of AIARM is significantly less than the number of Apriori. Conversely, in the high support threshold conditions, the number of AIARM is bigger than the number of Apriori. The database scan number of AIARM is determined  by the feature of random search, a certain amount of database scanning for antibody population evaluating can not be avoided.

TABLE II.  COMPARISON OF DATABASE SCAN NUMBER Threshold  Database scan number  support confidence Apriori  AIARM 10% 50% 18348 7064  10% 60% 12514 6352  15% 50% 10152 5493  15% 60% 6257 5628  20% 50% 5264 6092  20% 60% 2788 6533  However, it should be noticed that these numbers of AIARM keep relatively stable in various constrains, and all iterative times are less than 100. AIARM has strong robustness of computational cost, so it can be used in an interactive association rule mining whose threshold constrains vary frequently. AIARM will neither waste a lot of time in frequent item-set generating as Apriori in low support threshold condition, nor construct decision trees repeatedly as FP-growth.



VI. CONCLUSIONS In this paper different types of attributes are converted into  an uncertain concept space by cloud transformation, thus any quantitative or qualitative attribute of a record can be represented by a certainty degree set of cloud concepts that describe the attribute. The correlations among these cloud concepts are association rules. An optimization object function for mining these rules is constructed and an artificial immune algorithm AIARM is proposed. In this algorithm, frequent item-sets are generated by random searches and the rules can be extracted. To improve the efficiency, a non-frequent item hyper set detection method is designed to reduce the times of database scanning. The result of numeric experiments shows that AIARM could accomplish the task of association rule mining in different threshold constrains with a relatively stable computational cost.

