Implementation on E-commerce Network Marketing Based on WEB Mining Technology

Abstract?At present, most systems only provide OLAP-based simple statistical analysis and most mining frameworks in system are designed based on the closed system so it seems not to be enough in e-commerce mining application with variable demands. This paper analyzes and concludes research status and the trend of current e-commerce system framework and points out the problems of traditional e-commerce Web mining system. Based on the study of multiple Web mining algorithms applied in e-commerce environment, this paper improves critical Apriori association rules and k-means cluster core algorithm and tests the effectiveness of the improved algorithm with experiment. Meanwhile, we encapsulate multi-Web algorithms at the stage of mining framework to complete mining task.

Keywords-web mining; k-means; frequent item set; marketing

I. INTRODUCTION The largest transformation of networked marketing on  traditional marketing ways lies on the change from originally popularized marketing into the form of ?one to one? marketing of enterprise on individual. This also reflects the ?customer-centered? management idea. Under this circumstance, understanding degree of customer?s individual information is significant to develop marketing activity.

However, because customer?s personal information easily involves user privacy, it is difficult to collect them. During e-commerce, commodity purchasers need to establish information flow interaction between commodity supplier and its cooperator through Web method. The feature of e- commerce-oriented data mining is to apply technological means such as association, classification, clustering, etc, to extract useful data to direct market strategy from Web database. It is based on the principle that consumers? past behavior predicts their future consumption tendency.

Through collecting, analyzing and processing data which is related to consumers and their consuming behavior from internet, it transforms potential, hidden and unknown information in advance into potentially huge valuable information after extracting, scrubbing and processing. It largely cuts down the cost to bring huge profit for trade companies to determine specific consumer groups or individual consuming habit, hobby, tendency for further directing adjusting marketing strategy in enterprise and to provide huge profits for trade companies. It is successfully applied in financial field of high investment, high risk and high return at the earliest. It is also broadly applied in  customers? resources information-intensive industries such as telecom, insurance, retailing, etc.

This paper introduces data mining technology including  definition, function and process of data mining at first. Then, it further studies association rule mining algorithm, analyzing classical algorithm: Apriori algorithm in association rule and simply introduces e-commerce definition, features, etc. With examples to analyze k-means algorithm application in retailing industry, we also point out the key steps in mining and defects in this algorithm. For the defects of k-means algorithm, this paper improves k-means algorithm to distribute and parallize the task to discover frequent item set. Then, this paper introduces e-commerce data mining-oriented features, and system structure, etc. It offers an e-commerce data mining-oriented and network marketing application examples. Finally, the conclusion in this paper is provided and the future prospect is also provided.



II. CLUSTER ANALYSIS TECHNOLOGY IN E- COMMERCE WEB MINING  Cluster analysis groups the data object into class or cluster based on attribute information of data object or relationship between objects so that objects in the same cluster have higher similarity. However, objects in different clusters have large difference. Cluster division mainly adopts data as its measurement during cluster. Similarity and dissimilarity degree between data is measured through distance. Meanwhile, similarity coefficient between data is an important standard in data packet. Classical cluster algorithms include k-means algorithm, PAM algorithm, factor analysis, machine learning method, neural network method, etc. The following aspect will introduce common k- means algorithm. The main steps of k-means algorithm are: (1) Select k different data objects randomly as  representative of k classes; (2) Distribute the rest data objects to the class belonging  to the nearest classes to form k new classes. Then compute the clustering criterion function F :   || ||  i  k  i j O C  F O M ? !

?  ?? (1) 2|| ||iO M denotes the square of Euclidean distance  between data object O and class iM ; (3) Compute the gravity of each class and replace the  class representatives with these gravities. If tey are the same   DOI 10.1109/ICMTMA.2015.141    DOI 10.1109/ICMTMA.2015.141     as before the algorithm goes to an end; otherwise, turn to the second step; The pseudo code of k-means clustering algorithm is  described as follows:  Algorithm: Fuction k-means(S,k) Input: Data object set { }S O? , the number of class k Output: k classes Select k data objects from S // 1 2, ,..., kP P P on behalf of k classes 1 2, ,..., kC C C For each O in S If 2|| ||iO M =min{|| ||,1 }iO P j k # # // Find the nearest iP to O O P? For each cluster jC (1 j k# # )  / | | j  i i j O C  P M X C ?  ? ? ? // Prototype is updated by gravities   || ||  i  k  i i O C  F O M ? !

?  ?? // Compute the clustering criterion function Until 1i jP M ??  As a basic method, cluster analysis is broadly applied in some fields such as similarity search, customers division, trend analysis, financial investment, etc. In transaction database of e-commerce system, customers? one-time purchasing commodity makes up one transaction. It is helpful to improve commodity layout that the usually purchasing commodity clusters together. Analyzing each type of customer?s characteristics is helpful for specific customers to perform publicity and retailing of specific commodity. Similarly, e-commerce system will generate amounts of data and information in daily business and the information will be automatically collected and stored in access logs by Web server to be processed and transformed into transaction database. Thus, by means of cluster method to analyze these data, seller can discover fixed customer group and aim to make sales scheme of commodity. They can evaluate the effectiveness of various sales and discover the most effective logic structure in Web space to mine the key algorithm research in framework.



III. IMPROVED WEB MINING DATA SYSTEM  A. Logic Framework of Mining System Figure 1 depicts Web mining-based general logic  framework in e-commerce system. User interface is divided into graphical user interface (GUI), command line interface and Web interface. Graphical user interface and Web interface are working on command line interface based on DMQL. Users mine task requests and they will be  transformed into DMQL language by submitted data in GUI or Web interface. Then, they will be sent to process each component to be transforming and mining. Results after mining task completion will directly return to client by each component or published in form of Web page.p p p g  Figure 1. Logical structure of electronic commerce system based on Web mining  The base of Web mining algorithm is realized via Web service register. It can add, delete algorithm and it can arrive at the purpose that Web mining platform and algorithm offer platform separation. Therefore, it can better satisfy the features of distributing data mining in e-commerce platform.g g p  Figure 2. Prototype structure of Web mining system     B. Improvement and Realization of K-means Algorithm In k-means algorithm, the selection of k centers is  usually random selection or relies on field knowledge. To select k centers better, and improve cluster quality, it needs to improve k-means algorithm. The improved k-means algorithm is described as: It is supposed there are totally m pages in sites and there  are totally n times of user access. Because collaborative recommendation is applied, recommendation pool T is ( 1)n m% ? matrix in memory. Each line represents a user?s  access page set. From previous m columns, each column expresses user?s access time length on this page. Each matrix item expresses one user?s access time on one page, that is, this user?s interest degree to access to this page. 1m ? column indicates time length of this line adding to recommendation pool. It is because this recommendation pool keeps an operating replacement policy according to new and old degree of time.

Input: Initial k and recommendation pool Output: Centerset of the recommendation pool  / 2k k? & +? , // Initial value of k-means algorithm Replace the items whose score item is 0 with mean ? // Avoid large-scale sparse matrix emerge to influence the recommendation quality Initialize(T,CenterSet, k) // Select k initial centers randomly While k K# Do begin CenterSet=k-means(T,k,CenterSet) // Clustering operation to get k centers and find a new center max 0? ; newcenter null? For each c T! Do begin  0d ? For each c CenterSet! Do begin d=d+distance(T,t,c); End  If d>max then Begin Max=d; Newcenter=t; End End CenterSet=CenterSet( {Center} K=k+1; End Return Centerset  After each operation of improved k-means algorithm, one element which has the largest distance from each center is taken as a new center. There are three improvements in this algorithm:  ? It changes traditional k-means algorithm that demands users give k value in advance and different k values be led to different cluster results.

? It avoids large-scale sparse matrix in some pages because these pages get 0 score without any access.

? Traditional k-means will compute new average value again to obtain new cluster center after each iteration.

Most of its algorithm times will be taken on re-calculating distance between each sample and the new cluster center.

However, the improved k-means algorithm will select the element which has the largest distance from each center as a new center after each algorithm operation. This element is from original sample database and the original distance matrix data can also be used again. Therefore, there is no need to re-calculate distance between each object and new average value point.



IV. APPLICATION ANALYSIS ON E-COMMERCE NETWORK MARKETING  The implementation of association rule in data mining needs to appoint to the mined database at first and this needs users to be based on analyzing problems to complete. Then, the minimum support and threshold of minimum confidence will be made. System will select an appropriate mining algorithm according to mining data quantity and problem description. Running algorithm finally obtains association rule in certain degree. In fact, what user needs is not the totally generated rule but selection of the rule containing the appointed item. Generally, users only select one of those items and it means most of the generated rules together are useless but it takes up large quantities of resources during generating rules. Because of this, we adopt a constraint- based association rule mining at first to filter originally lots of algorithms. This rule adds one of users? item set into mining algorithm and combines other constraint conditions in association rule to generate the association rule which is called ?antecedent fixes consequent constraints?. This paper takes price as constraint condition to be added in the algorithm. The constraint conditions are expressed as:  1 2( , ,..., ) maxnsum price B B B sumprice #  (2) From this formula, 1 2( , ,..., )nsum price B B B is  products price addition after consequent constraints.

max sumprice is the maximum value of price after consequent constraint and the value size is determined by commodity A. According to association rule, towards anti- monotone constraint, as long as one item set does not satisfy constraint condition, any of its superset does not satisfy this constraint condition. If this feature is used in k-means algorithm in association rule to be improving, it improves efficiency of frequent item set and reduces candidate set generation during producing. Taking these three products as an example, algorithm description is based on the rule: 1A B) and 1 2,A B B) .

Since  1 1( ) sup ( , ) / sup ( )conf A B port A B port A) ?  1 2 1 2( , ) sup ( , , ) / sup ( )conf A B B port A B B port A) ?  1 1 2sup ( , ) sup ( , , )port A B port A B B? So  1 1 2( ) ( , )conf A B conf A B B) ? )     If A B) cannot satisfy the requirement of the minimum reliability, the superset with rule consequent B as the consequent rule cannot also meet the minimum reliability requirement. Because of this, during producing item set, it is very favorable for cutting 2- item set A, B to rapidly generate the next item set. Constraint-based association rule reduces times to scan database during mining. In order to further improve processing speed of algorithm, the transaction of all containing antecedent constraint establishes a temporary table to store for later process. Meanwhile, these rules antecedent is constant.

Taking the sale data in Foodmart2000 as an example,  above improved algorithm is performed practical analysis.

At first, transaction database samples are extracted from database at first. After analysis, if commodity A5 sells well, and they hope to mine commodity rule with A5 as rule antecedent and the rule consequent price is smaller than A5, for convenient explanation the commodity price is set as: price(A1)=3, price(A2)=5, price(A3)=4, price(A4)=6, price(A5)=8. min_sup=0.5, min_conf=0.65.

Database sample in table 1 is performed filtration with  A5 as antecedent constraint item. Meanwhile, A5 will be deleted to get transaction database in table 2.

Table 1. Sample of sales data TID ID List 500 A1, A3, A4 1000 A2, A3, A5 1800 A1, A2, A3, A5 5600 A2, A5  Table 2. Affair samples after filter TID ID List 1000 A2, A3 1800 A1, A2, A3 5600 A2  Compute all the support degree of frequent 1-item set to get: 1: 2(sup 3) 3(sup 3)L A A? ? . It creates two association rules: 5 2( 3 / 3 1)A A conf) ? ? ; 5 3( 2 / 3 0.67)A A conf) ? ? , which is eligible for  consequent. The support degree of al the 2-item sets to get 2 : 2 3(sup 2)L A A ? . It creates one association rule: 5 2, 3( 2 / 3 0.67)A A A conf) ? ? . This rule is  filtered and not be output. 3L is empty set and the algorithm is over. Then we get two final association rules: 5 2(sup 3 / 4 0.75, 3 / 3 1) 5 3(sup 2 / 4 0.5, 2 / 3 0.67) A A conf A A conf  ) ? ? ? ?? . ) ? ? ? ?/ We compare the average accuracy between original k-  means algorithm and the improved k-means algorithm.

Experimental results are shown in table 3 and figure 3. The experimental results show that the running speed of the improved k-means is a bit quicker than original k-means algorithm and its average accuracy is more accurate than original algorithm. In particular, during accurately  designating cluster number k, average accuracy improves 8%. It indicates that this algorithm has higher accuracy.

Since document set in this experiment is very small, advantage of the improved algorithm is not obvious. The improved algorithm meets the purpose to improve recommended speed. Meanwhile, since each k-means algorithm is executed, it will select the element which has the largest distance from each center as a new center after each algorithm operation. Thus, the new center sample point is still from original recommendation pool so it can repeatedly use original data in distance matrix so as to reduce calculating cost.

Table 3 Accuracy of test results 7 8 9 10 11  Original algorithm 36.51 40.44 53.09 45.38 39.67  Improved algorithm 44.32 43.05 61.04 53.72 45.34  Figure 3. Average accuracy comparison

V. CONCLUSIONS This paper discusses the data mining at first including  data mining definition, data mining function, data mining process and main technology, etc. Then, it further studies the association rules in mining algorithm, and mainly analyzes k-means algorithm in association rule and simply introduces definition, classification and characteristics of e-commerce.

Then this paper points out algorithm defects By analyzing classical samples in e-commerce retailing with cluster. For the defects in k-mean algorithm, we improve them so the task to seek frequency item set can be distributed and parallized. Finally, this paper also combines the examples to prove the effectiveness and efficiency when e-commerce data are implemented in data mining.

