Research ofAssociation Rule Algorithm based on Data Mining

Abstract?Association rule data mining is an important part in the field of data mining data mining, its algorithm performance directly affects the efficiency of data mining and the integrity, effectiveness of ultimate data mining results.

Based on the existing association rule mining algorithms, this paper studies and analyzes their efficiency and effectiveness, and according to the efficiency defects of Apriorialgorithm, proposes an improved algorithm. This algorithm can reduce the data base I /Operation time, improve mining efficiency.

Keywords-data mining; association rule; frequent itemset; Apriorialgorithm

I. INTRODUCTION The birth of data mining technology met people?s  requirements. Data mining, also known as Knowledge Discovery from the database, it can extract implicit, people do not know in advance, but is potentially useful information and knowledge from a lot of incomplete, noisy, fuzzy, and random data in practical application. The occurrence of data mining provided a powerful means to automatically and intelligently transform the massive amounts of data into useful knowledge, which facilitates the erection of bridge between data and knowledge.

Association rule mining as an important branch of data mining is one of the most important and widely used data mining methods, also an important issue for this paper to be discussed [1]. The concept to association rules was proposed first by Agrawalet al. in 1993, when analyzing the market basket problem, to discover interesting collection or related links between items among large amounts of data. For example, by digging market basket data, obtained the ?90% of customers buying the bread and butter, at the same time will buy milk?, so then find the buying patterns of customers in the sale of goods, making retailers better understand customer buying psychology, habits, and carry out targeted marketing, production scheduling, ultimately enable retailers to get better returns. Although the association rule is a demand a risen from the rapid development of the retail industry, but its application depends not only on the retail.

Currently, the association rule mining technique widely used, in addition to banking, insurance, e-commerce and other commercial areas, people took it to expand the application to privacy protection, Web data mining, teaching management, etc., reflecting the great development potential and application prospects. With the continuous expansion of application fields, to continue the research of association rule  mining has important theoretical and practical value, so is a useful attempt.



II. DATA MINING From the point of view of data application, improved  from low-level database query to decision support systems, and further development of advanced applications such as predictive analytics. From a business perspective, data mining is to achieve deeper analysis on a large number of enterprise data according to the established enterprise business goals, the aim is to discover the unknown, hidden potential rules and convert them into corresponding model, thus supporting business decision support activities.

Data mining is defined broadly as a process to extract implicit, people do not know in advance, but is potentially useful information and knowledge from a lot of noisy, uncertain, stored in various forms or incomplete large data sets; in a narrow sense, data mining is the process to extract useful knowledge from the data set with specific form.

A. Data Mining Process Data mining process is generally composed by several  major phases such as mining objects determination, data preparation, data mining, structural analysis expression and mining application [2]. Data mining can be described as a repetition of these stages, particularly shown in figure 1.

Mining objects determination  Data integration Data selection  Data preprocessingData conversion  Data preparation  Data miningSelect data miningalgorithm  Data mining  Results evaluation and knowledge consolidationResults presentation  Results presentation and application   Figure 1.  Data mining process    Mining objects determination, in principle, data mining can be performed on any type of information storage. This includes relational databases, data warehouses, transactional databases, advanced database systems, and expanded files.

The advanced database systems include object-oriented and object-relational databases; databases for special applications, such as spatial database, time series database, text database, and multimedia database.

Data preparation phase can be further divided into four steps: data integration, data selection, data preprocessing and data conversion. In these, data integration is to process multiple files or the data in multiple data base running environments, solve the semantic ambiguity, deal with the missing data, and clean data [3]. Data selection is to search and select the relevant data for data mining goals, including conversion of data in different formats, and aggregation of data in different sectors. Data preprocessing is data cleaning and enrichment work. Important data in the database is accurate, and unimportant data may be contaminated.

Preprocessing is to overcome the limitations of current data mining tools, and an important work of data conversion is to encode data. Different values of the database fields (attributes) to be converted into digital form will facilitate the search.

Data mining, at this stage the actual mining operations, namely by the use of machine learning, statistical analysis and other methods to find useful patterns or knowledge from the database, including data mining method selection, data mining algorithm selection, and data mining.

Results analysis presentation and mining applications, including results expression, to intuitively express the mining results as far as possible, let it easy for users to understand and use; results evaluation, to select and evaluate the useful part of mining results, and then find the acceptable results; knowledge consolidation, to gather the extracted information to the execution system, understand the role of such information or evidence it.

B. Data Mining System Structure Although data mining regarded as a basic step of data  base knowledge discovery process is more scientific, but in the industry, the media and the database research field, directly as a data base knowledge discovery is more prevalent. Therefore, data mining has a broader concept: it is a process to extract interesting knowledge from a lot of data stored in databases, data warehouses or other information warehouses. Based on this view, a typical data mining system may consist of the following main components, shown in figure 2.

It is noted that data mining technology from the outset oriented applications. It is not only simple search, queries and call for specific database, but also micro and macro statistics, analysis, synthesis and reasoning for these data, to guide for solving practical problems, attempt to find interrelation between events, even use the existing data to predict future events. As a result, increase people on data applications, from the low-level end query operations to decision support for business decision-makers at all levels.

This demand-driven force is more powerful than database query.

User application interface  Model assessment  Mining engine  Knowledge base  Data cleaning, filtering  Data integration  Application layer  Logic layer  Data layer   Figure 2.  Data mining system structure

III. ASSOCIATIONRULE DATA MINING AND IMPROVED ALGORITHM  In the knowledge models data mining discovered, association rule model is very important one, also the most active branch. Association rule indicates correlation between groups of objects in the database. Association rule mining is to discover the interesting or relevant connection between a large numbers of data items, the association rule problem was proposed by R. Agrawalet 1993, immediately attracted wide attention [4]. Many researchers had in-depth research on it, then improved and expanded the initial association rules mining algorithm. Meanwhile, the association rule mining has been applied to the database in many other fields, and achieved good excavation effect.

A. Definition of Association Rule Association rule mining is to illustrate by using formal  description, has common sense, in particular: let  1 2{ , , , }mI i i i be consist of m different items. Given a transaction database D , in which each transactionT is a set of items in I , that isT I , each T has a unique identifier.

If the item set is that X I and X T , then the transactionT  contains the item set X . Association rule is an implication like X Y , in which X I , Y I , and X YY . If the association rule X Y is established,  there should be also the following two flag parameters: support S , namely the transaction database D should have at least %S  transactions include all the items in X and Y ; Confidence C , namely at least %C  transactions including X containsY . In X Y , X is known as former member, Y as after member, and X , Y both can composed by the conjunctive expression.

For convenience, the value from 0% to 100% commonly used, rather than 0 to 1, to express the support and confidence. And the minimum support threshold, the smallest confidence threshold is generally set by the domain experts. Collection of items called item set, the item set including k  items called k -item set [5]. All the large item  sets denoted by L , in which  k  i i  L LiL , and k is the length  of the longest item set. The frequency of item sets is the number of item sets included in transaction database D , also known as frequency or support counting. Item sets meeting minimum support minSup  means that the frequency of item sets is greater than or equal with the product of minSup  and the total number of transactions in D . If the item sets meet minimum support, then it will be called frequent item sets.

B. Steps of Association Rule Mining Association rule mining is to identify the association  rules in the transaction database D  to meet a user-specified minimum support and minimum confidence; the entire mining process can be decomposed into two steps, specifically shown in figure 3.

Data set  Search for frequent item sets  Association rules generation  Association rule sets   Figure 3.  Steps of association rule mining  First, to find the item set with all the transaction supports greater than the minimum support. The support of an item set is the number of transaction containing this set. The item set with minimum support called frequent item sets, others are non-frequent item sets. That is, to identify the item set with support greater than a given support threshold.

The second step, generate strong association rules based on frequent item sets finding. That is, generate the association rules with support and confidence greater than or equal to the prior given support threshold and confidence threshold.

C. Performance Analysis of Association Rule Mining Algorithm At present, there are many frequent item sets generation  algorithms, and when generating frequent k - item sets these algorithms will scan each transaction of the database for statistics of the support of k - item sets, and according to the determined minimum support find all frequent k - item sets at the first k  iteration [6]. However, because that the size of the databases usually very large, so the above method consumes too much time. Therefore, to seek effective generation algorithm is a key issue. In fact, in the whole  execution process of association rule mining the first sub- issue is the core, and the second is relatively simple.

Apriori rule is the basic rule of frequent set needed by Boolean association rule mining and generation; also a very influential association rule mining rule.

Apriori algorithm is an iterative algorithm called search layer by layer, the role of k -item set is to search the first ( 1)k  item set. At first, find a collection of frequent 1-item sets, as 1L . The role of 1L  is to find the collection 2L of 2- item sets, and 2L  to find 3L , so to repeat it, until no frequent k -item set. This way, to find each kL needs scanning the database. An important nature of Apriori is to improve the efficiency of frequent item sets produced layer by layer, which is used to compress the search space, the core part of Apriori algorithm as follows:  1{ }L L 2k ; While ( 1kL ) {  kN =apriori_gen( 1kL , minSup ); For each transactions t D {  tN =subset ( kN , t ); For each candidates tn N  {  n ; } }  min{ . }k kL n N n count Sup ; k ;  } Return ( k kLk kLkk );  Since the rules are generated by the frequent set, each rule will automatically satisfy the minimum support. So, the rule generated by the above algorithm is what we hope to get.

Apriori algorithm has two fatal performance flaws: the first is a lot of I/O space-time overhead in multiples cans of transaction D item sets. For each k  cycle, each element of the candidate set kN  must first be verified whether joined  kL by scanning the entire transaction set D , so there will be a huge I/O space-time overhead. The other drawback is that may produce very large candidate sets. Generating the first k candidate set kN from 1kL is exponential growth, so resulting in so many candidate sets for execution time and memory space will be a challenge [7].



IV. OPTIMIZATION OF ASSOCIATION RULEMINING ALGORITHM  Apriori algorithm, although its implementation process is relatively simple, but each generation of candidate set containing different number of items needs to scan the transaction database D , when the candidate set larger, space- time overhead of Apriori algorithm becomes relatively large;    in addition, the data in the transaction database is still increasing, after each increase in data, Apriori algorithm should recalculate the frequent item sets and generate association rules, so the previously generated frequent item sets and association rules already have no use, which is not conducive to quickly and efficiently find association rules.

Even, if the size of the transaction database exceeds the memory capacity, Apriori algorithm can no longer be used.

The first step of improved algorithm is to simply account the frequency of the item sets containing a certain factor, to determine the frequent one-dimension item set, while generating set '1N . In the first k step, there are two stages, first, with function apriori_gen, through the frequent item set  1kL  generated in ( 1)k step, to generate a candidate set  kN , at the same time generate set ' kN , and then search it to  calculate the support of kN .

In the improved algorithm, the basic idea of looking for  the largest item set is that it requires the data set multi-step process. The first step, simply account the frequency of the item sets containing a certain factor, to identify those having support not less than the minimum, that is, one-dimensional frequent item set. From the second step cycle processing until no frequent item set generated. Cycle process: in the first k step, according to the ( 1)k -dimension frequent item set generated in the first ( 1)k step, to generate k - dimension frequent item set, and then search set 'kN  to get the support of the candidate item set, finally compared with the minimum support, thus finding the k  dimensional item set. Set 'kN  is defined as: the form of each member in the set is ( ,{ })id kT s , each ks is a potentially frequent k - dimension item set which is identified as idT . When 1k ,  ' 1N and database D  are consistent. And when 1k ,  ' kN  is  generated by the algorithm, the members of 'kN  and transaction T  are consistent. If a transaction does not include any candidate k -dimension item set, 'kN  will not  have a directory of it, so the directory number of 'kN  will be less than the number of database transactions, especially for k with large values. In addition, for k with large values, each directory less than the corresponding transaction, because a transaction hardly containing a candidate.

Conversely, for k with very small values, each directory more than the corresponding transaction, because that a  directory in 'kN contains all the candidate k -dimension item sets in the transaction.

The advantage of this algorithm is that only in the first scan using transaction database D calculates the support of candidate frequent item sets, in other scans using the last scanned candidate transaction database 'D to calculate. In the last several scans, 'D  is much smaller than D , which reduces the I/O operation time, thereby increasing the efficiency of the algorithm.



V. CONCLUSION With the development of information technology, data  mining technology has obtained widespread concern, which prompted the scientific community more in-depth study of this technology. Data mining technology has many research fields, in which association rule mining is one of the important research directions, the in-depth study on it not only has important theoretical significance, but also has a very important application value. Association rule mining algorithms are the main contents of the study, and many efficient association rule mining algorithms have been proposed. In this paper, through the study of existing association rule mining algorithm, starting from database size reduction, an improved association rule data mining algorithm is proposed. It can greatly enhance the time efficiency of frequent item finding algorithm, especially when a large number of data item set, its superiority is particularly prominent.

