

IT In SmarT CITIeS  Planning and Implementing a Smart City in Taiwan  IT In SmarT CITIeS  Chiung-I Chang, National Taichung University of Science and Technology, Taiwan Chih-Cheng Lo, Chunghwa Telecom, Taiwan  Because of smart cities? diverse demands, a powerful and effective platform is necessary before they can be realized. This article describes a cloud virtualization resource management system called CHT Virtuoso that will support smart cities in Taiwan.

I t is forecast that by 2050, 70 percent of the world?s population?more than 6 billion people?will live in cities and their suburbs.

These cities will need to be smart, so gov-  ernments will have to face and solve the signifi- cant issue of how to enhance city infrastructure and efficiency to provide citizens with necessary services.

A smart city is one that uses ICT such that city services and monitoring are more aware, interac- tive, and efficient.1 IT extends into the physical world, constructing the Internet of Things (IoT).2 By applying the new generation of IT, humanity can become more refined. We can achieve dy- namic production management and an improved  quality of life by integrating human society and physical systems through infrastructure moni- toring in every corner of the world.3  The Taiwan government has decided to develop smart cities for two primary reasons: to uncover new growth opportunities for Taiwan?s ICT and to tap into the global smart living technologies mar- ket. Although cities provide their inhabitants with life?s basic amenities, smart technology can boost agriculture, save energy, and bring improvements to homes, businesses, and the environment. Taiwan is equipped with a basic infrastructure, and the popu- larization of 4G services launched in 2015 further strengthened the fixed and mobile broadband net- work environment to enable smart city applications.4    computer.org/ITPro  4 3  Given this foundation, the gov- ernment has set aside NT$5 billion (US$166.7 million) for the years 2015 to 2017 to construct 4G smart city broadband applications in cooperation with telephone companies and indus- try. Chunghwa Telecom is the leading telecom in Taiwan and is financially sound. It provides a complete fixed-line and mobile broadband infrastructure; core communication technologies; ICT integration solutions and capabili- ties; IPTV and multimedia on demand (MOD) services; big data sources; voice, data, and value-added services; and cloud services and their related advantages. Combined with 4G?s high coverage rates, these entities provide a more complete infrastructure for ful- filling the smart city concept.

Here, we introduce Taiwan?s smart city plan and describe an application platform architec- ture for supporting smart city services and oper- ations. We also look at the major features of CHT Virtuoso (Virtuoso), Chunghwa Telecom?s cloud management system.

Smart City Planning in Taiwan According to the program introduced here, Chunghwa Telecom will assist Taiwan?s govern- ment in achieving a smart city within three years.

The company offers the highest 4G base station coverage, rich experience in ICT projects, and the best R&D experts; the combination of industrial resources and government policies, which are tailored to the local governments of 4G smart cit- ies, will promote industrial economy and give rise to an appropriate public policy. The proposed 4G smart city broadband solution includes the fol- lowing convenient city, happy city, and friendly city programs and subprograms.5  Convenient City The convenient city program aims to construct a convenient ?moving? environment6 based on 4G broadband, IoT, cloud technology, big data, and so on to provide accurate, public, real-time traffic and road information for the government, enter- prise, and citizens.7 Through 4G traffic sensors, public sector open data, and other information sources, real-time feedback to the cloud center  provides taxis, tour buses, passenger cars, citizen cars, and special vehicles with traffic condition and disaster information. Announcement appli- cations, phone applications, KIOSK information systems, bus stop displays, management plat- forms, and so on are used to broadcast informa- tion and thus help enterprises and citizens. Figure 1 shows a convenient city?s overall services. The convenient city program consists of the following four subprograms.

Dynamic traffic-control-management services.

The service process is divided into four stages.

First, raw data?including open data from nation- wide backhaul traffic information, and traffic im- ages and eTag IDs from 4G traffic detectors?are collected and transmitted to the cloud center. The images are then converted to enable traffic analy- sis, and eTags are used to analyze traffic speed.

Then, traffic information is generated. Finally, real-time traffic information and value-added services are provided to users? devices.

Smart transportation safety services. Notifi- cation to government authorities of immediate danger events is combined with image, data, and evidence management so that passers-by and lo- cal residents feel safer. Taxis play an important role for tourists by using 4G broadband to achieve upgraded location positioning and dispatch effi- ciency. Using location-based service positioning  Figure 1. Overall services of a convenient city. Through 4G traffic sensors, public sector open data, and other information sources, real-time feedback to the cloud center will provide taxis, tour buses, passenger cars, citizen cars, and special vehicles with traffic condition and disaster information.

Disaster notification  4G traffic sensor  Travel viewpoint information  Taxi  Bus Vehicle Internet service Trunks  Vendor platform- management application  MRT  Airport  Smart government  MRT KIOSK smart stop  service  Traffic service app  Convenient city cloud service  Traffic and disaster notification    44 IT Pro  July/August 2016  IT In SmarT CITIeS  technology combined with interactive navigation devices, real-time information about attractions, nearby messaging as regards, for example, traf- fic jams and weather information, and more are provided to passengers.

Smart vehicle infotainment services. Through 4G broadband, music, video, messages, and so on are available to citizens. Rich information about entertainment and recreation is also conveniently provided. The public sector is integrated through individuals posting real-time traffic data. Informa- tion about speed cameras, parking lots, and other traffic issues is used to guide the direction of traffic.

Smart transportation applications. Transit-ori- ented development (TOD) intelligent transporta- tion applications can cover Taoyuan Airport, the mass rapid transit system, and the north Taiwan transportation network. 4G and Wi-Fi networks are constructed to integrate land and air trans- port information (for example, flight information, passenger transport timetables, neighboring busi- nesses, attractions, weather forecasts, and related information) with an intelligent feeder transport system in the surrounding areas. This provides the public?that is, domestic and foreign passen- gers?with more convenient transportation and related services.

Happy City The happy city program is based on 4G broad- band technology and aims to connect a smart life, cultural and creative tourism, smart shop- ping districts, and audiovisual and mobile ser- vices to realize the concept of a happy city by  providing various ubiquitous services and using sustainable business mod- els.8 The overall concept of the happy city is shown in Figure 2. The happy city program consists of the following four subprograms.

Smart life and consumer services.

Digital wallet applications (e-wallets) integrate physical cards, citizen cards, credit cards, and so on. People use smartphones for soliciting transport services, shopping, paying bills, and many other purposes to enjoy the convenience of a smart life. Because  the use of smartphones and the mobile Internet is increasing rapidly, Taiwan?s major trusted ser- vice manager (TSM) platforms began offering payment services in the first quarter of 2015. The TSM platform issues citizen cards, transportation tickets, credit cards, and so on to near-field com- munication (NFC)-enabled smartphones using an over-the-air approach. Thus, citizens and visitors can download a digital wallet application to their mobile phones and manage various applications.

Smart cultural and creative activities. Cultural and creative activities, exhibitions, and tourism activities are accessible on mobile devices. Guests enjoy rich cultural programs, creative events, and sightseeing tours using their smartphones. A mobile electronic ticket allows sightseeing tours to become digital packages, and boosts the overall tourism industry. Through a tourism portal, tourists are provided with different services for different travel stages, including a stage for purchasing an elec- tronic package before they travel. While they travel, real-time 4G audio and video tours are offered so that users aren?t limited to a specific location or time and can experience real or virtual sightseeing. Af- ter their travel, users can share tourism videos with their community.

Smart shopping district. The objective of this project is to achieve a shopping district that is pleas- ant, healthy, and secure.9 The three key compo- nents are shopping services, audiovisual content, and the IoT.10 Through data analysis and match- ing, the system integrates payment and front-end logistics services for stores. It performs back-end analysis of shopping information to boost revenue  Figure 2. Overall happy city concept. The happy city will provide various ubiquitous services and use sustainable business models.

Life Tour Business Video  Digital wallet  Mobile shop  Mobile TV  Mobile pay  Mobile ticket  4G Mobile/Wi-Fi  Mobile card  Interactive guide  Culture originality    computer.org/ITPro  4 5  and satisfaction for both stores and customers, creating a win?win situ- ation and fostering prosperity in the area. The online-to-offline service is combined with advertising from local specialty shops, and 4G video promo- tions and push advertising messages guide visitors and residents to stores in the shopping district.

At the shopping district entrance, via Wi-Fi and beacon sensors, a mo- bile advertising service pushes video coupons to allow customers to easily move to online mall consumption, and then to delivery logistics servic- es. Payment can be made by coupon through an NFC shopping applica- tion. Mobile phone advertising through augment- ed reality navigation, positioning pushes, and interactive electronic billboards, and the timely and appropriate pushing of 4G video ads, guide passengers into stores to boost the local econo- my. A face-recognition function is integrated into interactive sensing electronic billboards so that the consumer segment can be understood.

Audiovisual ubiquitous services. 4G technolo- gy is used to provide multidevice and multiscreen seamless video content. In this project, content providers cooperate to launch an HD television service through Chunghwa Telecom?s content distribution network and a video platform to pro- vide users with a comprehensive mobile viewing experience. This will revive the Taiwan film and television industry and is expected to drive the growth of Taiwan?s film and television content.

4G technology is characterized by low laten- cy, real-time transmission, and large bandwidth characteristics, and is thus particularly capable of fulfilling a happy city?s needs. It provides rapid re- sponse for handling high-speed streaming audio and video navigation, video advertising, and other mobile services. A 4G ubiquitous television service is required to ensure seamless audio and video content, with HD picture quality, such that mo- bile video services will represent a new milestone.

Friendly City The overall concept of the friendly city program can be expressed as ?love.? 4G mobile broadband is exploited to build a friendly environment and  create a friendly city. The planned program to construct a friendly city is focused on the top- ics of moving, learning, health, and government communication. The program uses science and technology to improve the content and texture of life and to achieve a personal, outdoor, village, and public barrier-free environment that im- proves friendliness. Figure 3 shows the friendly city?s services, which are as follows.

Smart accessible applications. An intelligent accessible application development platform is provided, comprising life assistance services, beacon location-based services, and 4G video guide services. Instant video mode is provided for volunteer guiding. Services are available to help the visually impaired, vulnerable people, and backpackers by delivering transportation as- sistance. Using a mobile phone application, users can access guidelines, a voice reminder service, a beacon positioning system, and a video mode to guide them to their destination.

Smart healthcare services. Taiwan?s elder- ly will be 14 percent of the total population by 2018; thus, Taiwan will become an ?aged soci- ety,? which will drive demands on the healthcare industry. Required healthcare services are avail- able through 4G technology features. HD video streaming provides home healthcare for seniors; medication management; and remote care of children, relatives, and friends in an immediate, stable, and smooth manner. The healthcare sys- tem also integrates physiological measurement  Figure 3. Friendly city services. These services focus on the topics of moving, learning, health, and government communication, with ICT to improve the content and texture of life.

Barrier free  Mobile learning Governance  Healthcare  ? Intelligent video guide ? Volunteer as traffic sign notification ? Traffic signal notification  ? Interactive education platform ? Big data for learning ? Country academic tutoring  ? Mobile convenience ? Intelligent village ? 3D GIS ? Big data analysis ? Mobile SNG ? Disaster notification  ? Healthcare platform ? Physical measurement/ analysis ? Consulation/remote care    46 IT Pro  July/August 2016  IT In SmarT CITIeS  equipment, facilitates community care by clinical staff, and allows multiple staff members to simul- taneously discuss professional care.

Smart mobile learning services. With applica- tions and the mobile Web as the service entrance, the system provides intelligent classrooms and an interactive teaching platform, with big data ana- lytics to facilitate analysis of the learning process to enhance learning. Multiple digital learning services provide countrywide tutoring, univer- sity studies, and a lifelong education for different learning populations, such as K12. The learning services provide online video learning, quality teaching programs, and live learning. Most of the services are smoothly delivered via 4G technol- ogy. At the same time, users? learning processes are recorded, and, through big data analysis, rec- ommendations are given to users.

Intelligent governance services. These servic- es are divided into three areas11: safety and disas- ter prevention uses the 4G network to transmit live video for disaster prevention and to broadcast announcements; a decision-making assistant uses big data statistics analysis and case research to offer planning recommendations; and, with convenient services, the system solves the prob- lem of the inconveniences that rural populations face. In the latter case, for example, a smart vil-  lage might be served by the village chief through mobile devices, instant messaging, and uploaded reactions to city government initiatives.

Application Platform Architecture Because of the diverse requirements for smart cities, a powerful and effec- tive platform is needed that supports the requirements of a smart city?s various applications.12 In a smart city ecosystem, telecom operators assume the role of providing primary con- struction, maintenance, and opera- tion. Through unified specification information, openness, and applica- tion interfaces, urban information service platform applications can be integrated, sharing data between ap- plications and industries. Through  the application service platform, integrated in- frastructure, and underlying capabilities, which carry national urban intelligent applications, multiple value-added services can be provided.

As Figure 4 shows, a complete smart city appli- cation and services platform includes three main layers: basic resources, a development platform, and application services. Smart city applications will be constructed on this platform, and full support, including platform operation and main- tenance, will be provided.13  Basic Resources Layer This layer is constructed according to the unified hardware specifications and system architecture to provide services to the development platform layer. It consists of virtual machines (VMs), stor- age devices, networks, security protection de- vices, a resource pool, and other components, providing the resource requirements of the up- per layers, storage, switching, security, and other basic functions.14 The shared repository in this layer is used mainly to capture the various fields of data to be stored. The computing platform provides virtual servers, networks, storage space, and value-added services, such as VMs, virtual networks, and security protection. Furthermore, the platform has a high degree of elasticity and can install its own application software, which is required to construct the environment.

Figure 4. Smart city application platform architecture. Smart city applications can be constructed on this platform, and full support, including platform operation and maintenance, will be provided.

Traffic  GIS  Resource  Deploy  Resource Authority  Computing pool Network pool  Physical machine/storage/network/security  Storage pool Security pool  Allocation Registration  Query Measurement  DB instance Warehouse  Monitor Life cycle Authority management  Runtime ResourceResource management  Authority Route  Monitor App  App busMeasurement  SMS Traffic Billing Storage Security LBS APIs  App engine  Middleware platform  Data platform  SaaS PaaS  IaaS  Security Health Travel Logistics Building Fire control App  management platform  App operator  Product manager  Cloud management  platform  OAM    computer.org/ITPro  4 7  Development Platform Layer This layer provides the development and operating environment for upper- layer services, such as Web server utili- ty, database management, and software components. It requires a common framework for core technology con- struction and the provision of open in- terfaces and connection mechanisms, cloud computing resources, large data analysis and exploration tools, infor- mation security, and other common component modules. By reusing sys- tem component modules, the comple- tion of customized solutions can be accelerated. This layer also includes a variety of application services offer- ing standardized tools and environ- ments. The application development environment helps developers by providing tools to enhance the quality and quantity of application de- velopment and shorten the development cycle.

Application Service Layer This layer includes a variety of smart developments providing friendly urban applications, slotting, management, monitoring, billing, and other func- tions. The application management platform pro- vides application services related to management functions on the smart city cloud platform, in- cluding user, partner, product, promotion, service, billing, and subscriber management; statistical analysis; application monitoring; and other related functions. System developers, administrators, and maintenance and operation personnel can perform the required services in this management function.

Finally, resource usage, billing, processing, and other data sheets are shown via statistical reporting.

The Virtuoso System The key to achieving an application service plat- form for a smart city is a stable and resilient virtu- al infrastructure resource management system.15 In Taiwan?s smart city plan, Chunghwa Telecom will provide the cloud service platform, Virtuoso, a self-developing system for configuring, manag- ing, and monitoring various entities within the cloud center. Management information system (MIS) managers can take advantage of a stan- dardized API to operate and manage resources, the surveillance applications reached by VM ser-  vices, automatic extensions, and other tasks. The architecture of Virtuoso is shown in Figure 5. Its main features are as follows.

User Interface The user interface is an integrated management portal that provides maintenance and operation staff to customers; it constitutes the entrance API. It can manage large numbers of virtual com- puting resources and related hardware devices, such as physical servers, VMs, storage, and net- work equipment, to improve management ef- fectiveness. It provides the following functions: hierarchical authority management mechanism, automatic deployment of virtualization platform capabilities, and complete API support.

Resource Optimization Resource scheduling, management, and optimi- zation are the core values of virtualization tech- nology. Virtuoso provides the following features:  ?	Dynamic resource scheduling. The system calcu- lates the CPU load of all physical machines, re- sulting in standard deviation values. The bigger this value is, the more discrete the representa- tive is?that is, the greater the CPU load unbal- ance. At this point, Virtuoso proposes a VM migration operation to achieve load balancing.

?	Overcommit provision. The total VM specifica- tions can exceed the limit of the physical ma- chine?s resources. For example, the CPU uses  Figure 5. Virtuoso system architecture. The Virtuoso cloud management system configures, manages, and monitors various entities within the cloud center.

Application  CH T  Vi rtu  os o  System manager User  API OAM portal  VM management  Quality assurance  Resource allocation  Network security  VM  Server storage  Virtual switch  app OS  app OS  app OS  app OS  app OS  Virtual switch Virtual switch  Auto deploy  Data backup  Event alarm  Energy saving  User portal  Applications  Ca bi  ne t  Server  Storage  Network    48 IT Pro  July/August 2016  IT In SmarT CITIeS  a time division mechanism and average disper- sion for all VMs of the same host. The over- commit ratio has no upper limit.

?	Memory overcommit. This function uses bal- loon memory technology, giving VMs a basic amount, and collects idle memory according to different weights dynamically allocated to the VM. The overcommit ratio may be 1:4.

?	Thin provisioning. Using storage space manage- ment technology, this feature allows temporary excessive VM storage space utilization. Using all the storage space without prior reservations can increase storage space utilization.

?	Dynamic provisioning. The VM is dynamically transferred to adjust the configuration best suited to the physical machine?s performance, and then reaches the resource load balancing that optimizes and enhances the efficiency of resource utilization.

?	Autoscaling function. When the VM?s CPU, mem- ory usage, disk read/write traffic, or network traffic are too high or too low, the VM is auto- matically increased or reduced on demand.

Availability Management The system can immediately detect the operat- ing status of each physical machine. When the physical machine fails, the services running on the failed machine can be rebooted on another functioning physical machine to reduce the out- age time of the VM application services. Systems with high availability are designed to ensure un- interrupted virtualization service management.

According to the safety design, the external sys- tem must have an account at a particular access API. Through safety certification, the risk of sys- tem intrusion is significantly reduced.

Virtual Machine Management The Virtuoso managing functions include all life-cycle management needs, such as startup, shutdown, forced boot, reboot, forced reopening, pause, resume, and delete snapshot functions.

The following features are also included:  ?	Dynamic scale up and down. This feature allows the CPU, memory, and hard disk space of VMs to be dynamically expanded or reduced.

?	Convenient template build and conversion processes.

Users can convert their own VM as a tem-  plate for the templates that are to be loaded subsequently.

?	Dynamic migration mechanism. Without inter- rupting services, the VM can be moved to an- other physical machine. Virtuoso?s advanced features can manage the dynamic extension of resources and provide cross-cluster or instant migration across storage devices and transfer processes without interruption.

?	VM information initialization. This function sup- ports copying a VM and setting correct param- eters after initialization to avoid duplication of a VM?s information, which affects its stability.

Storage and Backup Management Virtuoso provides real-time and historical moni- toring, and basic functions. The main functions include a reliable snapshot and restore mecha- nism, storage connection monitoring, space us- age forecasting, virtual disk access restriction management, and disaster recovery capabilities.

Network Management Network management supports the following complicated functions: virtual LAN access and management capabilities, virtual network card management, network traffic monitoring, VM security isolation, network card binding, VM network card IP/MAC tamper-proof capabilities, and VM network card access control.

Performance Monitoring and Energy Management Virtuoso provides instant performance moni- toring, historical effectiveness reports, and a physical machine power-blackouts-control mechanism. It also includes physical machine and VM real-time performance, utilization, and effi- cacy monitoring, and provides historical reports according to a variety of time intervals. Finally, the power blackouts policy supports power man- agement settings to save energy.

A s mentioned, Taiwan has two primary reasons for developing smart cities: to uncover new growth opportunities for Taiwan?s ICT and to tap into the global market for smart living technologies. To achieve smart city life and fulfill traffic management, safety, environmental protection, and intelligent service    computer.org/ITPro  4 9  automation needs, Taiwan must exploit cloud technology and the advantages of virtualization, which constitute a fast, flexible, and reliable basis for the achievement of smart city applications.

Chunghwa Telecom will assist the government in achieving smart cities by the end of 2017. Cur- rently, virtualization management products are expensive; Virtuoso, which provides important functions, is practical, stable, easy to operate, and reasonably priced. In particular, Chunghwa Telecom has R&D personnel who can give full technical support.

