

Data analytics   The Evolving Role of the CDO  D igital transformations are data transformations? they require that enter- prises look at processes  from an end-to-end, holistic perspective and remove physical constraints from information com- munications. Because our on- line world and the entire digital experience is based on ones and zeros, the only way to achieve digital transformation is by get- ting control of the avalanche of data that is generated by supplier, customer, and employee interac- tions. Today?s data environment is orders of magnitude more com- plex, diverse, and voluminous than that of prior computing eras, and the growth will continue at an exponential rate.

Given this backdrop, enterprises are realizing that new leadership is needed to take on responsibil- ity for data and information value.

The chief data officer (CDO) role has arisen to fill this need. A rela- tively new role in the enterprise, the CDO has taken on a number of forms. Many organizations have experimented with the role, and  a variety of venues for knowledge sharing have emerged to help define how this role needs to function in the information-driven enterprise.

Conferences, associations, and or- ganizations centered around the community of people interested in data at the executive level are helping to shape this new C-suite member.

These developments are part of the emerging realization by senior executives that data is at the soul of their enterprises. Or- ganizations are in a never-ending cycle of pursuing business value from their data, but despite large amounts of resources and atten- tion, many data initiatives have resulted in disappointment.

Reexamining Core Models and Value Propositions Part of the problem lies in the per- ception of who is responsible for le- veraging data in business processes.

Data has been an inconvenient means to an end?a mechanism to get work done. Data issues slow businesses down and get in the way.

These issues are something that the  IT organization is supposed to manage, fix, remediate, and make consumable?but, unfortunately, IT is not up to this task. The per- ception that IT should be solely responsible for data is changing, given that the overarching issues of transformation now require re- examination of core business mod- els, core value propositions, and the fundamental assumptions on which the business is based.

The digital transformation of the enterprise changes this per- spective. For the first time, orga- nizations must begin looking at end-to-end processes and the en- tire customer lifecycle to effective- ly respond to customer needs. IT cannot be responsible for chang- ing the business value proposition or fundamentals?this requires an executive mandate. Because data is now inextricably at the heart of transformation, and digi- tal disruption will have an enor- mous impact on businesses and institutions of all sizes, data is now a C-level responsibility.

Data must now be considered the most valuable asset of the  Seth Earley, Earley Information Science  EDitOR: seth Earley, Earley information science, seth@earley.com    computer.org/ITPro  65  organization. It is the source of competitive advantage and mar- ketplace differentiation. Business models are created from data struc- tures and flows. The customer ex- perience is entirely composed of or supported by data. But in most large enterprises, the data land- scape is so complex and fragment- ed that these models, structures, and experiences can be adapted only through time-intensive, cost- ly, and difficult-to-execute initia- tives. Experimentation, which is a fundamental requirement in the digital ecosystem, is too slow and cost-prohibitive to be viable.

A Culture of Proactive Stewardship CDOs have their work cut out for them. They need to create a culture of proactive stewardship, get the buy-in of users, line-of-business managers, and leadership, and eliminate the ?acts of heroics? that many organizations rely on to get products to market, campaigns launched, and programs success- fully completed. In addition, they need to establish data ownership, remediate upstream processes, re- solve conflicts, and change the way systems and processes produce and consume data. Finally, they need to have a cross-functional and cross-business-unit under- standing of how information flows through the enterprise and know how to measure efficiency, quality, and effectiveness.

The traditional responsibility for data has been with the CIO and within business units that were producing and consuming data.

The focus has been on serving customers and employees rather than looking at data holistically.

Data from these functions might be consumed elsewhere, but this viewpoint was not at the root of process and policy decisions. The costs and benefits of data are not evenly distributed. The CDO un-  derstands this and raises that point of view above parochial interests.

Enterprise capabilities and agil- ity around data are needed to compete with born-digital and other disruptive market entrants.

Being able to rapidly create new products and offerings depends on being able to quickly and cost- effectively assemble the correct data from various internal and ex- ternal sources, and then craft that data into a user experience that provides value or solves a specific problem. Rapid experimentation and evolution are part of the faster clock speeds that every industry is experiencing. According to Tim Fitzgerald, vice president of digi- tal transformation at Avnet, the rate of change that digital trans- formations are causing businesses is unprecedented (as per his talk at the Worldwide Business Re- search B2B Connect Conference; https://twitter.com/sethearley/ status/777622008397869056).

This next series of articles in the Data Analytics department, based mostly on interviews conducted with CDOs who attended the MIT Chief Data Officers Symposium (www.mitcdoiq.org), will share the experiences of several business and technology leaders in deal- ing with data challenges related to digital transformation. Some of these leaders are CDOs, but input was also provided by CEOs, senior vice presidents, and senior man- agers. They offer their practical experience and lessons learned in data initiatives. These are practical approaches for understanding the role and responsibility of the CDO and how this role is providing the necessary foundation for digital transformations.

Why Is a New Role Needed?

When an organization is establish- ing a new role, several questions need to be answered: What will be  different? How will having a CDO change how the business operates?

How will it impact decision mak- ing, processes, policies, and the technologies that are used to run the business day to day? The CDO needs to be an empowered posi- tion with the support of the rest of the leadership team. The CDO can change the status quo in sev- eral ways:  ?	 Increase	 visibility	 and	 awareness	 in the	 C-suite. The CDO will have the ability to communicate and collaborate with leadership.

What will a CDO communicate that a CIO will not? Is this an- other aspect of the CIO?s job, or is it distinctly different from that function? The answer is that CDOs can raise the visibility of process issues and focus atten- tion on innovation with data that the CIO does not have band- width for or awareness of.

?	Focus	 on	 cultural	 change. Many CDOs are evangelists and spend their time educating executives about the importance of data and what can be done to inno- vate with data assets. This effort could be directed toward pro- ducing a specific outcome, or toward increasing awareness of cross-functional challenges and processes that impact the ability to leverage data most effectively.

?	Focus	on	process	 change. Some CDOs roll up their sleeves and work with managers at the level of specific initiatives and programs that are geared toward a new ca- pability or specific outcome.

?	 Focus	 on	 data	 quality	 issues. Data quality in a particular domain? for example, customer data? requires significant effort to address due to the number of stakeholders, processes, systems, and applications that are impact- ed. Many times, these are part of master data initiatives, which can take years to implement, so this    Data analytics  66 IT Pro  January/February 2017  should be seen as a long-term responsibility.

?	 Focus	on	governance. Data and in- formation governance is a thread that runs through all of these areas, and, conceivably, a CDO could stand up a governance program to tackle all of these challenges. Surprisingly, (con- sidering the close tie-in of the realization of data value to ef- fective governance), some CDOs do not get directly involved in governance, acting more as am- bassadors and liaisons rather than taking on this operational aspect of the role. Lack of ef- fective governance (which in- cludes data strategy, data quality, and data ownership) is a sig- nificant impediment to digital transformations.

According to IDC, within the next two years, two-thirds of Global 2000 enterprises will have digital transformation at the center of their corporate strategy. Data is at the core of digital business, and data without integrity won?t be able to support digital transformation initiatives.1 Addressing the root causes of data issues requires au- thority at the highest levels of the enterprise. Organizations need to empower a senior executive to have the resources to fix legacy issues (which can be significant) and be able to effect process and cultural change. That role is the CDO.

Establishing the Need in an Organization According to Jim Gilligan, former CEO of Blue Cross Life Insurance of Canada, ?A lot of challenges are still the traditional ones, such as data management, such as making sure you do data onboarding in a quality and efficient fashion.? The increasing use of analytics through more powerful tools may expose problems. ?Of course,? adds Gil- ligan, ?your analytics strategy will  not succeed if you don?t have qual- ity data to begin with.? When data issues are not addressed at the source, downstream users will try to fix them. This is problematic because  ?	 the downstream users are usu- ally high-cost analysts, actuar- ies, or data scientists;  ?	when these users fix the data, they create a new source that others in the organization might not know about or be able to ac- cess; and  ?	when others cannot access the ?fixed? data, they might use different assumptions or ap- proaches that will make it dif- ficult to reconcile the resulting multiple copies of the data.

Gilligan goes on to observe that there are numerous sources of data and multiple streams?both inter- nal and external?from partners and vendors that have different re- strictions and usages. There needs to be a coordinated process for re- porting on quality and developing remediation plans to address qual- ity issues. Putting a remediation plan into place at the source is not always straightforward. In some cases, the source does not have a mandate or authority. In other cas- es, they might not have funding to clean the data. Governance of the data source, with authority and re- sourcing, is the answer.

Data governance is less glamor- ous than some other areas, such as visualization, according to Steve Orrin, chief technologist of Intel Federal. ?But you need the gover- nance in order to get those inter- esting visualizations, especially when analytics are being done across different types of data.?  Data Stewards Collaborate About Quality Data stewards need to be part of the process?they are close to data  sources, and they understand the constraints of the data and quality needs of downstream processes.

They routinely discuss quality is- sues and develop plans to address problems. Stewardship with focus and discipline, guided by a data strategy and augmented with the proper tools, is an essential com- ponent. CDOs work in different functional areas with managers who are trying to achieve business objectives, such as greater market penetration and increased profit- ability. They help those managers to understand how the quality of data impacts their business objec- tives. Making this connection is an important part of the CDO?s role.

The CDO Communicates Value to the CEO Many corporate goals fail to be achieved because top-level sup- port is lacking. The CEO must be an evangelist for the message that data quality is the first step in the information ecosystem. This message starts with the CDO, who can connect abstract concepts to tangible business outcomes. The CDO understands that the pro- cess starts with the onboarding of data?whether internal or exter- nal. For example, customer and marketplace data goes through an ecosystem of processes and appli- cations and eventually becomes part of a marketing strategy. Data quality issues will cause that mar- keting strategy to fail, however, because poor quality data leads to faulty baseline assumptions.

Improving business outcomes is the driver for many CDO ini- tiatives. Mark Nance, CDO of American Fidelity, notes that get- ting greater value out of business data was the catalyst for initiating its CDO role three years ago. ?Ini- tially, we were going to focus on governance, but business value came to be seen as the core moti- vator for the role.?    computer.org/ITPro  67  This kind of business-critical message must be communicated to the board, where key decisions are being made. The CDO can also help the CEO translate the mes- sage into issues that might have a higher priority, such as organiza- tional risk. In the case of risks and risk mitigation, the CDO will work with a chief risk officer (CRO) to quantify the impact of data quality.

By identifying the issues with the greatest urgency, the CDO can le- verage in-flight initiatives to benefit multiple departments. By improv- ing data quality for risk mitiga- tion, the marketing organization can benefit as well. However, the importance of support from the CEO cannot be overstated. Der- ek Strauss, CDO of Ameritrade, observed that ?a CDO needs ex- ecutive sponsorship to provide air cover.?2 The CEO not only needs to understand the importance of data to the business, but must also drive, from the top, the kind of cultural change that is needed for transformation.

The CDO and Digital Disruption Pure play, ?born digital? financial and insurance technology start- ups (known as ?FinTech? and ?In- sureTech?) are transforming and disrupting their respective sectors.

The value proposition of these startups is in client-centricity. En- gagement is much more effective than with traditional institutions because these businesses are de- signed from the ground up to take full advantage of serving the cus- tomer through digital means.

This disruption is hard for tra- ditional organizations to battle because legacy systems and lum- bering processes prevent them from delivering the value propo- sition of client-centricity through digital data and end-to-end ho- listic thinking around serving the customer. The CDO helps to  develop the capabilities needed to battle these disruptors by bring- ing scale, long-term relationships, and market presence to the battle.

The CDO arms the organization with the digital agility to do battle with these disruptors.

Digital agility gives traditional institutions the opportunity to interface with their customers in a completely different way. The issue for both incumbents and innovators is ensuring that they move from analog to digital in a way that maintains quality and augments and streamlines the relationship. A digital solution al- lows for experimentation and in- novation at a faster clock speed than ever before. But digital plat- forms require that data quality processes are in place. This is the basis of the value proposition?a new or enhanced way of interact- ing with the customer.

Even with the best technology, there is a dependency on data, and data has a dependency on process, and process has a dependency on governance. Although some CDOs choose to evangelize, they typically do so in less mature or- ganizations in which business ex- ecutives need to understand why this is so important. Without that understanding, the work of op- erationalization cannot gain the needed attention and support and therefore will not gain traction. In cases where people are nodding their heads and saying, ?Yes, we understand, now how do we do it?,? the CDO role shifts to one of leading, or at least sponsoring, governance. According to Gartner, the CDO is typically responsible for ?the firm?s enterprise-wide data and information strategy, gover- nance, control, policy develop- ment, and effective exploitation.?3 This makes sense once leadership is on board. Before that point, the CDO is more cheerleader than catalyst for implementation.

The CDO and Cybersecurity Cybersecurity is a part of risk and data management, and these are board-level issues. Boards have to become more conversant in cy- bersecurity because digital trans- formation requires foundational cybersecurity, which is also depen- dent on good governance of data.

Digital disruption will revolu- tionize the whole relationship that companies have with customers; it will change how business-to- business companies are aware of consumer needs. One of those paramount needs is trust, which is based on safeguarding and pro- tecting data and assets. Safeguard- ing customers? data and privacy means understanding what they need and not looking at data just for business needs. The CDO?s overarching role in working with data managers in all departments helps maintain an enterprise-wide vision of monitoring data security, including vulnerabilities resulting from the trend toward increasing partner and customer access to corporate data.

The CDO Role Varies by Organization Different types of CDOs are need- ed for different types of industries and maturity levels. For an organi- zation early in the learning and ma- turity curve, the job is more about education and awareness than get- ting involved in day-to-day issues.

Others set up an infrastructure of decision-making bodies and rules and then move on, while others continue to lead those decision- making groups on an ongoing ba- sis. Depending on the maturity of the organization and the demands of its industry?s state of transforma- tion (for example, drastic change is impacting insurance and financial services more quickly than the in- dustrial products vertical), as well as the state of its infrastructure (some transformations require    Data analytics  68 IT Pro  January/February 2017  major technology upgrades, such as costly enterprise resource plan- ning replacements), the organiza- tion will need very different types of CDOs and CDO agendas.

However, the core responsibility for data, data quality, and achiev- ing greater business value from that data is common to all the manifes- tations of the CDO role.

Zions Bancorporation?s Journey Brandon Thomas, CDO of Zions Bancorporation, described the path of his organization in getting con- trol of data and processes. A cata- lyst for launching his company?s journey was the increased em-  phasis on data sources for ?stress tests? that financial institutions are now required to conduct based on the Dodd-Frank Act. The first year of developing data governance was foundational, setting standards and policies. Zions appointed a re- presentative for each of the 10 sub- ject areas on the data governance council. ?Interest and participa- tion from the executive level was high,? Thomas reported. ?Custo- mers want companies to be re- sponsive and have their informa- tion available quickly.?  In the course of developing its governance program, the team also looked at its architecture and evaluated such issues as whether it was keeping too much data in the data warehouse. Thomas em- phasized that ?new technologies were required in order to establish data governance.? Among the new tools was a dictionary for tagging  data that is much more user friendly and accessible to business users than the previous solution.

Thomas believes that this approach to data, maturity in governance, and abi l it y to ef fect cultura l change provides a competitive advantage among peers. (See a fu- ture column for the full interview with Brandon Thomas.)  Changing Trends for CDOs According to Yang Lee of North- eastern University, co-director for MIT?s Chief Data Officer Re- search Program, ?Traditionally, data practices were led by middle managers, lacking executive col- laboration. The emerging CDO  practices are executive-led, ac- countable, and sustainable.?4 His research shows that  ?	 65 percent of CDO positions have been established just with- in the past three years;  ?	 64 percent of CDOs report to a business executive?CEO, chief operating officer (COO), CRO, or chief marketing officer (CMO); and  ?	 36 percent of CDOs report to a technology executive?CIO or CTO.

Ultimately, the impact of the role will be measured by how well the CDO has transformed the organi- zation through the use of data.

CIOs have traditionally been charged with developing and man- aging the enterprise?s information infrastructure. This is likely to remain the case, but according to  Tamal Chakravorty, director of IT and Test for Ericsson Global Ser- vices, the CDO needs to ?know how to find the required informa- tion to fuel business growth.?5  The interviews I conducted  with leaders knowledgeable  about the CDO role point to several observations:  ?	The role is new. ?The role of CDO is in its early stages, much like the role of CMO was 20 years ago,? according to Rich Wendell, CEO and CDO of Tellic, a firm specializing in pharma data sci- ences as a service.

?	The role is likely to remain fluid for a number of years.

?	How the role is expressed de- pends on the company?s matu- rity level with respect to data management, as well as other factors such as size and industry sector. (Highly regulated indus- tries might lean more toward a governance model, whereas those in digital startups might focus on business value.)  ?	 It is important to align with and delineate clear responsibilities among related roles such as CIO and CTO.

?	Data is the foundation of digi- tal-born companies and essen- tial for the transformation of traditional firms. The role of CDO will be pivotal to ensure the agility needed for future growth and success.

Forrester research has found that 54 percent of top performing organizations (those with revenue growth greater than 10 percent) have appointed CDOs versus 33 percent of low performers (those with less than 4 percent revenue growth).6 Clearly, the CDO is a role that can provide significant value to the enterprise. Given to- day?s data-driven environment,  The core responsibility for data, data quality, and achieving greater business value from that data is common to all the manifestations of the CDO role.

computer.org/ITPro  69  this role is likely to be on a growth trajectory for some time.

