SPECIAL SECTION ON FUTURE NETWORKS: ARCHITECTURES, PROTOCOLS, AND APPLICATIONS

ABSTRACT With the development of the latest technologies and changes in market demand, the wireless multi-sensor system is widely used. These multi-sensors are integrated in a way that produces an overwhelm- ing amount of data, termed as big data. The multi-sensor system creates several challenges, which include getting actual information from big data with high accuracy, increasing processing efficiency, reducing power consumption, providing a reliable route toward destination using minimum bandwidth, and so on. Such shortcomings can be overcome by exploiting some novel techniques, such as clustering, data fusion, and coding schemes. Moreover, data fusion and clustering techniques are proven architectures that are used for efficient data processing; resultant data have less uncertainty, providing energy-aware routing protocols.

Because of the limited resources of the multi-sensor system, it is a challenging task to reduce the energy consumption to survive a network for a longer period. Keeping challenges above in view, this paper presents a novel technique by using a hybrid algorithm for clustering and cluster member selection in the wireless multi-sensor system. After the selection of cluster heads and member nodes, the proposed data fusion technique is used for partitioning and processing the data. The proposed scheme efficiently reduces the blind broadcast messages but also decreases the signal overhead as the result of cluster formation. Afterward, the routing technique is provided based on the layered architecture. The proposed layered architecture efficiently minimizes the routing paths toward the base station. Comprehensive analysis is performed on the proposed scheme with state-of-the-art centralized clustering and distributed clustering techniques. From the results, it is shown that the proposed scheme outperforms competitive algorithms in terms of energy consumption, packet loss, and cluster formation.

INDEX TERMS Data fusion, big data, clustering, multi-sensors, layered architecture.



I. INTRODUCTION Recent advancement in the field of wireless ad-hoc and sensor network has facilitated the development of low cost and low power sensors. Normally, the wireless sensor device is a compact and tiny device that is operated by battery, which is sometimes difficult to charge in real-time scenarios.

These sensors have deployed a region of interest, where they can sense, collect, and process information. In the deployed region, these devices are operated autonomously in remote or hostile areas where human intervention is not possible.

Hence, the reliability and survivability of a network are of an utmost important. In such region, these devices forming a group called cluster where sensed data is transmitted to the  base station (BS) my means of multi-hop communication.

Wireless ad-hoc and sensor network has resource constraints, such as a limited battery (energy), limited computational capabilities, less storage capacity, and lower communication bandwidth. Despite its limitations, it has various practical applications including battlefield (surveillance), health mon- itoring, environmental and structural monitoring [1].

Most of the research work in wireless ad-hoc and sensor network is carried out on enhancing the lifetime of battery resources, converging predominately in energy conservation constraints [1], [2]. Initially, the battery lifetime in each sensor device is limited to the initial battery charge. In var- ious applications where humans are not accessible to these  VOLUME 5, 2017 2169-3536 2017 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.

Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.

See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  devices, it is difficult to recharge or replace the batteries.

Hence, limited energy in wireless ad-hoc and sensor network is a critical constraint in surviving network for a longer period. Network lifetime is one of the important features for evaluating the performance of wireless ad-hoc and sensor network. Typically, network lifetime is resolute by residual energy of the network, thus one of the main challenges in wireless ad-hoc and sensor network is the efficient re-use of the battery (energy of the device). For the above-mentioned constraints, a clustering technique is one of the solutions to cope with energy conservation in wireless ad-hoc and sensor network.

In the clustering technique, a set of devices is grouped together in a geographical region. After grouping, a clus- ter head is selected based on some certain algorithms [1], [3]?[5], in which the selected node is called a cluster head, whereas, rest of the nodes are called member nodes. Cluster head acquires data from its member nodes and aggregates it.

Then it forwards the data to the neighboring cluster heads at the base station via direct hop or multi-hop. Routing data in clusters are divided into two broad categories, i.e., intra- cluster (within the same cluster) and inter-cluster (within clusters) [6] data transmission. Such layout of the cluster reduces a significant amount of energy in the network. Wire- less ad-hoc and sensor network is composed of hundreds or even thousands of nodes communicating with each other.

Such densely deployed nature of the network consumes more energy in exchanging data with the unstable additive load and excruciating faults.

Various algorithms for selecting nodes as a cluster head andmember nodes, the inter-communication and cluster head play a vital role in facilitating network in surviving for a longer period of time. It is known as flat architecture based network. In flat architecture based network, there is a uni- formity in all nodes, i.e., structure and composition of a node are homogeneous [7]. Thus, they lack conservation techniques that may be supported by themselves. Apparently, in cluster architecture based network, the high energy node that is appropriately localized cluster head acts as a gateway, which plays an important role in solving various issues [8].

Cluster architecture based network is considered to be energy efficient network by route discovery, data aggregation, fault tolerance, and end-to-end nature [9]. Furthermore, cluster architecture based network shows substantial advantages over flat architecture based network, which are as follows.

? It is minimizing transmission power.

? Helps in balancing the nodes energy as well as data load.

? The overhead is reduced due to incorporating a topolog- ical technique that results in survivability of a network for a longer period of time.

? It minimizes collisions by reducing extensive hop-by- hop communication.

? It reduces the size of the cluster head.

? It extends the lifetime survivability of the nodes Having said that cluster contains cluster head as well  as member nodes where cluster head communicates with  FIGURE 1. Cluster Formation and their challenges.

member nodes within a cluster as delineated in Figure 1.

In the given figure, the deployment region is divided into x and y coordinate plane. Based on some clustering algorithms, the nodes are grouped together to form a cluster. The cluster head aggregates the data, and then disseminate it toward the base station using multi-hop communication. Apart from the traditional clustering technique, sometimes, it may also hap- pen that due to limited energy of a sensor node, deployments of sensor nodes are inhospitable. Also, sometimes leakage of energy from cluster heads may cause more damage to the network. Thus, affecting the survivability of a network is in danger, which drastically minimizes the network lifetime.

Reconfiguration of clusters or cluster head selection in the network may be a useful remedy to overcome the said con- straints. In this case, the cluster head will stop collecting and disseminate data. Apart from that, re-clustering may cause additional overhead resulting in a delay in the network and limited node energy [8].

Having such knowledge of survivability issues in wireless ad-hoc and sensor network, this paper presents a novel tech- nique for enhancing network lifetime by proposing clustering based routing technique. At first, a group of sensor nodes forms a cluster referred to as setup phase. Furthermore, the formation of the cluster and selecting the boundaries of a cluster is made in steady phase. And finally, the routing phase is used to disseminate the data from the cluster head toward the base station. The proposed scheme introduced a new synergistic mating technique of communication architecture that tackles both flat and clustered network. The proposed approach encompasses direct and multi-hop routing making the network efficient in energy consumption. The multi-hop communication is based on route discovery from source to destination. Also, rotation of cluster head and re-assignment of forwarding nodes is already been premeditated in the design phase of the communication architecture for wireless ad-hoc and sensor network.

A. RESEARCH CONTRIBUTION The main contribution of this paper is as follows.

At first, we present a hierarchical framework for integrating clustering algorithm with routing technique.

5070 VOLUME 5, 2017    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  The framework first internments the scalable features of clustering technique, which helps in the extension of network commodities. Moreover, the incorporation of relay/gateway nodes in the architecture provides the direct one-hop com- munication and thus eliminating the chances of multihop communication toward wireless ad-hoc and sensor network.

Consequently, prolonging the network lifetime.

On the basis of proposed architecture, the nodes in the network are grouped together forming a cluster. We then propose optimized routing technique that solves the void problem. The proposed optimization algorithm facilitates the deployed nodes to achieve survivable network.

We conduct the extensive simulation (and performedmath- ematically) and statistical analysis by considering the simu- lated scenario of wireless ad-hoc and sensor network. From the results and discussion, we show that the proposed scheme is feasible for wireless ad-hoc and sensor network, which handles high data rates in an efficient and reliable way.

B. RESEARCH MOTIVATION Wireless sensor and ad-hoc network bridge the gap between the physical and virtual world. It is evolving to be an enabling technology due to intensification in sensing, processing, and communicating information at a very low cost. Due to identical nature of the nodes involved in the network, the major design objective is to assure a certain network lifetime (referred to as data gathering cycles) and to ensure that all the devices involved in the communication expire at the same time. One of the main advantages of these sensors is to work unattended, which is the ideal situation at inaccessible areas. Apparently, wireless sensor and the ad-hoc network are facing an increase in the equipment of handling multifaceted functions, such as network processing, information fusion, data aggregation, requiring these sensors to use significantly less energy, which helps in increasing the survivability of a network. Nodes involved in these networks are less tolerant towards energy conservation since they have limited trans- mission range, processing capabilities, and communication bandwidth [10]. Therefore, one of the useful remedy to cope with such constraints is the clustering technique, where they select cluster head among the nodes. The cluster head is used for gathering information in their vicinity, and disseminate it toward the sink. Moreover, rotation of cluster also enhances the node?s lifetime.

In this paper, while aiming for a sustainable, reliable com- munication that leads to the survivability of a network, we focus on selecting cluster head and routing technique. Specif- ically, we propose a system architecture that exploits selec- tion of cluster head in a wireless ad-hoc and sensor network, which is a novel paradigm for enhancing the network lifetime.

The selection of cluster head is based on two different clus- tering layers, i.e., first clustering layer and second clustering layer. Moreover, different parameters are also considered that helps in selecting the cluster head, i.e., residual energy, the distance among various nodes, and the position of the node.

After selecting cluster head, there is a need to route the data  toward sink node. To achieve this, direct hop and multi- hop communication scenarios are considered that efficiently disseminate the data toward sink or base station.

To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first that exploits the realization of the survivability of wireless ad-hoc and sensor network by considering clustering and routing together. We hope and believe that this work will be useful for the healthcare systems and will provide state- of-the-art guidance for research vis-?-vis wireless ad-hoc and sensor network. Eventually, future directions and open challenges are discussed regarding clustering and routing techniques.

C. ORGANIZATION The rest of the paper is organized as follow. Section 2 briefly describes the latest background and related work. Section 3 describes the network architecture. Moreover, Communica- tion Model, Traffic Model, Energy Model, the proposed scheme based on data fusion model is also presented in this section. Section 4 comprises extensive simulations, mathe- matical, and statistical analysis of the proposed scheme. And Finally, Section 5 offers a conclusion.



II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK There are various routing protocols for wireless sensor net- work. Among them, LEACH has been proposed that acts as a pioneer in the said field [11]. In the literature, various works are proposed that are close to LEACH [12]?[16]. With extensions to LEACH, same methods of distributed cluster- ing techniques are used in the previously proposed scheme.

There are various algorithms that deal with the techniques above [12], [15], [16].

An upgraded architecture of LEACH is proposed to reduce the energy consumption in wireless sensor networks based on clustering technique [17] where CH is responsible for transmitting data to the clusters. They replaced the direct hop with multiple hops to save the amount of energy as compared to LEACH. However, in this scheme, cluster head (CH) may die or crash because of the heavy load of data on CH. To avoid such circumstances, a method is used in which main CH hand over the responsibility to a vice-CH. The vice-CH care for whole architecture and do protection from any disordered condition of the network.

The hierarchical clustering algorithm technique is pro- posed in which the network lifetime can be increased by using cited algorithm [18]. One of the famous hierarchical clustered routing algorithms is Energy Efficient Level BasedClustering Routing Protocol (EELBCRP) proposed to maximize the network life by reducing the energy depletion in which the number of dead nodes is minimized [15]. In this network, the n numbers of sensor nodes are deployed randomly to make a cluster network. Its author has assumed that there is a fixed base station situated in the center of deployed sensor network with fixed identical and limited sensor nodes for energy carrying. Data is sent to the base station through middle nodes by adjusting the dynamic power. Once the node  VOLUME 5, 2017 5071    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  deployment is done, the base station transmits a level-1 data with lowest energy power. All the receiving sensor nodes put their level as 1. In the next step, the base station transmits a level-2 signal data with intensified power level. Likewise, apart from the level-1, all the recipient nodes keep their level as level-2. For all nodes coverage, the base station sends a continuous signal to another opposite side of the base station to express the level up to edges, nodes and give them the same level. Then, for calculating the distance from the base station on the received signal strength, base station broadcast a hello message with the higher and lower limit information, i.e., upper limit (Ui) of level i and lower limit (Li of level i) of each level.

An improved version of LEACH protocol is proposed known as Energy Efficient Extended LEACH (EEE LEACH) protocol [19]. They introduced Master Cluster Heads along with Cluster Heads and decreased the distance between nodes by creatingmultilevel clustering technique in enhanced LEACH protocol. As a result, if the number of clusters is higher, it minimizes the communication distance and increases the energy efficiency of the protocol. The per- formance of EEE-LEACH is better than simple LEACH protocol.

A Centralized Cluster Designing (CCD) version of LEACH is proposed in which base station decides the selec- tion of cluster head and optimal cluster k [20]. Nearly all pro- tocol related to CCD use the same policy. Central point, i.e., the base station decides the cluster head using high energy [21]. As in BCDCP [36], it reduced the load distributed for computation and obtain the parameter values over low energy nodes for computation. Few algorithms from the literature are discussed in the following paragraphs. These algorithms are based on centralized cluster designing approach.

C-LEACH (Centralized ? low energy adaptive clustering hierarchy) presents centralized decision-making scheme for selection of cluster head [20]. C-LEACH disseminates the cluster heads all through the network. The performance of C-LEACH is very good regarding energy consumption and load balancing. All the sensor nodes are responsible for send- ing the current location and residual energy to the sink node.

The current location can be found by the global positioning system (GPS). Energy load should be equally distributed to all the nodes in the network for making better cluster size.

Moreover, sink node computes the average energy of the node. The nodes having low energy level than average level cannot elect cluster head in the cluster election process. For discovering the k cluster to resolve is NP-hard, base station use simulated annealing algorithm to find clusters [22].

For homogenous large scale wireless sensor network, two algorithms are proposed in [23]. One is for dynamic cluster designing, i.e., energy-efficient and dynamic clustering (EEDC). Another algorithm is for multi-hop rout- ing algorithms that are related to clustered architecture i.e.

energy-efficient and power-aware (EEPA) algorithm. In the network, each node checks the received signal power from nearing nodes. By detecting the received signal power, all  the nodes evaluate alive nodes in real time. Afterward, the optimum probability is calculated to make a cluster head.

Thus, energy consumption can be decreased that is used in intra-cluster and inter-cluster dissemination. Hence, in this manner, the highest node energy is chosen as cluster head, in which the minimum battery power is denoted by Bmin.

Bmin is considered sufficient to assume a node as an active node. Moreover, designed clusters have uneven cluster size while the CMS associated TPO the cluster depend on CH and computed by received signal strength indicator (RSSI).

A technique is given that uses the same approach of cluster formation and updating their proposed scheme, i.e., threshold-based load balancing protocol for energy efficient routing (TLPER) protocol [24]. Information of the number of the nodes in the network and geographic location is sent to the base station (BS) by deployed network nodes. BS selects a CH on the basis of highest node density. BS informs all the network nodes about the decision that CHs have been selected. CHs broadcast their status with RSSImessage. After receiving the RSSI message of cluster head, all nodes make a decision to be a member of the network as a non-cluster head node. Assistant cluster head (ACH) is selected among all the cluster member nodes with maximum energy level.

ACH divide the burden of CH by using load balance thresh- old (LBT) approach and helps the CH rotation for energy efficiency by using the role transfer threshold (RTT) scheme.



III. NETWORK ARCHITECTURE With a view to balance battery power of a node for surviving for a longer period of time is achieved by efficient data traffic management. In most of the research work, modeling of data traffic is used to achieve energy efficient network. Hav- ing such knowledge of data traffic modeling, the proposed scheme is powered by efficient clustering and routing tech- nique. In the proposed network architecture, four different methods are used to enhance the survivability of a network through node deployment, cluster formation, member node selection criteria, and routing technique. Energy hole problem is tackle by clustering and rotation of clustering technique.

Whereas, the void problem is tackled by the routing algo- rithm. The basic idea of the tasks above is to reduce the com- plexity of both clustering and routing algorithm, which helps in enhancing the survivability of the network. The following sub-sections delineates the proposed network architecture.

Assumptions: ? For the sake of simplicity, we have assumed that sensors have same battery information, memory capacity. How- ever, the cluster head is assumed to have more battery power as well as memory space.

? We also assumed that for routing the data, Ad-hoc on Demand Distance Vector Routing protocol is used, which efficiently delivered the data to the destination.

? Sensors nodes are considered to be heterogeneous since they have the capabilities of sensing heterogeneous data, such as temperature, body temperatures, and user?s activities.

5072 VOLUME 5, 2017    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  ? Finally, the nodes know each other location information, and all nodes having fixed radio transmission.

A. ROLE OF SENSOR NODE AND CLUSTER HEAD In our proposed network architecture, the role of the sensor nodes is to sense the outer stimuli, process the data, whereas, cluster heads are used for computations as well as communi- cation. In a given scenario, sensor nodes are responsible for sensing data, forward it to cluster head, and after performing processing, cluster head forward it to the base station using routing technique. Moreover, flooding process is handled by cluster heads; cluster head floods the control signals (cluster head joining request, route request), and also find the energy efficient path toward the base station. Hence, sensor nodes are free from computation and finding the optimal path toward the base station. Such technique helps the network to operate for a longer period of time, and also provide survivability factor to the network. Also, the energy level of each cluster head is kept high since they have to perform many activities as compared to other sensors. The role of each sensor is mentioned in Table 1.

TABLE 1. Role of Deployed Nodes  B. HIERARCHICAL NODE PLACEMENT SCENARIO While considering the energy hole problem in a network, there is a need to deploy the nodes in a way so that nodes near to the base station do not expire quickly. To avoid energy hole problem,we deployed nodes in a hierarchical way, where each sensor node send their data to the cluster head. The clus- ter head forwards that data toward their neighboring cluster head (which is near to base station). The cluster head near to base station may die quickly since they are busy through their communication cycle.

To solve this problem, the rotation of cluster head is per- formed after a specific interval. For instance, if the energy of the cluster head is reduced from the specific threshold, the job of the cluster is assigned to neighboring node (a node which is closer to cluster head). Then, the newly become node will start performing the job of the cluster head, as shown in Figure 2. For implementation, we assumed that the next contestant node should be nearer to the cluster head.

C. SYSTEM MODEL Based on the above system scenario, the network consisting of n number of sensor nodes as well as a cluster head (CH).

Let us consider R = (CH1,CH2,CH3 . . . CHn) are set of  FIGURE 2. Random selection of Cluster head and dead cluster heads.

cluster head nodes, S = (SN 1, SN 2, SN 3, . . .SN n) is the set of source nodes, whereas D = (DN 1,DN 2,DN 3,DN n) is the set of destination nodes. We have assumed that to avoid orthogonal signals OFDMA are available in the network to avoid interference [25].

D. COMMUNICATION MODEL To evaluate systemmodel, the power transmission calculation has been made using source and relay node, denoted by W si andWDj , whereW represents power, s represents source node and d represents destination node. If a node i transmit data to node j with the power of W, then we can have the signal to noise ratio (SNR) ?ij at the target node [27] as:  ?ij = Wi  No?i,j?? (1)  In Eq. (1), No is the white noise, ?i, j?? is the Euclidean distance between nodes i nodes j, whereas, ? is considered as path loss [26].

Also, in the given scenario the source or destination nodes either transmit or receive data with the help of CH. Therefore, to calculate the data rate between the source and destination, we have used the following equation [27].

CD(si, di) = BLog2(1+ ?si,di ) (2)  In the Eq. (2), B represents the available bandwidth. To trans- mit data from source to destination, the source and destina- tion pair can either use amplify-and-forward or decode-and- forward communication mode. For our proposed scenario we have adopted the technique of decode-and-forward [27].

As a result of that, the source node broadcasts data for the destination node. The neighboring nodes, as well as CH, also receives the same copy of data. Afterward, the CH decode the data first and then transmits the data toward the destination.

E. TRAFFIC MODEL For our proposed system architecture, we assumed that data generated by ith source node follows the Poison Distribution System having mean rate of ?i. Similarly, the traffic load is based on general distribution with the mean traffic load of Ti.

Therefore, the total amount of traffic load being generated  VOLUME 5, 2017 5073    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  between source and destination via p-AGW is [27]:  0i,j = ?i,T i, ?i,j  CDF (SN i,DN i,CHi) (3)  where ?i,j represents the indicator function. CDF represents decode-and-forward. In case, if ?i,j = 1, then the ith source and destination pair will transmit via jth number of CH.

Hence, the traffic load (Ti) in the jth number of CH will be calculated as:  ?j = ?  i?s 0i,j (4)  where ?j represents the time when CH is busy. Moreover, CH acts as a relay node between source and destination node based on the round robin mode [27]. Afterward, the CH comprehends the M/G/1 processing sharing queue [17]. For instance, if we increase the number of CH and assign it to multiple source and destination nodes, then the overall effect on the transmission will be drastically increased, which can be calculated as:  Ceff (SN i,DN i,GW i) = CDF (SN i,DN i,CHi)(1? ?j) (5)  F. ENERGY MODEL In a given scenario, an assumption has been made that each node receives and transmit the data packet with equal battery power. Therefore, the energy used by each node autonomously depends on the Euclidean distance between nodes i nodes j. As a result, energy consumed by each node is calculated as:  E = Rb + Tb (6)  In the above equation, E represents the amount of energy consumed by a node, Rb represents receiving bits and Tb represents transmitted bits. These two parameters are used to calculate the total amount of data being received by a node. Also, they are used during simulation results in order to calculate energy consumption as well as delay in a network.

In order to calculate total amount of data being collected by medical sensors in one cycle c, we have,  DcT = D c R + SD (7)  where SD represents the total amount of data being collected by a node in one cycle. Cycle represents one complete round of data transmission by each node in a cluster, started from node I to node n. Moreover, nodes forward their data in multi-hop manner via CH. Therefore, Eq. (8) describes the relationship between all the nodes and the overall summation of hops in a network:?k  n=1 DcR =  ?k n HCH ? Z (8)  where Hp?AGW represents source to destination, Hp?AGW = 0 if a sender is itself a CH. And Z represents any node in a cluster. This equation is used to calculate overall number of hops from source to destination. It is used to find out the total transmission delay in a network, such that if the number of nodes increases, the effect will be on total  transmission delay as well as energy consumption. However, in the proposed scheme, the feature of scalability helps the network to maintain the transmission delay as well as energy consumption per node.

Finally, total energy consumption can be calculated as the overall sum of hops from all the CH.

W = ?k  n=1 Wn =  ?k n=1  E(DcR + SD) (9)  where Wn represents the energy consumption of node i per cycle. By calculating total energy consumption of a network, the network is divided into various clusters, where each clus- ter has cluster head that is used to aggregate the data. All the nodes send their respective data to the cluster head via hop- by-hop manner, thus minimizing the total amount of energy being used by each sensor.



IV. PROPOSED SCHEME The majority of the clustering algorithm are based on three phases, i.e., setup phase, steady phase, and routing phase.

Setup phase is related to the design of cluster where the communication process starts with cluster formation. Usu- ally, this phase is referred to offline or passive phase since all the control packets are broadcasted in this phase, and no data is transmitted. Moreover, steady and routing phase comes in an operational or active phase where data is in the network for aggregation as well as routing. The proposed solution is explained in the above context in the subsequent sections.

A. SELF-ORGANIZING The nodes are deployed either randomly or uniformly, switch- ing on their transceivers, they start broadcasting control packet to show their existence. The neighboring nodes receive their broadcast message and set up their neighboring table.

Setup of neighboring table helps the node to calculate link quality and other necessary calculations that help them in making future decisions. Initially, the energy level of all the sensor nodes is equal. The self-organizing capability is widely exploited by exchanging node?s information, such as location, energy level, etc. The proposed scheme set up neighboring table at each deployed node by just placing adjacent count in it rather than all the info of neighboring nodes. Such mechanism saves energy. Figure 3 shows a typical example self-organizing mechanism for our proposed scheme.

B. FLAT LAYER DESIGN One of the main issues that usually occurs in multi-hop rout- ing communication is frequent depletion of node?s energy, which is the neighbor of the base station. Likewise, in the clustered network where nodes are close to the base sta- tion are receiving data from different sources. Such nodes are busy in communication throughout the communication period. Moreover, a significant amount of energy is also used during the time of clustering. In most of the techniques, such  5074 VOLUME 5, 2017    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  FIGURE 3. Self-organizing cluster scenario.

as LEACH, V-LEACH, and TL-LEACH follows the similar fashion of communication. Hence, these techniques are facing a significant amount of energy depletion, which is sometimes not suitable for the network. Moreover, frequent cluster formation also facing the same problem to the net- work. To cope with these constraints, the proposed scheme gives suitable solutions regarding clustering and routing.

In the proposed scheme (shown in Algorithm 1), the nodes that are close to base station performed direct communi- cation (one-hop communication) and remained unclustered, whereas, the nodes that are one-hop away from the base station perform multi-hop communication, and remain the cluster part. This technique is termed as a flat layer as shown in Figure 4.

Algorithm 1 Function of Flat Layer BS BC Msg(setupinit ) R(BTx ) = 100m Set Node(Rx ) = NodeL1 NodeL1 BC Ctrni Set TRX of NodeL1 = Sleepmode for specific time limit If Node(Rx ) /? NodeL1 Pckt = Received Set Node(Rx ) = NodeL2  End if  FIGURE 4. First flat layer of proposed scheme.

The nodes that are deployed in flat layer are termed as First Layer Nodes (NodeL1). Moreover, the subsequent layers are  mode on the basis of the node?s transmission range (previ- ous layer). The transmission range of MICAz node in outer environment is 75-100m, whereas an indoor environment is 20-30m [29]. The network clustering is started from 2nd layer till the network boundary, in which the cluster heads are selected by decision making nodes of the 1st layer (discussed in later section). This technique not only helps the energy consumption but also reduces the load on the neighboring nodes (in term of load balancing). Both the factors, i.e., saving energy aswell as load balancing on nodes results in increasing the network lifetime.

C. DESIGN OF CLUSTERING LAYER When it comes to centralized clustering technique, all the nodes in the network required to broadcast the decisionmetric information to the base station. Such technique consumes a lot of energy. Moreover, this technique is also inappropriate for large scale network where direct hop communication is harmful to data transmission (e.g., distance between nodes is high). Therefore, to avoid such problem, the only solution that cope-up with such constraints is to transmit decision metric information toward base station using multi-hop communi- cation. In such scenario, the overall energy consumption is directly proportional to the size of the network.

We have used below notations in our explanation.

Apparently, distributed clustering technique involves inter-  node communication to elect/select the cluster head and its members. In this method, the inter-node communicationmes- saging is equal to the multiple of n nodes. Therefore, the size of the cluster is sometimes not fixed. Hence, it is difficult to manage. Having such drawbacks, the proposed scheme using multi-layered probabilistic clustering algorithm efficaciously solved the problems offered by centralized and distributed clustering technique. In the proposed technique, the neighbor- ing node that prefers one node over another in order to select various positions (such as, decision making and cluster head) at several steps, where decision-making node (those nodes that are used for selecting cluster head from the consequent layers), and packet ID and postfix counter (such as, packet ID is used for grouping the nodes, which prefer one node over another for selecting cluster head) are the major factors in the design of cluster. Furthermore, the 2nd layer nodes (NodeL2 ) elect those nodes which is surrounded bymaximum number of nodes (i.e., where density of the nodes is high) as a decision making node (i.e., Node(dm)), i.e., Cntni > Cntnk ?i and k = 1, 2, 3, . . . k, where k belongs to similar group.

Such technique helps in minimizing the energy consumption during the design of clusters, which results in increasing network lifetime, as shown in Figure 5.

The nodes involve in 2nd layer (NodeL2 ), interchange the information of their density to Node(dm), so that they may take part in the computation of becoming cluster head. These nodes turn-on their transceiver by using time division multi- ple access (TDMA) technique. The first node in NodeL2 want to interchange their node density information to Node(dm), it is assigned by sequence number (Pkt (Seq_no)) along with the  VOLUME 5, 2017 5075    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  FIGURE 5. Selection of Cluster Head at 2nd Layer between Neighboring Nodes of the nodes selected at the 1st Layer.

postfix counter ?0?. Afterward, the nodes involve in this com- munication save this packet sequence number and become part of the group. Note that the nodes with the highest density information will interchange these information. This mecha- nism has two advantages, i.e., i) to inform other group mem- bers about their density information, and ii) also, to inform rest of the nodes they shall not continue their postfix counter and also they should not save, any such information. Such postfix counter helps the packet sequence no (Pkt (Seqno)) to separate it from another group. The node (after last member) of the group directly communicate to Node(dm) in order to assign Pkt (Seqno) along with the postfix counter ?0?. Thus, by selecting the node density information of 2nd layer, the node (decision making node) is now capable of electing their new cluster head (having highest density in 2nd layer nodes).

D. SELECTION OF CLUSTER MEMBERS To select the member nodes in each cluster, this sections describes a mechanism of how the members will join their respective clusters. Initially, the cluster head broadcast a mes- sage of Join Request. This message indicates the availability of the cluster head for their nodes. Upon receiving Join Request message by the node, the node in return broadcast Join Accepts message. Afterward, they become the member of that cluster. For instance, if more than one Join Request is received by the nodes, then the decision is made on the basis of load on the cluster head, i.e., the cluster having fewer members is favored to be attached to it. Such mechanism helps in allocating an equal number of member nodes to each cluster, which helps in balancing the node?s load  ? How many nodes can be attached to the cluster head?

In a given scenario, we noticed that some of the cluster heads are available on a short distance to the nodes, and they are providing good signal strength. However, when the node tries to connect to that cluster head, it does not allow the node to connect. Therefore, we found that the other nodes already occupy the channels of such cluster head. In such situations,  TABLE 2. Notations Used in Algorithms  if the node selects such a cluster head, it gets disconnected from the current network. Therefore, we perform an extensive mathematical analysis for the blocking probability of a cluster head so that it can efficiently share resources and provide feasible end-to-end connectivity.

The cluster head can provide services to a limited num- ber of nodes. As the number of nodes increases on cluster head, the Quality of Services decreases. Therefore, we need traffic management that can efficiently balance the number of connections on a particular cluster head. If the number of connections on cluster head exceeds a particular threshold, the cluster head should not accept any more connections.

On the other hand, if a mobile node requests a connection to an overloaded cluster head, it will not be guided by the infor- mation of the overloaded cluster head. Let ? be the number of connections on cluster head is computed as follows.

? = ? + ?N  i=1 ?i (10)  where ? represents the number of connections already pre- sented on a cluster head, and the ? is a new connection arriving on cluster head. Therefore, we define a two-state Markov Chain model for the cluster head. In the first state, the cluster head accepts new connections since it has vacant channels readily available for new connections (open state).

Whereas, in the second state, the cluster head does not accept new connections since it has no available channels for  5076 VOLUME 5, 2017    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  incoming new connections (close state). The probability of an open and close state depends on the joining and leaving of new nodes, respectively.

A threshold is defined for every cluster head in the network to control the number of incoming connections on cluster head. Let ? be the threshold for the number of connections on cluster head. Similarly, for each new connection, the cluster head compares the number of connections to threshold ?. If the value of ? drops below a predefined threshold then, the cluster head stops accepting new connections. If a cluster head reaches a close state, then it blocks any new incoming connections. The probability of blocking a new connection is represented by using Eq. (11) [30].

PBlock = ?C  i=0 (1? ?i+1)? Pi (11)  wherePi is the probability of a channel in either busy or active and ? is the state of a cluster head either in the open or closed state. We restrict the boundaries of ? to either 1 (open state) or 0 (close state) to efficiently distribute the incoming nodes on the available channels of a cluster head.

FIGURE 6. Theoretical and Experimental Blocking Probability.

FIGURE 7. Mean number of Connections.

As illustrated in Figure 6, theoretical and experimental results are almost similar, which display an increase in the number of new connections which results in an increase in the blocking probability. Similarly, in Figure 7, the theoretical and experimental analyses show almost similar results with an increase in the mean number of connections that affects the total number of connections.

E. DATA FUSION MODEL FOR MULTI-SENSOR SYSTEM PROPOSED SCHEME After cluster formation, now we have to process the Big Data being received by cluster head. The proposed architecture is based on data fusion, which was initially developed by U.S.

Joint Directors of Laboratories (JDL) and U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) [32]. Based on the architecture require- ment, we have modified and altered the existing data fusion technique according to our scheme. The data fusion technique consists of five levels. The detailed description of each level is given below.

? Level 0: Initially, the data is received by cluster head, which is then aligned and divided into sub-blocks. Each sub-block is processed separately at each cluster head.

? Level 1: At this level, the data is further refined at each cluster head. Furthermore, various types of data are converted into the consistent structure, such as images, data into target source.

? Level 2: At this level, contextual description is provided for each sub-block. Such type of technique is based on environmental data, which helps in identification of a situation.

? Level 3: At this stage, each cluster head is respon- sible for identifying future threats and susceptibilities for operations. This technique is hard to achieve since it is based on the computational complexities and the designed algorithm.

? Level 4: At the final level of data fusion, the designed fusion algorithm is continuously monitoring the pro- cessing performance at each cluster head and assigning diverse sources bestowing to the specific goals.

The block diagram of data fusion in the multi-sensor system is illustrated in Figure 8.

FIGURE 8. Block diagram of data fusion modeling.

On the basis of aforementioned fusion level, we are now defining life cycle for data fusion model in the multi-sensor system as shown in Figure 9. The process life cycle consists of four attributes that are interdependent on each. These are described as below.

? Initially, the raw data is collected from various sensors.

After collection, next step is to organize the data in a meaningful form.

VOLUME 5, 2017 5077    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  FIGURE 9. Process lifecycle for fusion algorithm.

TABLE 3. Simulation parameters.

? Afterward, the unwanted data is discarded. This technique helps each cluster head to process the data efficiently.

? The data blocks are now ready for processing, which are fused and analyzed.

? Finally, the processed data is ready to be transmitted over the network.



V. SIMULATIONS RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In this section, we develop a simulation using C-Sharp using Table 3. After testing few example algorithms, we have suc- cessfully implemented our proposed algorithm. Therefore, this section comprises excessive simulation, results, and dis- cussion regarding proposed scheme, a centralized cluster- ing algorithm, TLPER and distributed clustering algorithm, EELBCRP as well as V-LECH. In order to test of proposed scheme, we have considered energy consumption per node, average energy consumption per node in a cluster, energy consumption in cluster design other than broadcast. Initially, there are total 100 nodes deployed in our simulation scenario with the area of 100m ? 100m. For better analysis, we have considered medium scale network keeping in view the layered architecture.

To prolong network lifetime, balancing and optimization of node interaction during the cluster formation plays an  important role. Sometimes, it also happens that too much interaction of a node may die to quack due to energy deple- tion. As shown in Figure 10, the proposed scheme due to layered nature utilizes less energy per node as compared with other.

FIGURE 10. Energy Consumption per node.

FIGURE 11. Total energy consumption during formation of cluster.

Moreover, Figure 11 gives an enhanced confirmation of our proposed scheme as compared with the rest of the competing algorithms. In this figure, the hybrid solution for proposed scheme gives us a better solution as compared with the centralized and distributed algorithms of cluster design. It is due to the hierarchical distribution of nodes and selection of cluster head on the basis of direct hop and multi-hop man- ner. Moreover, the routing techniques used in the proposed scheme also use less energy to disseminate the data toward the base station. Hence, by efficient data communication, a node can preserve energy for a longer period of time.

The nature of the centralized clustering technique, it can be exploited in a medium scale network. In such environment, the involvement of intermediate node cannot take part due to the minimum distance between the nodes.

To make the communication successful, they are using flooding technique in order to deliver the data. If we are considering large-scale network, the situation is even becom- ing more severe since the distance is increased. During our simulation, we have seen that the proposed algorithm perform well as compared to rets of the three competing algorithm  5078 VOLUME 5, 2017    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  since the area is divided into two different layers. By dividing, they are minimizing the distance by grouping the nodes.

Hence, they can easily deliver the data via short, which results in dropping less number of packets as shown in Figure 12.

FIGURE 12. A number of packets broadcasted during formation of cluster.

FIGURE 13. Number of cluster formation.

To conclude our simulation, we have further extended our simulation scenario toward the formation of cluster heads.

If we consider a large scale and medium scale network, some the cluster will be increasing in large scale network since the node density is very high. Apparently, due to less number of nodes (i.e., 100 nodes) in medium scale network, there will be a minimum number of clusters formation occurs as shown in Figure 13. In this figure, the proposed scheme has domi- nant over the rest of competing algorithms since the cluster formation is based on the density of the nodes. Also, in the competing algorithms, the formation of the cluster is not on the basis of node density. Thus, it results in congestion on the network, which ultimately results in decreasing the lifetime of the network. The results can be in Figure 14 if we have medium scale network (comprises of 100 nodes), the energy consumption of the proposed scheme during formation of the cluster is very less as compared to the rest of competing algorithms.

A. HADOOP-BASED IMPLEMENTATION OF DATA FUSION MODEL The main purpose of the proposed scheme is to enhance the efficiency of the proposed scheme using data fusion  FIGURE 14. Total energy consumption during formation of cluster.

model based on Hadoop system. To validate the system, we consider some example scenarios. These example scenarios help us in implementing our proposed architecture. For this purpose, this section provides the details about the analyzing datasets of various sizes, the tools we use for the analysis, and the implementation of the proposed algorithm onHadoop system.

B. DATASETS, TOOLS, AND IMPLEMENTATION ENVIRONMENT In this, describe the detailed description about the data sets we used for our analysis. Please note that the datasets that are used for analysis are only to check the system performance of the proposed system based on Hadoop. Datasets are related to the healthcare system, which comprises Glucose level of the patients, ECG, temperature, and various other activities [31].

We developed and test the proposed fusion algorithm to enhance the processing efficiency using Big Data on corei5 3.20GHz ? 4, UBUNTU 14.04 local machine with Hadoop single node setup having 4GB RAM and Gallium 0.4 on AMD OLAND graphics.

Analyze function is used to break down the data into smaller chunks so that interested feature shall be detected in an efficient way. Initially, data is arranged in a fixed size cell, called block, and in each block, there are various statistical parameters are associated with it. Hence, if the data block does not meet the threshold value, then it means that the block does not contain any of the interested features. Moreover, if the interested parameter is found in the data block, then the anomalies, as well as false-positive, are minimized by exploiting mean difference comparison. The difference is calculated between mean values of the interested region and the whole block by (|X_RDC ? X?_B|). Moreover, the pixel value for each interested region is denorted by ((NP_RDC).

These parameters are mapped with the different threshold in order to minimize false-positive in the data sets, as shown in Figure 15.

The combination of results is made at each cluster head.

Since the data is divided for each parallel processing, per- forming the algorithm mentioned above at each level. Now, we need to combine the results, which are being generated  VOLUME 5, 2017 5079    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  FIGURE 15. Divide function flows chart.

by each processor. For this reason, recursive operations are made on each consecutive data blocks. For instance, if one set remains empty than another set of the data block can be returned. Apparently, the proposed algorithm checks the Euclidean Distance (ED) between the interested rejoins of different data sets. Such difference is made to know about the continuous features. To examine the continuous features, our proposed system based Hadoop performed significant cal- culations, and hence enhancing the system efficiency. After calculating ED, both interested rejoins at each data block are merged.

C. PROPOSED DATA FUSION ALGORITHM The proposed algorithm for the proposed data fusion based on Hadoop server uses recursive mechanisms to achieve division of the data, analysis of the data, and combine the data. In the algorithm, the first statement is the division function (i.e., if-statement). This statement checks the incoming data chunks in the processing server. In the given algorithm, if the size of the data blocks is less than the defined threshold than the division process will stop and analysis function will start.

Apparently, each data block is equally divided (horizontal and vertical) depending on the width and height of the data block.Moreover, the division function is called again to check the block size. This will happen when we have large data sets, and we need to analyze the data more efficiently. After division into the certain threshold, the division process stops.

If the algorithm detects the region of interest, then it compares and analyzes the pixel value information and the entire data block with the mean values. Moreover, an REPTree method is exploited to divide the data in a fixed size up to certain extent. And finally, the combine function is used to collect and combine the results generated by each parallel server.

The proposed algorithms for data fusion is described in Algorithm 2. Notations for various parameters are explained in Table 4.

TABLE 4. Parameters and their description.

1) RESULTS AND DISCUSSION To test and validate our proposed algorithm, the datasets men- tioned above are implemented using Java iterations and the Hadoop with proposed algorithm. The data sets are obtained from [33]?[37]. The proposed algorithm using enhanced MapReduce in the light of the proposed algorithm is more efficient that the simple Java iteration implementation as shown in Figure 16. In this figure, the graph shows aver- age processing time to process 1MB of data using proposed algorithm as well as Java iterations. From the figure, it is clearly seen that the proposed algorithm require approximate half of the second to process 1 MB of data. Apparently, Java  5080 VOLUME 5, 2017    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  Algorithm 2 Data Fusion Algorithm to Analyze Big Data Divide (image_matrix M) { Step 1: If (size (M) <= ?B_size) { Set_ CP = Analyze (M); Return Set_ CP; } //end of if  Step 2: If (Width_M<Height_M) { // divide m into two parts vertically B1=M [0- Width_M /2] [Height_M]; //first half of M B2=M [Width_M /2- Width_M] [Height_M];//2nd half of M} Step 3: Else { B1=M [width_M] [0-Height_M/2]; //Upper half of M B2=M [width_M] [Height_M/2- Height_M]; // Lower  half of M} // end of if else Step 4: Set_ CP 1=Divide (B1); Step 5: Set_ CP 2=Divide (B2); Step 6: Conquer (Set_ CP1, Set_ CP2); //combining blocks and results of blocks. }//end of Divide Analyze (Image_Matrix_Block B) { Step 1: CalculateX?_B, S.D_B; Step 2: If (S.D_B < ?Min_RB_SD) {// Block does not have any river.

Set_ CPDataClass_Set= 8 Return Set_ CPDataClass_Set;} // end of if  Step 3: Set_ CPDataClass_Set= CP_in_BlocK (B, X?_B); Step 4: For each (CPDataClass RDC: Set_ CPDataClass_Set) { If ((|X_RDC ? X?_B| < ?Mean_diff )|| (NP_RDC <  ?NP_RDC) Remove RDC from Set_ CPDataClass_Set;} Step 5:ReturnSet_ CPDataClass_Set; // Return set of CP detected.} CP_in_Block (Matrix block B, Double X?_B) { Step 1: Define Set_R= 8; Step 2: Divide B into sub_blocks S_B of size 10 x 10; Step 3: For each (S_B) Do { Calculate X?_SB, SD_SB, |X?_B-X?_SB|; If (REPTree (X?_SB, SD_SB, |X?_B-X?_SB|)== river) { Set_R= Set_R U S_B;}}  Step 4: ? SBi, SBj ? Set_R where (i 6=j), if (ED (SBi, SBj) <=2) the merger SBi, SBj Step 5: return Set_R} Combine (Set Set_ CP1, Set set_Rivers2) { Step 1: If (Set_ CP1== 8) then return Set_ CP2; Step 2: If (Set_ CP2== 8) then return Set_ CP1; //if either set is empty then no need to combine.

Step 3: For each (CP R1: Set_ CP 1)  For each (CP R2: Set_ CP 2) { If(ED (R1, R2) < ?Ed_CP) then R1 + R2;  //Combine R1 and R2, remove individual entries of R1 and R2 }//end of for each loop Step 4: Return (Set_ CP1 U Set_ CP2); Combine CP Set1 and Set_ CP 2 }  iterations require more time to process the same amount of data. Also, ASA-APS requires more time for both cases since the size of the data is too much. Moreover, products of the ASA-WSM are processed quite efficiently since the size of  FIGURE 16. Processing time is taken by our algorithm for various products.

the data is very less. It is concluded from the figure that size of the data plays an important role in any system. Likewise, if the size increases, the performance of Java iteration drastically reduces, whereas, the performance of the proposed system is giving us better results.

FIGURE 17. Processing time is taken by the proposed a system using simple Java and Hadoop.

Moreover, the proposed algorithm is compared with the size of the data. As shown in Figure 17, if the size of the data is kept smaller for processing (for both Java and proposed algorithm), in this case, Java implementation generate quite good results than proposed scheme. On the other hand, if the size of the data increases, the parallel processing nature of the proposed scheme efficiently process and analyze data with the data fusion algorithm. Since the parallel processors are waiting for the data. When each server receives data, then the overall performance of the proposed scheme significantly increases. Apparently, the Java iteration performs very poorly when the data size is increased.

Moreover, we also evaluate the throughput of the proposed system by increasing the size of the data sets. As shown in Figure 18, the throughput is directly proportional to the size of the data sets. When there is an increase in the size of the data sets, the throughput also increases, hence increase the system sufficiency.

To test and validate with various other datasets, we mea- sured the processing time as good throughput on healthcare datasets as shown in Figure 19 and 20. In the figure, the proposed scheme with proposed takes few seconds to process  VOLUME 5, 2017 5081    S. Din et al.: Cluster-Based Data Fusion Technique to Analyze Big Data  FIGURE 18. The throughput of the proposed system.

FIGURE 19. Processing time of healthcare datasets.

FIGURE 20. Throughput of our proposed scheme.

GBs of data. To be more specific, it takes seventy seconds to process 2GB data on a single node of the parallel processor.

Moreover, if we increase the size of the datasets that due to the nature of the proposed parallel and distributed system of the parallel processors, the throughput is maximized. Therefore, it is concluded from these results that the proposed system give us very efficient results than ordinary simple processing tools.



VI. CONCLUSION Usually, the nodes involve in the network requires high energy power throughout the communication period. And due to the inherent properties of the network, it is really difficult to survive the network in such environment. Therefore, keeping in view the above limitations, we proposed a novel architec- ture for wireless ad-hoc and sensor network. The proposed architecture is based on the layered deployment of clustering technique, which is followed by the routing scheme. Initially, nodes recognize themselves to be close enough to establish  direct hop communication, which is referred to layer-1. Sec- ondly, nodes that establish multi-hop communication toward the station and are having a high density of nodes are referred to as second layer cluster. Moreover, after formation of the cluster, there is a novel algorithm to assign a member to each node, which is based on the distance as well as RSSI of the node. After selection of cluster head and assigning nodes to it, data fusion technique is employed that partitioned and process the data efficiently. Also, we have also calculated blocking probability for the cluster, which calculates the number of nodes to be attached to each cluster head. And Finally, simulation results show that the proposed scheme conserve energy in all the circumstances as compared with three competing algorithms.

