

Section title   Leadership Computing  Cancer?s Big Data Problem  Justin H.S. Breaux | Argonne National Laboratory  D ata is pouring into the hands of cancer researchers, thanks to improvements in imaging, models, and understanding of genetics. Today, the data from a single patient?s tumor in a clinical trial can add up  to one Tbyte, the equivalent of 130,000 books.

But we don?t yet have the tools to efficiently process the  mountain of genetic data to make more precise predictions for therapy. And it?s needed: treating cancer remains a com- plex moving target. We can?t yet say precisely how a specific tumor will react to any given drug, and as a patient is treated, cancer cells can continue to evolve, making the initial therapy less effective.

Toward this goal, the US Department of Energy (DOE) is partnering with the National Cancer Institute in an ?all government? approach to fighting cancer. Part of this part- nership is a three-year pilot project called the Joint Design of Advanced Computing Solutions for Cancer (JDACSC), which will use DOE supercomputing to build sophisticated  computational models to facilitate breakthroughs in the fight against cancer on the molecular, patient, and population levels.

The pilot builds on US President Barack Obama?s Pre- cision Medicine Initiative and Vice President Joe Biden?s recent ?Cancer Moonshot? to transition cancer therapy away from a ?one size fits all? approach. Instead, the goal is to move toward individualized diagnosis and treatment that accommodates a patient?s unique body chemistry and genetics.

?Cancer researchers are very good at generating all types of data, from genomic data, proteomic data, and im- aging data,? said Warren Kibbe, director of the Center for Biomedical Informatics and Information Technology at the National Cancer Institute. ?What we?re not really good at yet is integrating all that information into a consistent model and making predictions on how a tumor will respond to a given treatment.?  Editors: James J. Hack, jhack@ornl.gov | Michael E. Papka, papka@anl.gov    Leadership Computing  80  March/April 2017  CANDLE Key to this collaboration is a computational frame- work called the CANcer Distributed Learning En- vironment (CANDLE). Over the years, many proj- ects have amassed a huge volume of cancer data, including tumor genomes, patient data, and experi- ments on potential drugs. CANDLE is designed to use machine learning algorithms to find patterns in large datasets. Machine learning is a type of ar- tificial intelligence that focuses on developing pro- grams that can teach themselves to grow and change when presented with new data. These patterns offer insights that could ultimately result in improved treatment or guidance on new experiments.

To date, machine learning studies have pro- duced computational models that estimate drug response for a singular data point?say, a certain mutation. Researchers working with CANDLE, however, envision a higher degree of complexity that integrates many types of information, such as drug interactions and specifics about a patient?s genealogy, as well as the tumor?s molecular charac- teristics and how its protein expression varies over time.

?The research community has collected thou- sands of experiments with hundreds of thousands of data points characterizing tumors and their response to the drugs,? said Rick Stevens, an as- sociate laboratory director at the DOE?s Argonne National Laboratory and professor of computer science at the University of Chicago. ?By working with the national laboratories, the National Can- cer Institute can now finally scale and quantify the cancer problem.?  Using this computational architecture, partici- pating labs?Argonne, Lawrence Livermore, Los Alamos, and Oak Ridge national laboratories? will focus on three problems singled out by the Na- tional Cancer Institute as the biggest bottlenecks to advancing cancer research. The three pilot proj- ects are aimed at understanding key protein inter- actions, predicting drug response, and automating patient information extraction to inform treatment strategies.

Each pilot looks at cancer from a different scale. Lawrence Livermore drives the molecular-  level pilot, Argonne leads the patient-level pilot, Oak Ridge undertakes the population-level pilot, and Los Alamos looks at uncertainty quantifica- tion across all three pilots.

Molecular Level Thirty percent of all cancers exhibit mutations in the Ras family, a collection of proteins that help trigger cellular machinery to make new cells or kill old ones.

The molecular-level pilot work being led by a team at Lawrence Livermore will use the CANDLE architecture to predict how these proteins behave on the top of cell membranes. The team will then apply this knowledge to what researchers describe as the ?Ras pathway problem,? where glitches cause genes to remain stuck in the ?on? position, leading to cancerous tumors.

Researchers want to produce highly complex simulations that describe how a protein moves and binds to specific locations on the cell membrane.

They hope such insights can be applied to the mil- lions of Ras pathways and dramatically enhance our understanding of how they work by predicting the likelihood that a signal will take a certain path.

Patient Level Cancer encompasses hundreds of diseases, each with thousands of possible causes. Thus, bringing precision to therapy selection for a specific patient is the goal of the Argonne-led patient-level pilot.

With the CANDLE platform, researchers at the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility, a DOE Office of Science User facility, will develop predictive models that guide drug treatment choices for tumors based on a much wider assortment of data than is currently used.

To do this, they?ll merge one type of compu- tational model that uses data to predict phenom- ena with another model that uses data to explain them. The hope is that by merging these two meth- ods, they?ll be able to migrate lessons learned from computer simulations to the research laboratory, where researchers test mice to verify the computer?s prediction of how a tumor will respond to a given therapy.

To date, machine learning studies have produced computational models that estimate drug response for a singular data point?say, a certain mutation.

www.computer.org/cise     81  Researchers will also try to find mechanisms for how a particular tumor evades a therapy or de- velops resistance.

?Conceptually, that?s how we?re thinking the future of cancer therapies is going to move. Right now, we don?t understand the biological implica- tions of resistance well enough for any particular therapy to do a good job at predicting combinato- rial therapies,? said Kibbe. ?We think that simula- tion will allow us to do a much better job of pre- dicting which combination of therapies would be most effective for a specific patient.?  Population Level At any one point in time, 3 to 5 percent of patients with cancer participate in a cancer clinical trial, but cataloguing all this data is still a manual task.

Oak Ridge will help the National Cancer In- stitute scale its ability to monitor cancer patients across the country by automating the process of entering and extracting information. By apply- ing natural language processing and machine learning algorithms to these millions of clinical reports, computers will be able to derive meaning from the notes that doctors and nurses write in their reports.

Once completed, this system will automatically analyze and extract information so that research- ers can monitor country-wide outcomes, which can then inform treatment strategies for patients of different lifestyles, environments, and cancer types.

Steps are being taken to de-identify data before population-level pilot data is shared with partici- pating labs, Stevens said.

Next Steps Over the next three years, both the National Can- cer Institute and DOE have a monumental task, but they have a plan.

The first year will focus on merging statistical models and building machine learning methods that make the best of their ability to explain and predict phenomena. In the second year, computer scientists will have to computationally estimate how confident they are in those predictions, and in the final year, researchers will put all these pieces together and integrate experimental design.

?I really think we are at a unique place right now. There are some unbelievably great conver- sations happening across government right now about how we work together and integrate these  brand new tools to enable understanding of these basic processes,? said Kibbe. ?And if we can real- ly understand the interplay of mutations, normal biological processes, and cancer, we have a much better chance of being able to interfere with?and end?cancer.?  A s the pilots progress from building and merg-ing computational models to testing them in the laboratory, Stevens admits that you?d have to be a little fearless to go after a problem like this.

