

TSINGHUA SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY  ISSNll1007-0214 p226  Volume 22, Number 2, April 2017  Call for Papers Special Issue on Cloud Computing and Big Data Applications  The publication of Tsinghua Science and Technology was started in 1996. Since then, it has been an international academic journal sponsored by Tsinghua University and published bimonthly. This journal aims at presenting the state-of-art scientific achievements in computer science and other IT fields. From 2012, the journal enters into IEEE Xplore Digital Library with the open access mode. In 2015, Tsinghua Science and Technology has been indexed in the Science Citation Index Expanded with IF 1.063.

This special issue on Cloud Computing and Big Data Applications is devoted to gather and present new research  that addresses the challenges in the broad areas of Cloud Computing and Big Data. Cloud Computing delivers computational resources on-demand as services that are commoditized and delivered comfortably analogous to traditional utilities such as electricity, gas, water, and telephony. Cloud service offerings for compute, storage, and communication resources as well as for hosted software and data are growing at a tremendous rate. It is essential to understand how to effectively transform these services into utilities that provide value to both users and providers.

This special issue therefore aims to publish high quality, original, unpublished research papers in the broad area of  Cloud Computing and Big Data, and thus presents a platform for scientists and scholars to share their observations and research results in the field. Specific topics for this special issue include but are not limited to:  ? Cloud Computing architectures and systems ? Principles and theoretical foundations of Utility  Computing, including pricing and service models ? Cloud resource virtualization and management and other  enablers ? Utility-/comfort-driven platforms for Clouds ? Scalability and resource management: brokering,  scheduling, capacity planning, parallelism and elasticity, as well as marketplaces  ? Cloud management: autonomic, adaptive, SLAs, performance models and monitoring  ? Mobile and energy-efficient use of Clouds  ? Applications: games, social networks, scientific computing (e-science) and business, as well as large-scale foundations for Big Data and analytics  ? Big Data analytics and processing in Clouds ? Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  Approaches for Big Data ? Big Data Acquisition, Integration, Cleaning, and  Best Practices ? Fault tolerance and reliability of Big Data Systems ? In-Memory Systems and platforms for Big Data  Analytics ? Programming Systems for Big Data  SUBMISSION GUIDELINES Papers submitted to this journal for possible publication must be original and must not be under consideration for publication in any other journals. Prospective authors should submit an electronic copy of their completed manuscript to http://mc03.manuscriptcentral.com/tst with the manuscript type as ?Special Issue 1?. Further information on the journal is available at: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/RecentIssue.jsp?punumber=5971803.

IMPORTANT DATES Manuscript Due: July 1, 2017 Notification of Acceptance: September 1, 2017 Final Version Due: October 1, 2017 Publication Date: February 1, 2018  GUEST EDITORS Yan Wu, College of Engineering, Boise State University, USA. yanwu@boisestate.edu.

Lu Liu, College of Engineering and Technology, University of Derby, United Kingdom. l.liu@derby.ac.uk.

