Building Issue-Data Maps to Support the  Resolution of Socio-National Issues

Abstract?Owing to the development of big-data-related technology, interest on systematic methodology that determines policies has been increasing based on data in the public health field. In this study, a method is proposed to establish an issue data map required to discover main national and social issues based on the data and solve issues through cooperation with domain experts. First, main issues with socially high interest are selected through literature review and analysis on news and search trends. Next, the factors that influence these selected issues are analyzed, and specific monitoring items of each driving force are selected to investigate the related data. In addition, a map is established to interconnect researchers with considerable experience in issue domain research and policy decision organizations that have decision-making capacity to solve the issues. This study empirically shows the process of establishing an issue map on a main social issue, which is the ?increase in domestic inflow of foreign infectious diseases.? Efficient policy decision making will be possible if an issue-detection system that enables constant monitoring based on this issue map is established.

Issue-data map; issue detection; issue monitoring; man?machine collaboration; horizon scanning; decision- support

I. INTRODUCTION Since the early 2000s, various open data have been  revealed according to the ?Open Government and Open Data? by the UK and USA. Subsequently, the data-processing industry of these open data, which creates new values by analyzing the open data, was activated [1, 2]. Nevertheless, problems remain.

Although obtainable data have rapidly increased, obtaining information with proper form within a restricted time remains difficult. For example, policy decisions to effectively manage diseases such as foot- and-mouth disease or Middle East Respiratory Syndrome or to respond to disasters such as floods or landslides due to localized heavy rain must be made within a limited time through quick data processing.

However, big data processing tools or environments that can efficiently solve these problems have not yet been established [3].

Detecting factors that can possibly cause problems in the future by investigating data in various fields is called horizon scanning [4]. It is similar to monitoring and detecting projection factors that can potentially threaten the horizontal line of boundless oceans.

Nations such as Singapore and UK have already installed and are operating national-level horizon- scanning organizations for effective prediction [5]. A method to establish a data map to support efficient decision making by detecting the main issues that threaten the nation and society is described in the present study. The purpose of establishing an issue map is to easily search issue-related data, researchers, and decision-making system to support reason-based decision making and acquire a passage role of connecting issue-related policies and R&D. In this study, selection process, data that become the target of monitoring to solve each issue, related researchers, and procedure of establishing interconnected maps of related policy decision makers will be specifically dealt with based on main national and social issues.



II. DATA-BASED ISSUE SEARCHING Issues that must be solved by defining problems  and needs that appear in megatrends that are socially shown and issues that must be prepared for the future are included in the search.

A. Issue-Searching Process The issue-searching process of the main national  and social issues is described as follows:  1. Searching of candidate issue: a list of candidate issues is selected through literature review to select issues with high social interest.

2. Issue analysis: analysis is conducted in the aspect of searches and news trends on the candidate issues investigated through literature review.

?Search trend analysis: search pattern analysis on users of core keywords related to an issue using Naver DataLab1  1 http://datalab.naver.com/     ?News trend analysis: analysis on the change in media interest by investigating the increase rate of news using Naver New Library2  3. Selection of main issues: main issues are selected through primary and secondary filtering. New social issues are primarily filtered through search trend analysis, and issues with high social influence are secondarily filtered via news trend analysis.

4. Analysis of main issues: driving forces that influence selected issues are analyzed.

5. Expert counseling: issue influence is verified, and feedback is received from domain experts.

6. Establishment of issue-data map and analysis report: a data map of data, researchers, and policy decision makers that considers the driving forces is established, and an analysis report is written.

Figure 1.  Data-based issue searching process.

B. Cases of Issue Searching Based on Data By performing search and news trend analyses on  32 candidate issues in 18 fields through the issue- searching process mentioned earlier, 10 main issues were selected. As of April 2016, the national and social issues searched in the Republic of Korea are as follows:  ?Searching and preparation of new technology to enter the hyper-connected society  ?Preparation of digital financial revolution (block chain/FinTech)  ?Increase in cybercrimes such as mobile finance frauds and hacking  ?Increase in home meal alternate food  ?Increase in respiratory diseases due to air pollution (fine and yellow dust)  ?Increase in domestic inflow of infectious diseases that occur in foreign regions  ?Necessity to manage the influence of air and marine pollution among nations  ?Preparation for refugee problem spreading   2 http://newslibrary.naver.com/search/searchDetails.nhn  ?Necessity to guarantee safety of chemical products  ?Early alarm and preparation for terror

III. CASES OF ISSUE-DATA MAP ESTABLISHMENT In this section, actual cases on issue-data map  establishment on the issue of ?increase in domestic inflow of infectious diseases that occur in foreign regions? among the 10 main issues are described.

Online media is useful in collecting early information on infectious diseases in real time. The period of infectious-disease-related information coming out differs depending on the feature of each medium, and the quickest information sources of each step in the infectious disease outbreak curve are analyzed [6]. Social network and blog are sources that can provide infectious-disease information before the spreading period of infectious diseases, and the range of information acquisition source widens as time passes. If these features are well used, unusual signs can be understood before the step of collecting the number of diagnosed patients is reached, and immediate measures can be initiated.

Therefore, preventing the spread of infectious diseases that come from foreign regions is important for early detection and quick correspondence. The World Health Organization (WHO) is leading intelligent surveillance of disease outbreaks by emphasizing the significance of real-time information collection and early correspondence. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) are also collecting various information for rapid disease surveillance and correspondence. Because the importance of proactive correspondence on infectious diseases is increasing, platforms such as ProMED- Mail3, HealthMap4, and MediSys5 that provide disease information based on various atypical data without depending only on official information by health authorities are established. Moreover, the importance of prediction technology using this information is also increasing. Spatiotemporal Epidemiological Modeler6 developed by IBM, InfluSim7 developed by Germany, Epidemic Simulation System8 developed by USA, and Global Epidemic and Mobility Model9 are examples [7] of these technologies.

A. Analysis of Driving Forces Collecting and monitoring data based on driving  forces that influence the change in the future is important, instead of simply collecting much information. For this issue analysis, driving forces are derived in terms of Society, Technology, Environment, Population, Politics, Economy, and Resources [8].

The derivations of these driving forces and correlation   3 ProMED-mail, http://www.promedmail.org 4 HealthMap, https://www.healthmap.org/en/ 5 MediSys, http://medisys.newsbrief.eu/ 6 STEM, http://www.eclipse.org/stem/ 7 InfluSim, http://www.influsim.info/ 8 EpiSIM, http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/joanamargarida/websiteProject/ 9 GLEAM, http://www.gleamviz.org/     with issues are verified through evaluation by experts in the fields of diagnosis, prediction, and spread of infectious diseases.

TABLE I.  RESULTS OF DERIVED DRIVING FORCES TO MANAGE OUTBREAK OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES IN FOREIGN  REGIONS  Field ID  Driving Force  Society  S1 Outbreak of infectious diseases in foreign regions S2 Ecological change  S3 Improvement in social recognition level  S4 Opening of infectious disease information  Technology  T1 Professional treatment and management of infectious diseases T2 Early quarantine of infectious diseases  T3 Prediction of spreading of domestic infectious disease  Environment E1 Climate change  E2 Outbreak and transfer of infection medium  Population P1 Transfer of population and supplies  P2 Outbreak of infection in classes with vulnerable health  Politics O1 Improvement of domestic infectious disease management system  Economy C1 Management of domestic infectious diseases and increase in R&D budget   As listed in Table , 13 driving forces were derived, and the correlation between issues and these driving forces were analyzed through expert evaluation. The analysis results are shown in Fig. 2.

Higher correlation with issue occurrence was located closer to the center of the hemisphere. The most important driving forces were selected as (S1) ?Outbreak of infectious diseases in foreign regions? and (E2) ?Outbreak and transfer of infection medium.? This result indicates that quickly and accurately obtaining information on infectious diseases and infection medium outbreak in foreign regions is a significant key in solving this issue. (P2), i.e., ?Outbreak of infection in classes with vulnerable health,? which occurs after inflow, was known to have a relatively low correlation, but an average of higher than three points from the five-point scale of the expert evaluation results on all driving forces is still meaningful as an object of management.

Figure 2.  Results of the analysis on the correlation between driving forces and issue of ?increase in domestic inflow of  infectious diseases that occur in foreign regions?.

B. Establishment of Issue-Data Map An issue map based on these derived driving  forces must be established. The issue map must support reason-based decision making by easily approaching data, researchers, and decision making systems that are related to the corresponding issue and by connecting with issue-related policies and R&D.

Thus, related specific monitoring items were analyzed by each driving force. For example, specific monitoring items on (S1) ?Outbreak of infectious diseases in foreign regions? include ?untranslated virus information,? ?information on foreign infectious disease outbreak,? ?information on variant virus of existing infectious disease outbreak,? ?research information on new infectious disease,? ?statistics of infectious disease outbreak in foreign regions,? and ?information related to warning or banned overseas travel areas to the main advanced countries.? The issue map is established based on these specific items.

The issue map is composed of three maps, namely, the data, researcher, and decision-making-system maps. First, the data map provides information on the domestic and foreign data sources that can be used to manage and monitor infectious diseases that occur in foreign regions. The data related to the outbreak of infectious diseases are from foreign sites, and the data related to the inflow and spreading within the Republic of Korea are from Korean sites. A total of 86 sources are included in this data map, and Table lists the information on the main organizations and websites that provide information that can be seen in the data map.

TABLE II.  MAIN PUBLIC ORGANIZATION SHOWN IN THE DATA MAP  ID Organization of Open Data Site Name  S1  WHO WHO  Europe Media Monitor MediSys International Society for  Infectious Diseases ProMED-mail  Boston Children?s Hospital HealthMap  Council Foreign Relations Vaccine-Preventable Outbreaks United States National Library  of Medicine MedlinePlus  ECDC Epidemic Intelligence TESSy  S2  Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System  (GDACS) GDACS  Korea Meteorological Administration  Korea Meteorological Administration  S3 Ministry of Strategy and  Finance National Competitiveness  Statistics Statistics Korea KOSIS  S4  Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs  Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, Open Data  Portal Ministry of Health and  Welfare Centers for Disease  Control & Prevention     Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul Open Data Plaza  Centers for Disease Control & Prevention  Infectious Disease Statistics System  Ministry of Public Safety and Security,  National Disaster Management Research Institute  Korea Safety Map  E1 Korea Meteorological Administration Korea Meteorological  Administration  E2 Centers for Disease Control & Prevention Centers for Disease  Control & Prevention  T1  National Medical Center National Emergency Medical Center Statistics Korea KOSIS  National Health Insurance  National Health Insurance  T2  Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport  National Logistics Information Center  Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries KOSIS  P1  Ministry of Justice Ministry of Justice  Statistics Korea KOSIS Ministry of Land,  Infrastructure and Transport National Logistics Information Center  P2 National Assembly Budget Office  National Assembly Budget Office >  Economic Finance Statistics  O1 Statistics Korea KOSIS  Ministry of Government Legislation  National Law Information Center  C1 National Assembly Budget Office  National Assembly Budget Office >  Economic Finance Statistics    Except for indirect driving forces, the researcher map includes information on researchers who perform research that are directly related to the domestic inflow and spreading issue of infectious diseases outbreak in foreign regions.

By searching information from the main researchers based on research keyword from the National Science & Technology Information Service, researchers that match with the professional fields were extracted [9].

The decision-making system map distinguishes and defines the main policy decision making and executing organizations according to each driving force. The Ministry of Health and Welfare, Ministry of Public Safety and Security, Ministry of Food and Drug Safety, Ministry of Agriculture, Food, and Rural Affairs, Korea Customs Service, and Ministry of Justice are the main organizations included in the decision-making system map related to infectious diseases that occur in foreign regions. The Center for Disease Control & Prevention, which is an affiliated  organization of the Ministry of Health and Welfare, plays the key role.



IV. CONCLUSION Proper early response to main national and social  issues such as outbreak of foreign infectious diseases using quick collection of information is most important. However, explosively increasing data have changed the core issue of this activity. Efficient management of data has become more important than gathering data. The establishment of the issue map proposed in this study provides information that can connect policy decision makers to proper experts and quickly collect reliable data on issues that can severely threaten public safety. By systematically establishing this map and providing information service based on the results, detection and response systems on main national and social issues can be significantly developed.

