2332-7790 (c) 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Abstract?The traditional deployment research on wireless sensor networks (WSNs) has mainly focused on 2D plane and 3D full space; also, the sensors considered are almost always omni-directional sensors and are usually homogeneous. However, this type of research cannot fulfill the diverse requirements required for practical situations. We study the deployment problem of heterogeneous directional sensor networks (HDSNs) on 3D terrain, which is more suitable for practical security monitoring requirements and has more practical significance.

In this paper, we propose a novel uncertain coverage model: a modified 3D directional sensing model is presented, and a non-probabilistic measure based fusion operator is utilized.

We transform the deployment problem into a multiobjective optimization problem by comprehensively considering coverage, connectivity and deployment cost, and we use various state-of- the-art multi-objective optimization algorithm based deployment approaches to address it. We conduct deployment experiments on three types of real-world 3D terrain data (plain, hill and mountain). Through the analysis of the deployment results, we more clearly recognize the characteristics of the multiobjective deployment problem and the relations among different objectives.

Meanwhile, we obtain a deeper understanding and insight into the multi-objective deployment problem of HDSN.

Index Terms?Heterogeneous directional sensor networks (HD- SNs), non-probabilistic measure, multiobjective optimization al- gorithms, 3D terrain.



I. INTRODUCTION  MANY researchers have been studying the coverageand deployment problems of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) in security monitoring [1], [2]. The sensing range of a traditional sensor node is a circular region with the sensor node as the center and the perceived distance as the radius. In a practical environment, because of the restrictions of the topography of the deployment region, the sensing model usually has an irregular shape. Therefore, the traditionally considered sensing model is too idealized and simplistic.

Along with the development of sensor technology, various  This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant No. 61303001, and in part by the Foundation of Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing of the Ministry of Education (MSC-201602A). This work is also supported in part by the Science and Technology Project of Guangdong Province under Grant No. 2015A010103010.(Corresponding author: Zhihan Lv, Bin Cao)  Bin Cao and Jianwei Zhao are with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, 300401, China; Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education; Hebei Provincial Key Laboratory of Big Data Calculation, China. Xin Liu is with Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, 300401, China. (email: caobin@scse.hebut.edu.cn)  Zhihan Lv is with the Department of Computer Science, University College London, 66-72 Gower Street, London WC1E 6EA, United Kingdom. (email: z.lu@ucl.ac.uk)  types of directional sensors have emerged, such as ultrasonic and image sensor nodes [3], and the number of studies and applications of directional sensor nodes are increasing [4].

Ma et al. [5] first conducted research on the coverage prob- lem of directional sensor nodes. In the considered network, the sensing range of the node is a sector region with the node as the center and the perceived distance as the radius.

At present, the studies on directional sensor networks (DSNs) mainly concern the directional sector-shaped sensing model.

In addition to this type of model, there are scholars studying the triangle model and irregular polygon model, among other models [6], [7]. Based on the sector-shaped sensing model, Teng et al. [8] put forward a sector sensing model; however, this model is a 2D model. The work of [9] proposes a type of probabilistic sensing model, which comprehensively considers sensing distance, horizontal sensing angle and vertical sensing angle, and a sigmoid function is used to simulate the sensing characteristics of sensors, and has great practical importance.

Generally, there are two main types of sensing models, deterministic sensing models and probabilistic sensing models.

Deterministic models usually refer to Boolean sensing models, which are two-valued sensing models, as shown in Fig. 1(a).

The sensing probability is determined by the sensing radius (denoted as Rs). Within the range of Rs, objects can be detected with certainty; on the contrary, objects cannot be detected. However, the deterministic model is too simple and is not in accordance with the actual sensing characteristics of sensors. The probabilistic sensing model is more suitable for the practical situation and is conducive to precise experimental simulation. A variety of probabilistic sensing models have been proposed. Many mathematical functions are adopted to simulate the sensing behavior of sensors. However, in summary, the sensing probability decreases as the sensing dis- tance increases. The sensing characteristics of the probabilistic sensing models are varied due to the utilization of different mathematical forms, such as Elfes model (b) [10], the multi- layer model (c) [11], the shadow-fading model (d) [12], and the sigmoid model (e) [9], as shown in Fig. 1.

The directional sensor network (DSN) deployment problem has always been an important research topic. The main aim of the deployment is the Coverage [13]?[17]. For the cover- age issue for heterogeneous directional sensors (HDSs), [17] provides solutions for the deployment of heterogeneous DSN (HDSN). Nevertheless, the above studies mainly consider 2D planar regions, while the real sensor nodes exist in 3D space; therefore, researching 3D coverage and deployment problems of sensor nodes is more suitable for practical requirements.

2332-7790 (c) 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TBDATA.2017.2685581, IEEE Transactions on Big Data  JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 2  Fig. 1. Traditional sensing models. (a) Boolean model; (b) Elfes model; (c) multi-layer model; (d) shadow-fading model; (e) sigmoid model.

However, the studies based on 3D terrain [18] are relatively few, and only the coverage rate is considered [18]; problems such as connectivity and cost are not studied. Temel et al.

[19] proposed cat swarm optimization with wavelet transform (CSO-WT) for deployment. The research is based on 3D terrain, but directional sensor nodes are not considered.

In the WSN deployment problem, many problems ought to be considered beside coverage, such as connectivity, lifetime, uniformity, cost, etc. In [20], a new approach based on elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) [21] is used. And connectivity and coverage are considered.

Studies on adopting multiobjective optimization algorithms for WSN deployment problems are rare [22]?[24]. Addition- ally, the mathematical models are relatively simple. Only deployment problems on the 2D plane are considered, and 3D terrain is not taken into consideration. In addition, there are very few studies about multiobjective deployment optimization of HDSN on 3D terrain. To the best of our knowledge, no other researchers have made such an attempt.

The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:  1) We propose a novel uncertain comprehensive coverage model. A 3D probabilistic sensing model is presented and the concept of ?fuzzy ring? is introduced. The uncertain non-probabilistic fusion operator is adopted to merge the occluded coverage regions.

2) We study the deployment problem on 3D terrain. Com- pared to the 2D surface and 3D full space, the deploy- ment problem on 3D terrain is more complex, but it is more suitable for practical situations and has more practical significance.

3) The sensor nodes considered in the study are directional sensor nodes, and, furthermore, the parameters are di- versified, resulting in an HDSN. Thus, the deployment problem becomes more complex and is suitable for anal- ysis by biologically inspired optimization algorithms.

4) We transform the deployment problem into a multiobjec- tive optimization problem, and multiobjective optimiza- tion algorithm based deployment approaches are utilized for solving it.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the novel uncertain comprehensive coverage model.

In Section III, the objective functions of the deployment problem of HDSN are illustrated, and the multiobjective optimization algorithms are described. We introduce the terrain data used in experimentation in Section IV. Section V provides  the experimental results and analysis. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI.



II. UNCERTAIN COVERAGE MODEL  A coverage model has two important components, the sensing model and fusion operator. A novel probabilistic sensing model is put forward, and the concept of ?fuzzy ring? is employed. As for the fusion operator, for the overlapped sensing regions of multiple sensor nodes, we use the Sugeno measure [25], a type of non-probabilistic measure, to fuse them together. We will give detailed description as follows.

A. Line of Sight (LOS) [19]  Given a sensor node s, to cover a point p on the 3D terrain surface, there should exist a line of sight (LOS) between s and p, which means that the line connecting them is not occluded by any obstacle; otherwise, we say there is no line of sight (NLOS) [19]. The situations of LOS and NLOS are illustrated in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2. Examples of LOS and NLOS.

Fig. 2 gives an example of LOS and NLOS. As the figure shows, if the coordinates of points along the line connecting sensor node s and point p are all below that line, then we say there is LOS between sensor node s and point p; otherwise, there is NLOS. Therefore, if there exists NLOS between s and p, then p will not be sensed by s; while if LOS exists between s and p, p has some probability of being detected by s, and we further consider the detection of this point by combining the perceived distance, horizontal (pan) sensing range and vertical (tilt) sensing range.

As in the real world, a line is continuous, while the terrain data in our experimentations are made up of discrete points, so in the simulation, a line may pass through the space between two adjacent points. As shown in Fig. 3, line SP passes through point C, which is between points A and B. However, there are coordinates only for A and B in the terrain data but    2332-7790 (c) 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TBDATA.2017.2685581, IEEE Transactions on Big Data  JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 3  not for point C. To address this issue, our strategy is to set the higher value of A and B to be the coordinate of C, as follows:  HC = max {HA, HB} (1)  where HA, HB and HC are the altitude coordinates of points A, B and C, respectively.

Fig. 3. Simulation of discrete coordinate.

B. Sensing Distance  In the proposed sensing model, for a sensor node denoted as s, we define and set up three sensing ranges: Rl, Rm and Ru. We call the ring region within the ranges of Rl and Ru the ?fuzzy ring?. If a point p is located within the range of Rl, then p can be surely detected by s. If the position of p is outside the range of Ru, then p will not be detected. In addition, if p is in the ?fuzzy ring?, the sensing probability is influenced by the distance. The sensing model is as follows:  PD(s, p) =????????? 1, dist ? [0, Rl]  1? ?1 ? e tan  ( ?  (( dist?Rl Rm?Rl  )?1?1)) , dist ? (Rl, Rm]  0 + ?2 ? etan( ? 2 ((  Ru?dist Ru?Rm )  ?2?1)), dist ? (Rm, Ru] 0, dist ? (Ru,+?)  (2) dist = ? (s, p) (3)  where ? (s, p) denotes the 3D Euclidean distance between sensor node s and point p. Parameters ?1, ?2, ?1 and ?2 represent the sensing characteristics of the sensor, and different types of sensors can be simulated by adjusting their values, and ?1 + ?2 = 1, and ?1, ?2 ? [0, 1].

C. Sensing Angle  We mainly consider the sensing angle with respect to two aspects, horizontal (pan) direction and vertical (tilt) direction.

We denote the deterministic sensing angle by ?l and fuzzy sensing angles by ?m and ?u.Therefore, the deterministic sensing angle range is [0, ?l] and the fuzzy sensing angle ranges are (?l, ?m] and (?m, ?u].

With respect to the main sensing direction, we define ?PAN (s, p) and ?TILT (s, p) the horizontal (pan) and vertical (tilt) deflection angles with respect to the main sensing direc- tion, respectively. The sensing model is described as follows:  PA(s, p) =????????? 1, ?(s, p) ? [0, ?l]  1? ?1 ? e tan  ( ?  (( ?(s,p)??l ?m??l  )?1?1)) , ?(s, p) ? (?l, ?m]  0 + ?2 ? etan( ? 2 ((  ?u??(s,p) ?u??m )  ?2?1)), ?(s, p) ? (?m, ?u] 0, ?(s, p) ? (?u,+?)  (4)  ?(s, p) =  ?( ?PAN (s, p)  ?PAN  )2 +  ( ?TILT (s, p)  ?TILT  )2 (5)  where PA(s, p) is the sensing probability, and ?(s, p) is the comprehensive deflection angle with respect to the main sensing direction. The values of ?1, ?2, ?1, ?2, ?PAN and ?TILT can be adjusted to simulate different characteristics of sensing behaviors, and ?1 + ?2 = 1, and ?1, ?2 ? [0, 1].

D. Overall Sensing Model  In summary, for a sensor node s and a point p on the terrain, we can derive the sensing probability of s to p , as follows:  SP (s, p) = PLOS(s, p)? PD(s, p)? PA(s, p) (6)  where PLOS(s, p) = 1 denotes that LOS exists between s and p, while PLOS(s, p) = 0 denotes NLOS; PD(s, p) is the sensing probability with respect to the sensing distance; and PA(s, p) is the sensing probability considering the sensing angle.

E. Uncertain Fusion Operator  Assuming the sensor node set is S = {s1, s2, ..., sn} (n is the number of sensor nodes) and SPq(p) is the fusion coverage probability of all sensor nodes to point p, then in the probability space, SPq(p) can be determined as follows:  SPq(p) = P { ?n k=1 SPq (sk, p)}  = 1? P {?n  k=1 SPq (sk, p) }  = 1? ?n k=1 (1? SPq (sk, p))  (7)  The probability measure is a type of addictive measure.

Nevertheless, the actual environment is not so ideal, and the coverage of WSNs may not always satisfy the additivity of probability. Because of the influence of the environment and other factors, the Sugeno measurement, which is weakly additive, is more suitable to describe the uncertain coverage of WSNs. The formulation of Sugeno measure based fusion operator is as follows:  SPq(p) = min ( 1, 1? {  ?n k=1 [1 + ?? SPq (sk, p)]? 1}  ) (8)  where n is the number of sensor nodes; ?1 ? ? < 0; and according to the actual situation, ? can be adjusted to better estimate the coverage ratio of the sensor network. When ? = ?1, Sugeno measure degrades to the probabilistic measure in Eq. 7.

2332-7790 (c) 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TBDATA.2017.2685581, IEEE Transactions on Big Data  JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 4  Let SP th denote the sensing probability threshold. The value of SP q(p) varies from 0 to 1. Thus, to evaluate the network coverage ratio under this sensing model, the following definition is used:  SP s(p) =  { 1, SP q(p) ? SP th 0, otherwise (9)  According to the work of [26], we find that SP th = 0.9 and ? = ?0.5 is more in accord with the actual situation.

CQ represents the coverage quality after the deployment  operation. The calculation of CQ is as follows:  CQ = 1N ?N j=1 SP s (pj) (10)  where N denotes the total number of points on the 3D terrain.



III. OBJECTIVE FUNCTIONS AND MULTIOBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS  We transform the HDSN deployment problem into a mul- tiobjective optimization problem. We simultaneously consider three objectives: Coverage, Connectivity Uniformity and De- ployment Cost, which are denoted as fCoverage, fUniformity and fDeploymentCost. In this section, we will give detailed insights to them.

A. Coverage  Coverage is an important indicator of the WSN deployment problem. In this paper, we assume the number of sensor nodes is fixed, and through the utilization of optimization algorithms, we optimize the deployment of sensor nodes to maximize the coverage ratio. Specifically, the positions, horizontal (pan) sensing angles ?PAN and vertical (tilt) sensing angles ?TILT  will be adjusted during the optimization, where 0 ? ?PAN , ?TILT < 2? ?. We will use the proposed uncertain coverage model to assess the coverage ratio of the deployment on the 3D terrain. fCoverage denotes the coverage fitness, which is calculated using the following equation:  fCoverage = 1.0? CQ (11)  B. Connectivity Uniformity  To exchange and gather information, network connectivity among sensor nodes should be guaranteed. Each sensor node should be able to communicate with at least one sensor node and any two sensor nodes in WSNs can set up single-hop or multi-hop communication. The energy of wireless sensor nodes is limited. If one sensor node runs out of energy in advance, the network connectivity may be destroyed, and the whole WSN will be paralyzed. To prolong the network lifetime, the communication uniformity of sensor nodes should be considered. To achieve good Connectivity Uniformity, the number of sensor nodes each sensor node connects should be as close as possible. The standard deviation can be utilized to measure the uniformity [27]. To simplify the normalization, we calculate it in the following manner:  fUniformity =  ?M i=1 fabs (ni ? nMEAN )  M ?N (12)  nMEAN =  ?M i=1 ni M  (13)  where fUniformity is the measure of Connectivity uniformity; fabs(?) returns the absolute value of the input parameter; M is the number of sensor nodes in the largest connected sensor node set in the current deployment; and nMEAN is the average number of sensor nodes to which each sensor node is connected in the set.

As the connectivity of all sensor nodes should be guaran- teed, we assign a penalty to all objective functions:  fPenalty = p? (n?M) (14)  where p is the penalty coefficient, and we assign it a very large value (e.g. 1e6).

C. Deployment Cost  For the Deployment Cost [28] of WSNs, we mainly con- sider the altitudes and fluctuation degrees of the deployment positions. A higher altitude and more rugged local terrain result in a higher deployment cost. We use fDeploymentCost to represent the deployment cost function value, which can be calculated as follows:  fDeploymentCost = fFluctuation + fAltitude  (15)  fFluctuation =  ?M i=1 Flucti  M ? Fluctmax (16)  Flucti =  ?1 a=?1  ?1 b=?1 fabs (A(ix, iy)?A(ix+ a, iy + b))  np (17)  fAltitude =  ?M i=1 (A(ix, iy)?Amin) M ? (Amax ?Amin)  (18)  where fFluctuation and fAltitude are the measurements of fluctuation and altitude, respectively; Flucti is the fluctuation at the position of sensor node i; Fluctmax is the maximal fluctuation of all positions; A(x, y) is the altitude at position (x, y); np is the number of positions to which a sensor node can compare around its neighbor, which is 8 for an interior sensor node and less than 8 if the sensor node is located on the boundary; and Amin and Amax are the minimal and maximal altitudes of all possible positions.

To facilitate comparison and measurement, we map the fitness values of the above three objective functions to the range [0.0, 1.0), and the optimization target is to minimize all the objectives.

D. Multiobjective Optimization Algorithms  In this paper, we transform the deployment problem into a multiobjective optimization problem, in which we fix the number of sensor nodes at 25. Furthermore,    2332-7790 (c) 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TBDATA.2017.2685581, IEEE Transactions on Big Data  JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 5  Fig. 4. Extracted terrain data.

in HDSN each sensor node has different sensing dis- tance, sensing angle range (horizontal and vertical) and these parameters are fixed. For the miultiobjective algo- rithms, each individual in the population is represented as ( x1, y1, ?  PAN 1 , ?  TILT 1 , ..., xM , yM , ?  PAN M , ?  TILT M  ) , where  M = 25, xi and yi denote the position of the sensor node, ?PANi is the horizontal sensing angle, and ?  TILT i is the vertical  sensing angle, and ?PANi , ? TILT i ? [0, 2 ? ?). Thus, the  number of the variables is 100. To optimize this deployment problem, we adopted the following four multiobjective opti- mization algorithms: cooperative coevolutionary generalized differential evolution 3 (CCGDE3) [29], cooperative multiob- jective differential evolution (CMODE) [30], multiobjective evolutionary algorithm based on decision variable analyses (MOEA/DVA) [31] and nondominated sorting genetic algo- rithm III (NSGA-III) [32]. CCGDE3 is mainly proposed for large-scale optimization problems. Since the scale of the prob- lem in this paper reaches 100, it can be viewed as a large-scale problem; therefore, we can use CCGDE3 for optimization.



IV. 3D TERRAIN DATA To better simulate the practical environment, we utilize  the 3D terrain data of a real-life geographic environment to conduct deployment experimentation. We obtain real-life digital elevation model (DEM) initial data from the Internet1.

Through clipping, we obtain three types of terrain data (plain, hill and mountain). Then, after resampling and preprocessing, etc., we acquire three matrices of size 32? 32, which will be used for the deployment experiments.

The terrain region we consider is located in Honghe Au- tonomous Prefecture, on the border of Yunnan Province, China. Specifically, the extracted plain terrain is very flat and has slight terrain undulation. And the area of the extracted plain region is 160m ? 160m, which is illustrated in Fig. 4 (a).

The extracted hilly terrain is higher in the northeast and lower in the southwest. The localization is mountainous and hilly, and there are fluctuations, but the slope is mild. The area of the hilly terrain is 160m? 160m, as shown in Fig. 4 (b).

The extracted mountainous terrain has violent fluctuations, and the slope is steep. The area of the mountainous terrain is 160m? 160m, which is shown in Fig. 4 (c).

1Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, ?Geospatial Data Cloud,? [Online]. Available: http://www.gscloud.cn.

TABLE I PARAMETER SETTING OF SBX AND Polynomial Mutation FOR MOEA/DVA  AND NSGA-III  Symbol Quantity Value  pc crossover probability of SBX 1 pm polynomial mutation probability 1/D ?c distribution index for SBX 20 ?m distribution index for polynomial mutation 20

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS  TABLE II PARAMETER SETTING FOR COVERAGE MODEL  Symbol Quantity Value  (?1, ?2) distance sensing model parameters (0.5, 0.5)  (?1, ?2) (3.6, 3.6)  Rl deterministic sensing distance [7, 11]? 5m Rm distance thresholds  1.5?Rl Ru 2.0?Rl (?1, ?2)  angle sensing model parameters  (0.5, 0.5)  (?1, ?2) (3.6, 3.6)  ?PAN [0.5, 1.5]  ?TILT [0.5, 1.5]  ?l deterministic sensing angle [?/8, ?/4] ?m angle thresholds  1.5? ?l ?u 2.0? ?l ? fusion parameter ?0.5 SP th sensing probability threshold 0.9  A. Experimental Setup  We employ four multiobjective optimization algorithms (CCGDE3, CMODE, MOEA/DVA and NSGA-III) to tackle the multiobjective deployment optimization problem presented in this paper. For each type of terrain, each algorithm runs 24 times. The function evaluations (FEs) is set to (1e+ 6).

2332-7790 (c) 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TBDATA.2017.2685581, IEEE Transactions on Big Data  JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 6  1) Population Size: We fix the population size of all four algorithms as 120 [31]. In detail, there are 2 subpopulations in CCGDE3 and 60 individuals for each subpopulation. For CMODE, three swarms are maintained during the optimization as there are 3 objectives in the multiobjective deployment problem, and the swarm size is 20 and the archive size is 120. The population size of MOEA/DVA is simply set to 120.

The population size (NP ) of NSGA-III is determined by the number of reference points (H), which satisfy NP ? H . H is determined by (p1, p2), so we set them as (14, 0), thus, NP = H = 120.

2) Other Parameters: For DE in CCGDE3 and MOEA/DVA, F = 0.5 and CR = 1.0. SBX and polynomial mutation are used in MOEA/DVA and NSGA-III, and the parameters are shown in Table I.

3) Coverage Model Parameters: The parameter setting of the novel coverage model is listed in Table II.

B. Evaluating Indicator  As the ideal Pareto front (PF) is unknown, we use the Hyper Volume (HV) indicator [33]?[35] to evaluate the optimization results. HV can comprehensively evaluate the convergence and diversity of the solution set. In addition to the convergence curves of the HV indicator, we also formulate the visualization of estimated sets. Specifically, we calculate the HV value of each operation and use the average value as the HV value of the algorithm. We draw the visualization of the final solution sets of all 24 runs. To illustrate the details of the visualization more clearly, we also show the 2D projections of the 3D visualization, which facilitate the comparisons of each two pair of objectives and also of the performances contrasts of various algorithms.

C. Experimental Results and Analysis  First, we observe the deployment optimization results on plain terrain and perform the corresponding analysis.

Fig. 5. Convergence curves of HV metric on plain terrain.

For the HV indicator (Fig. 5), MOEA/DVA and CMODE are quite similar; NSGA-III ranks third; and CCGDE3 per- forms the worst. In detail, MOEA/DVA reaches 0.9731301,  Fig. 6. Visualization of final solution sets of all 24 runs on plain terrain.

2332-7790 (c) 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TBDATA.2017.2685581, IEEE Transactions on Big Data  JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 7  CMODE reaches 0.9727295, NSGA-III reaches 0.9662736, and CCGDE3 only reaches 0.9486235.

The HV indicator can comprehensively evaluate the con- vergence and diversity of solution sets, but the result is not detailed enough and exact judgments can barely be deduced.

Simultaneously taking into consideration the HV and solution set visualization, we can compare the performances of differ- ent algorithms more comprehensively.

From the visualization of the solution sets of all 24 runs (Fig. 6), we see the distribution and diversity: MOEA/DVA and CMODE perform well and cover more area in the objective space than counterparts, while NSGA-III and CCGDE3 are not so good. Because of the ability to comprehensively optimize all objectives, the HV values of CMODE and MOEA/DVA are quite similar and better than those of NSGA-III and CCGDE3. CCGDE3 has very poor performance on Coverage, and the diversity and distribution are quite bad, so there is a large gap between the HV values. NSGA-III is better than CCGDE3 for both convergence and diversity, while in contrast to MOEA/DVA and CMODE, its optimization of Coverage is not so good; therefore, the HV value is smaller.

If mainly considering Coverage, which is a main concern of the deployment problem, CMODE and MOEA/DVA are better, because their solution values varies from very low to very high; while for NSGA-III and CCGDE3, the results are not so good.

All in all, for the deployment on plain terrain, the perfor- mances of four algorithms can be summarized as: MOEA/DVA ? CMODE > NSGA-III > CCGDE3.

Then, we further analyze the deployment results on hilly terrain.

Fig. 7. Convergence curves of HV metric on hilly terrain.

For the HV indicator (Fig. 7), CMODE and MOEA/DVA are still quite similar, NSGA-III is worse and CCGDE3 is obviously not as good as the other algorithms. In detail, the HV value of MOEA/DVA reaches 0.9759476, CMODE reaches 0.9750499, NSGA-III reaches 0.9673375 and CCGDE3 only reaches 0.9486405.

From the solution set visualization (Fig. 8), the distribution and diversity of CMODE and MOEA/DVA are still the best, and they can more comprehensively cover the objective space, much better than NSGA-III and CCGDE3.

Fig. 8. Visualization of final solution sets of all 24 runs on hilly terrain.

2332-7790 (c) 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TBDATA.2017.2685581, IEEE Transactions on Big Data  JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 8  Compared to plain terrain (Fig. 6), NSGA-III performs much better, which contributes to the fact that its distribu- tion becomes better but still not so good with respect to MOEA/DVA and CMODE.

For the main indicator, Coverage, MOEA/DVA and CMOD- E are the best, and MOEA/DVA seems better, NSGA-III is worse and CCGDE3 is the worst.

In general, MOEA/DVA ? CMODE > NSGA-III > C- CGDE3.

At last, we analyze the sensor node deployment results on mountainous terrain.

Fig. 9. Convergence curves of HV metric on mountainous terrain.

For the HV indicator (Fig. 9), MOEA/DVA reaches 0.9524802, CMODE reaches 0.9522506, NSGA-III reaches 0.9300014 and CCGDE3 only reaches 0.9127590.

Observing the solution set visualization (Fig. 10), we see that the characteristics of the algorithms are similar to those of plain terrain (Fig. 6), and compared to hilly terrain (Fig.

8), the performance of NSGA-III is not good.

For the objective Coverage, CMODE and MOEA/DVA are similar while just the same as on plain and hilly terrains, MOEA/DVA is slightly better.

After all, on the mountainous terrain, the ranking of algo- rithms is MOEA/DVA ? CMODE > NSGA-III > CCGDE3.

Hereinbefore, we analyzed the deployment results on three types of terrain (plain, hill and mountain). We know that, as the complexity of the terrain increases, the characteristics of different algorithms are relatively stable, while the optimiza- tion results of various algorithms reduce. We can see this from the objective Coverage.

Compared to the other algorithms, CMODE and MOEA/DVA can maintain good distribution and convergence.

From their algorithm structures, we know that CMODE and MOEA/DVA are more complex and advanced than NSGA-III and CCGDE3. In detail, CMODE utilizes a subpopulation to optimize each objective, and an archive for maintaining good solutions found so far. As to the optimization of subpopulations and the archive, JADE [36] and jDE [37], which are powerful optimizers, are employed, respectively.

Additionally, to guarantee the diversity of the archive solutions, shift-based density estimation (SDE) [38]strategy  Fig. 10. Visualization of final solution sets of all 24 runs on mountainous terrain.

2332-7790 (c) 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TBDATA.2017.2685581, IEEE Transactions on Big Data  JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 9  is introduced. Functioning together, CMODE performs good as to both convergence and diversity. MOEA/DVA proposes the decision variable analysis (DVA) strategy to classify the decision variables, based on which decision variables are grouped, and the cooperative coevolution (CC) strategy is used for the optimization of each group. The MOEA/D framework is also included. Uniformly distributed weight vectors contribute to good diversity and distribution.

NSGA-III is based on NSGA-II, and weight vectors are also employed. However, the distribution maintenance strategy seems not so good for our problem, thus, distribution of the solution set is not satisfactory. CCGDE3 uses simple random grouping and simple DE optimizer (DE/rand/1), so its performance is quite bad.

Combining the HV metric results, we know that as the complexity of the terrain increases, MOEA/DVA and CMODE perform quite similar, but MOEA/DVA has some advantage over CMODE. For all types of terrains, CCGDE3 can only achieve a low Coverage rate, and the distribution is poor, so it is worse than MOEA/DVA and CMODE. NSGA-III is much better than CCGDE3, but it is still not as good as CMODE and MOEA/DVA. From the above, we can say that, roughly, the results are in accord with the HV indicator and CMODE and MOEA/DVA are the best, but MOEA/DVA seems better than CMODE. NSGA-III is worse, and CCGDE3 is the worst for all cases.



VI. CONCLUSION  In this paper, for the deployment problem of HDSNs on 3D terrain, we present a 3D sensing model and adopt a non-probabilistic measure-based fusion operator and propose a novel uncertain 3D directional coverage model based on the ?fuzzy ring?. We simulate the deployment problem as a multiobjective optimization problem with the following three objectives: Coverage, Connectivity Uniformity and De- ployment Cost. Four multiobjective optimization algorithms (MOEA/DVA, CMODE, NSGA-III and CCGDE3) are utilized to address the problem. To study the influence of different types of terrains on the deployment results, we conduct exper- iments on three types of terrains (plain, hill and mountain).

From the experimental analysis, we conclude that MOEA/DVA performs the best, CMODE is a little worse, NSGA-III ranks third and CCGDE3 is the worst. Unlike traditional studies on the deployment problem, we extend the deterministic sensing model to an uncertain sensing model and present a novel coverage model, extending from the 2D plane and 3D full space to complex 3D terrain and also from omni-directional sensors to heterogeneous directional sensors. Therefore, the deployment problem becomes more complex but has more practical significance.

