

Abstract  Emergency Department (ED) represents a highly  chaotic environment with a big responsibility to provide critical  care to patients on a rapid fashion for life saving service. The  operating capacity of ED is often challenged with overcrowding  especially with patients at non-emergency situation using it as  point of access for primary care. Application of Radio  Frequency Identification Device (RFID) technology in ED is  gaining significant attention with the potential to improve ED  care service and subsequently reduce cost. Our previous pilot  study demonstrated the feasibility of quantifying patient alone  time and provider time in establishing relationship to the ED  length of stay (LOS).  In this work, RFID data within the ED on  a larger patient group was used to quantify and understand the  various factors influencing  in ED. Results  indicate that many factors such as patients per physician or  nurse and order volumes are controllable to improve the  operating efficiency.  These findings motivates further  investigation to explore the relationship of patient alone time to  overall hospital LOS, readmission, patient leaving without  being seen, mortality, patient satisfactions and other  complications for a particular cohort of disease group to  improve quality of care at ED.



I. INTRODUCTION  The Emergency Department (ED) of the hospital is the  major portal through which the community accesses time-  sensitive and lifesaving complex care, and it is one of the  most complex and the busiest place in a hospital [1].

Unscheduled practices are common in ED with typical 24/7  operations and most often is highly chaotic depending on the  nature of the patient volume needing critical care such as  accident or acute sicknesses that needs high quality care in  the shortest time [2]. ED service is delivered through an  integrative collaboration among staff from various  departments depending on the need and the patient traverses  through the system, including triage, registration, treatment,  cashier, pharmacy, and admission for lifesaving care [3].

ED crowding is a major concern that affects the operating  efficacy of ED due to huge influx of patients, and in  particular non-emergency patients using ED as point of  access for primary care [4]. The ED workflow in most   Shivaram P. Arunachalam is with the Department of Radiology, Mayo  Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA (phone: 507-316-5839; fax: 507-284- 9778; e-mail: poigaiarunachalam.shivaram@ mayo.edu).

Gomathi Marisamy is with the Department of Information Technology,  Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905 USA.

Annie Sadosty, David Nestler & Thomas Hellmich are with the Department  of Emergency Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905 USA.

Mustafa Sir & Kalyan Pasupathy are with the Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905 USA.

hospitals is quite similar in order to provide the speedy care  need for life saving service. However, there are several  procedural workflow issues such as long wait time, overuse  of observation units, patients leaving ED without care or  payment, and non-availability of sickbeds to admit patients  once they are diagnosed [2].

ED represents an extremely challenging environment for  evaluating workflow and to measure the effect of system  level interventions. Time-motion studies are common to  study workflow related issues and have been attempted to  improve ED workflow [5]. In order to improve ED care and  patient safety, hospitals nowadays use advanced capacity  management tools for addressing various ED challenges such  as overcrowding, patient flow, length of stay (LOS) in the  ED, etc. [6]. While saturation has been reached as to how  much LOS reduction can be achieved without compromising  the quality of care, the question of whether or not Electronic  Medical Records (EMR) adoption has improved ED  workflow is still a lingering question.  Many ED  administrators agree that EMR adoption was not cost-  effective nor reduce LOS [7]. However, it is worth  mentioning that only advanced analytics of EMR data can  yield actionable intelligence to make vital clinical decisions  that can help guide quality patient care. Therefore there is a  clear need to explore novel approaches and analytics that can  improve ED workflow and care delivery while maintaining  patient safety.

RFID technology use in healthcare has opened a new space  in healthcare informatics research that provides novel data to  identify workflow process pitfalls and provide new directions  [8]. The potential advantages of RFID adoption in healthcare  and especially in ED has been well recognized to save costs  and improve care delivery [9]. However, many hospitals are  reluctant for RFID adoption due to the large upfront  infrastructure costs, need for an integrated health information  technology (HIT), advanced analytical tools for big data  analysis emerging from RFID and skilled data scientists to  tackle the data to derive actionable intelligence [10]. Our  recent work on the RFID data analytics demonstrated the  feasibility of quantifying and analyzing two novel variables  spends alone without interaction with a health care staff in  spends interacting with any health care staff [11]. The study  focused on how these two variables affected LOS in ED, and  the results were inconclusive to demonstrate any significant  relationship between these variables which motivated to to  identify factors  influencing longer alone time, which is  believed to increase LOS.

Identifying Factors Influencing Patient Alone Time at the  Emergency Department using RFID Data: What is Next?

Shivaram P. Arunachalam, Student Member, IEEE, Mustafa Sir, Gomathi Marisamy, Annie Sadosty, David Nestler, Thomas Hellmich, and Kalyan Pasupathy       Therefore, the purpose of this research is to use RFID  data in ED to quantify  understand how several factors such as ESI level (represents  patient severity), ED level (represents the complexity of care  given to a patient) of Mayo Clinic, order volumes for test and  procedures etc. patients per physician and nurse influence  patient alone time in ED.



II. METHODS  A. ED-CELL in Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN  Department in Rochester, MN is one of the busiest and  largest departments with 75 beds on 1.25 acres providing  and Clinical Engineering Learning Laboratory (CELL)  collectively called as the ED-CELL integrates systems  engineers, care teams, ED staff and patients to advance  knowledge and transform patient care. This novel integrated  team works on a common mission to leverage advanced and  proven ways to collect and analyze various data sources to  improve the ED experience for both patients and staff.  Mayo  Clinic adopted RFID into ED for improving workflow  process and quality of care. Recently more than 750 RFID  sensors has been installed throughout the ED in Mayo Clinic,  Rochester campus which enables real-time monitoring and  tracking of physicians, nurses, allied health staff, patients,  medical devices including the ED bed etc. which are tagged  using passive devices within the ED. The large big data  collected from RFID are automatically stored in a designated  database which can be retrieved for offline analysis. Real-  time tracking and display system provides visual monitoring  capability which staff can quickly access to locate or identify  the needed resources. Figure 1 shows a block diagram of a  typical RFID implementation.

.Fig 1: Block diagram of the RFID setup for tracking staff,  patients, and medical devices in ED    B. RFID Data Description  RFID data for the months of May-July 2016 within the  ED was retrieved from the database for offline analysis in  this study. The dataset description is similar to the one  described in our previous work [11]. Patient alone time, LOS,  patients per physician, patients per nurse etc. were derived  from the data, Using RFID data, the time each patient spent  in their observation room alone and how much total time  patient was with a provider were calculated. Integrated  analysis was performed by augmenting RFID data with  various patient-related (e.g., pediatric vs. adult, Mayo  emergency severity index (ESI), age, etc.)  and system level (e.g., patient volume, staffing levels, order  volumes) variables. Each data point presented in this work  corresponds specifically to an individual patient.

C. RFID Data Analysis  First, the relationship between patient alone time and the  ESI level was analyzed where ESI level 1 indicates high  severity and 5 indicates low severity. Similar analysis was  care represents the highest priority patients with ED level of  between patient alone time and LOS in the observation room  was studied. A suitable line fit was performed to  demonstrate the degree of relationship.

Next, the relationship between the total alone time of  patients to patients per physician, patient per nurse was  analyzed. The relationship between the maximum order  volume in the ED (within the window of LOS considered for  analysis in this study) and patient alone time was analyzed.

A suitable line fit was performed to demonstrate the degree  of relationship.  All statistical analysis were performed using  the freely available Generalized Boosted Regression Models  (GBM) package in R statistical software.



II. RESULTS  A total of 15453 usable patient data with RFID  information were available between May-July March 2016  for this study. Figure 2, shows the plot between ESI level and  the total patient alone time. It is seen that for ESI level 2, the  average patient alone time (indicated by the horizontal line in  the box plot) was higher compared to other levels. Similarly,  Figure 3, shows the plot between ED level and the total  patient alone time. It is seen that for ED level 5, the average  patient alone time was higher compared to other levels.

Surprisingly, for both ESI and ED levels, the average patient  alone times is not the lowest compared with other levels. This  could stem from the fact that if patient influx into ED at any  given time is higher than its capacity, the patient alone time  and throughput will be higher, which could be a possible  explanation for this scenario.

Fig. 2: Plot of ESI level to total patient alone time       Figure 4 shows the plot between patient alone time in minutes and LOS in hours. With the large dataset from 15453 patients, the plot although does not reveal a significant relationship, provides the trend leading to a conclusion that indeed patient alone time could be a crucial factor associated with LOS. However, it is imperative to note that each ED case is unique by itself and the patient alone time is indeed influenced by a host of other variables, which could generally lead to the expectation that higher patient alone time could lead to higher LOS. This result from a larger population provides better insight than from our previous work [11] with three time lower number of data points.

Fig. 3:  time     Fig. 4. Plot of patient alone time versus LOS. Blue line  indicates a line fit.

Figure 5 shows the plot between total alone and number of  patients per physician during the LOS being considered in  this study. As observed from the plot, approximately 8-18  patients are being handled by a physician at a given reference  window of time and sometimes there are 25 patients being  provided care by a single physician, This interesting result  reveals great insights into physician staffing levels since  lower patients per physician does not always correspond to  reduced patient alone time.

Similarly, Figure 6 shows the plot between total alone and  number of patients per nurse during the LOS being  considered in this study. As observed from the plot,  approximately 0.5-2.5 patients are being handled by a nurse.

The result obviously provide the notion that if just 1 nurse is  attending 1 patient total alone time is somewhat reduced,  however given the influence of other factors such as ESI  levels, availability of physician to make important clinical  decisions etc. does influence the patient alone time regardless  of how many patients a nurse is handling, in this case a  maximum of 4 patients. The results obtained with this larger  dataset are comparable to what was reported earlier with  fewer data points [1].

Fig. 5. Plot of patient alone time versus number of patients  per MD. Blue line indicates a line fit.

Fig. 6. Plot of patient alone time versus number of patients per nurse. Blue line indicates a line fit.

Figure 7 shows the plot between maximum patient alone time and the order volumes for all patients in the ED during a reference LOS.  As observed from the figure, order volumes between 5-20 orders caused higher maximum patient alone time. This provides new insight, that with a higher influx of patients in ED, and volume of orders goes up in a given reference time frame, patients need to wait longer as all the orders has to be processed and results obtained to move through the ED workflow. Since patient-alone time is influenced by many other factors, order volume also proves itself to be one of the integral factors that can modulate the patient alone time. While, it is doubtless that orders from ESI  priority depending on the test being ordered, the processing times are highly variable and case dependent which cannot imprint itself clearly as evident from Figure 7. This result reveal the importance of analyzing the RFID data separately based on ESI levels for a particular disease group to fully       dissect the underlying factors that could influence patient alone time.

Fig. 7: Plot of average patient alone time versus level of physician-patient ratio available during LOS.



III. DISCUSSION  The results from this study corroborates our earlier work,  and confirms the influence of various factors attributing to  patient alone time such as number of patients per physician or  nurse and the order volumes which indeed positively  influence LOS. Given this multi-factorial influence, a  multiple regression model can provide better explanation of  how these factors modulate patient alone time. The second  and third level for ED and ESI attributed to the higher patient  alone time. In general, longer patient alone time is expected  to significantly affect LOS. But, given the multitude of  factors that influence this patient alone time a definite cause  for its increase is not attributable.

The results indicate that to most extent higher patients per  physician could lead to longer patient alone time, but not  always and it is highly patient specific. However, by having  more emergency physician on board is always handy to  manage a sudden influx of patients needing critical care  which to some extent reduce patient alone time. Similar  analysis holds for the case for number of patients per nurse.

Usually a nurse handles a maximum of 4 patients, but there is  no specific trend  that a 1:1 ratio will definitely lead to lower  patients alone time, since it is also modulated by several other  factors. Therefore at no doubt optimal ED staffing is crucial  for high quality speedy care for the patients in need. RFID  data provided a new perspective into looking into patient  alone with the total number of order volumes placed in ED  within a reference frame of time. Since the orders are of  varying complexity with different processing times, it is  evident that higher orders positively may correlate with  longer patient alone time. This finding could be really  important because, eliminating unnecessary orders can be  crucial in ED, where time can be saved with integrative ED  care with physicians across all disciplines involved in the  care delivery.

So what is next with the use of RFID data? RFID data  provides process visibility in ED thereby helping to better  understand the workflow bottlenecks, inefficiencies, team  interactions, and also safety concerns which were not  possible before. Mayo Clinic already employs home gown  real-time dashboard that gives real-time feedback on patient  flow in ED etc. Since reduced LOS is often desired to  optimize ED operating capacity, RFID data does provide new  avenues of insights on how ED workflow can be streamlined  to identify gaps and leverage this new information to make  efficient workflow for high quality care. Potential next  direction is to investigate a unique cohort of disease group  within ED and explore the relationship of patient alone time  to overall hospital LOS, readmission, patient leaving without  being seen, mortality, patient satisfactions and other  complications to improve quality of care at ED.



IV. CONCLUSIONS  In this paper we demonstrated the influence of several  factors such as number of patients per physician or nurse and  order volumes on patient alone time which is known to  cause higher LOS in ED using RFID data. A multiple-  regression model using a specific patient cohort (e.g. with  chest pain) can provide great insights to optimize ED  workflow for these patients.

