

Would quantified self prevent obesity and diabetes among adults in Saudi Arabia?

Salem Alelyani College of Computer Science  King Khalid University Abha, Saudi Arabia  s.alelyani@kku.edu.sa  Abdelrahman Ibrahim King Khalid University  Abha, Saudi Arabia iaboeyad@kku.edu.sa   Abstract? The rapid advancement of wearable devices and smartphones, allowed practitioners and specialists to keep track of physical, biological and behavioral activities. Nowadays, this self tracking, a.k.a. quantified self (QS), is widely used in big data science due to the large volume of data being generated from these devices. The wearable devices that are being used today for self-tracking can collect enormous amounts of data for an individual from only one activity such as collecting the heart rates for an individual; it generates around 9 gigabytes of data per person per month.

The collected data from an individual or from a group might lead to extraordinary advancement in vast scientific fields if it has been collected, organized, and analysed in a proper manner. Examples of the advantages include, but not limited to, helping to improve health of targeted individuals, predicting future incidents or events, helping decision makers in governments and organizations in taking the right decisions at the right time according to data collected and analyzed from crows, that is to name a few. In this paper, we analyze existing approaches of utilizing and handling QS as big data, and the state of the art mining approaches in this emerging domain comparing two primary findings from previous studies and how it impacts individual?s health, especially among adults who suffer from obesity and diabetes. We also did and analyze a survey among self-trackers in Saudi Arabia to have an understating of the QS movement in the country and how it can be improved for healthcare purposes.

Keywords? quantified self; big data; healthcare; wearables; IoT; analytics

I.  INTRODUCTION "Khalil Gibran said once ?Knowledge of the self is the mother of all knowledge. So, it is incumbent on me to know myself, to know it completely, to know its minutiae, its characteristics, its subtleties, and it?s very atoms.? While many people are using their smartphones and wearable devices for self-tracking purposes, there is a huge demand for consumer-oriented health solutions a.k.a. digital health solution, which allows people to monitor and control their own health outside hospitals [1].

In Saudi Arabia, around one third of the population are diabetic.

Similarly, one third are obese. These terrifying numbers are threatening the young nation where more than 70% are under 30 years old. The number of diabetic patients in the kingdom has jumped from one-in-ten to one third according to the Economist [2]. The main culprits are those with the unhealthy eating habits and scant exercise. Similar things can be said  about diabetes.  The death rate due to these two lethal diseases are increasing yearly. Beside the death rate, there is the growing spending on healthcare in a growing economy. All these needs to be controlled. Previous studies have shown that changes in lifestyle such as increasing physical activities and in diet monitoring can significantly reduce the risk of diabetes and of body overweight [3].

In the Saudi Vision 2030, one important goal is increasing the average life expectancy from 74 years now to 80 years by 2030.

One thing can be done in order for this goal to be achieved, we may help reducing death due to diabetes and obesity.

Technology may play an important role to monitor and motivate self health. The smartphone usage in Saudi Arabia exceeded 70% of the total population. Not only smartphone usage is high in the country, Internet of things (IoT) in general is trending like everywhere else in the world, and that includes wearable devices, health sensors and any daily object, that is readable, recognizable, locatable, addressable, and controllable via the Internet [4].

. These devices can help patients to monitor their daily life activities and help healthy individuals to remain healthy.

In this paper, we will investigate whether using IoT devices to monitor individual?s activities, i.e. quantified self, would help improve someone?s life.

In the remaining of this paper, quantified self will be introduced. Then, we are going to discuss the quantified self from big data perspective. Then, briefly we are going to talk about the obesity and diabetes in Saudi Arabia. The following section will introduce quantified self in Saudi Arabia. Finally, we are going to discuss the conducted survey and its findings.

II. WHAT IS QUANTIFIED SELF ?

The quantified self (QS) movement refers to any person who is involved in any self-tracking activity, including tracking body weight, burned calories, steps calculation, sleep health, body fat and more than that [5] Previously QS users were using manual data entry to track their activity such as paper and pencil, but recently users are using IoT devices to track, monitor, record and analyze their activities.

The world health organization (WHO) recommends the use of what they called self-administered questionnaires (SAQs) among adults to improve their health. They have reported that older adults were capable of evaluating their own health with accurate information using paper and pencil [6]. This SAQs      approach can be digitized in what we call today quantified self- movement.

Qualified self is a term used for the first time in San Francisco in 2007 when Gary Wolf started a blog quantifiedself.com. By 2012 There were more than 50 QS meet-ups in the US alone, and a QS conference took place for the first time. Most of QS members keep records of certain things, such as fitness, steps, body weight, blood pressure and so on, and their aim behind that is to become or remain health [8],[9].

There are some reasons that make QS movement useful nowadays, and that includes the fact that electronic sensors became smaller and integrated, mobile phones became smartphones with all its sensors and computer chips, the social media sharing functionality encouraged more people to record and share their own data, and cloud services has made it easier to store such big data [5],[10].



III. QUANTIFIED SELF AS BIG DATA Quantified self is a very interesting topic among data scientists these days and that includes the data analysis and integration.

QS is becoming a very challenging research area because its users might not have the right tools to manage its data sets. To date, QS data sets are growing in size everyday [8].

If we consider SAQs data sets, we might call it (small data) but this is no longer the case in quantifying self movement. For example, the data collected from one wearable device that check user?s heart rates can consume up to 9 gigabytes of data per user per month, for heart rate monitoring alone, GPS locations and steps calculation is another form of big dots that should be analysed and presented for users.

This huge data streaming can be in different forms and representations, and all could be considered as big data. In the followings, we are going to discuss different forms of data types that might be generated from QS device: ? Temporal Data:  The data that change and vary overtime are called temporal data. In QS, heart rate, blood pressure,  steps, sleeping, and so forth, should be consider with  their respective time. Thus, studying QS with time consideration is crucial and might make the difference.

? Spatial Data: That data that represent the object in the geographical coordinates are known as spatial (or geospatial) data. For example, geographical position tracking in QS would help to predict heart beats or blood pressure for individuals. This might lead to better health or save the day for the user.

These two types may come in real time, a.k.a. data streaming, which is normal in such case [11]. However, data streaming needs an extensive preprocessing, mining, and analysis effort.

Beside that it suffers from what is so called curse of dimensionality. Most of that data would not contribute that much in the accuracy of the analytics. Thus, cleansing the data is an indispensable step. Therefore, such huge datasets need a huge storage capacity and powerful computational capabilities.

In addition to all this, the harvested data from the QS devices  and sensors are either structured, semi-structured and / or unstructured. This makes the mining and the learning, to make sense, and the extracting of knowledge from such data to be a painful task.

There are several issues associated with handling such a huge volume of data including: proper infrastructure, qualified human resource, intelligent knowledge extraction solutions, privacy security policies and solutions. In terms of infrastructure, we need equipped facilities that are prepared with high performance computers HPCs and storages that are able to handle the collected data with respect to volume and velocity. Furthermore, we need to have engineers who are qualified to manage that facility beside experts with high qualification in data science major. Data scientists will be responsible for writing and integrating algorithms that will extract knowledge from the collected data and validating the results. Also, they will be responsible for determining the recommendations that will be fed back to the users. These learning algorithms may provide recommendations to individuals, communities, organisations and / or governments.



IV. OBESITY AND DIABETES IN KSA Saudi Arabia, population has suffered from a lot of chronic diseases such as diabetes, obesity and hibernation. Recent studies showed that Saudi Arabia is facing some public health problems, especially in obesity and diabetes, as Saudi Arabia now a days is one of the top ten countries in both, with (35.6%) of the population are obese and (31.6%) have diabetes [12].

Both obesity and diabetes are preventable. Previous studies have demonstrated that changes in lifestyle are effective in preventing both diabetes and obesity in high-risk adults with impaired glucose tolerance. [13], [14] Increasing physical activity, improving diet and then sustaining these lifestyle changes can reduce both body weight and risk of diabetes.

Health professionals must continue to stress the importance of a balanced diet and physical activity for healthy weight loss. In the Saudi society, men and women must overcome many obstacles to make the best choices for optimal health. The provision of clinical preventive services to identify and control hypertension, elevated cholesterol levels, obesity and diabetes remain important medical priorities nationally. Development and implementation of national programs to promote a balanced diet, increased physical activity and weight control must be national priorities as well [15].

The quantified self movement should be closely monitored by all interested in the future of the American health care delivery system. The potential to improve the life of patients with chronic diseases is clearly apparent. Whether most people will use the increasingly sophisticated tools being developed is open to debate. [16]

V. QUANTIFIED SELF IN SAUDI ARABIA People nowadays are using their smartphones rapidly compared to yesteryears. A study by Google indicated Saudi Arabia to be the 4th placing in global smartphone ownership with (72.8%) of the population owning and using smartphone [17]. Most of      compass and other sensors that can be used in quantifying self.

On the other hand, wearable devices are becoming the new trend in the technology, with sensors that can calculate steps, burned calories, heart rates, blood pressure and more. The cost of these wearable devices is very low nowadays compared to 10 years ago. Thus, quantified self movement took place.

However, we could not find any study that focus on quantifying self movement in Saudi Arabia. Some of smartphones users in Saudi Arabia are using their smartphone for quantifying self purposes, some of them do keep track for of their steps, walking distance, exercise, sleep and more. In order to have a more understating of early adopters for the quantified self movement in Saudi Arabia, we conducted a survey to have some preliminary results regarding QS, and we managed to communicate with them using twitter as a platform to distribute the survey. More than 180 people participated in this survey from the age group between 17-65 years old, males and females.



VI. SURVEY ANALYSIS An online survey was conducted in a community that we believe to be a quantified-self users. Although the concept of QS is not familiar in Saudi Arabia, but most of the users are using at least one of QS methods. All 180 responses were used in the data analysis process.

In this survey 180 respondent participated around 94% live in Saudi Arabia. Around 61% of them were male and 39% are female as shown in figure 1. Around 60% of the participants were singles and the other 40% are married. Figure 2 shows the age group of the respondents, 17-35 years old sum up to 75% of the participants, as this is the age group who are early adopters in technology in Saudi Arabia.

Fig. 1. Participants Gender  Around 70 % of the survey respondents has used the QS tool in general, only 42% of them had used a wearable device such as Apple watch, Fitbit, Nike fuel band, jawbone up, Polar watch and so forth.

Less than 20% have never tracked any activity, while around 80% track their body weight, heart beats and sleep regularly using smart phones and wearable devices.

Around 31% of the participants track their activity every day,   Fig. 2. Age group for the respondents  more than 20% do it three to four times a week. While the rest track their activities weekly or monthly.

When we asked whether utilising QS tools have improved respondent?s lifestyle comparing to their last year, users of QS tools tend to have greater impact in their lifestyle because of self-tracking specially, in terms of exercising more, eating healthier food, run faster/longer distance, and having better mood/sleep.

Fig. 3. Results of the impact of QS tools utilisation on the participants  On the other hand, non-users tend to have lower impact in their lifestyle compare to their previous year, as shown in figure 3.

In order to test the statistical significance of the differences between the two population, we did ANOVA analysis to compare the difference between QS tool users and non-users in term of exercising more, and the Mean plot for that analysis is shown in Figure 4.

Fig. 4. Means Plots for QS Who are exercising more  Only 7% of the respondents believe that self-tracking has no impact in their lifestyle, while 93% believe that self tracking or QS has a positive impact on their life.

In addition, when we asked whether they prefer that their QS data should be used for research proposes, 93% of the respondents  have no problem or even encourage researchers to use their QS data anonymously. However, only 7% doesn?t feel comfortable sharing their QS data with anyone else.



VII. DISCUSSION QS tools might have a significant impact in Saudi Arabia in general and specially in terms of Consumer-oriented health solutions, which might help preventing the high risk of diabetes and body overweight among adults. Based on the survey we conducted (results shown above) and from the literature, 93% of the respondents agreed that using QS tools had a significant impact on their lifestyle. As you may notice from Figure 3, the percentage of the QS tool users believe that using such tools helped them to practice more and eat healthier. For instance, 43% of the QS tools users believe that they exercise more this year comparing to last year, while,  15%, on the other hand, believe so from the non-users group. Similarly, 18% of the QS tools users think they have been eating healthier this year comparing to 8% from the non-user. Figure 3 keeps showing similar consistent results from both groups. These promising results prove the hypothesis we made earlier regarding the potential of QS tools utilization to improve the lifestyle and the heath of the Saudi citizens especially in preventing diabetes and obesity. Therefore, QS tools users tend to have a better lifestyle when using QS tools in terms of physical activity and diet.

Therefore we believe that quantified self tools can reduce the high-risk of diabetes and obesity in the society. As studies show, that these two life threatening diseases are preventable by healthy food and regular exercise. We believe that most of QS tools users are motivated to exercise more, monitor their food if they are using any kind of quantified self-approaches.

Both males and females have interest in using QS tools  specially in the age group between 17-35 who are the early adapters of technology and IoT devices. There are huge increase in quantified health among adults in the country due to the social networks raid growth. Sharing physical activity with others encourages users to exercise  more and in regular paces.

On the other hand, 93 % of the participants are welling to share their data anonymously with others, which give high potential for researchers and medical experts to have significant amount of data for experiments, collecting it and storing it in the cloud will allow them to mix the data along with the analysis results and analysis model to come up with health related knowledge discovery and provide it for individuals and the society at massive scale.

Although the concept of quantified self is for someone to track, record and monitor his own data, the desire to understand the health status for family members or friends who live in remote city give potential to share QS data with others. Not only that, QS tools users might include professionals in healthcare to monitor their health and activity to give them realtime recommendation and prevent the risk of  careless patients. In a recent a study, quantified self tools users who used the platform wiki-heath [18], which allows them to analyse  their data and get real time recommendation and share their healthcare records with the loved ones and healthcare experts, has proven to have a significant impact for the user himself, his family members and for the healthcare experts who used this data for experimental purposes and for medical researches. Not only patients are using wiki-health a range from quantified self  users and even athletes who wants to monitor their activity or even from normal people who wants to stay fit.



VIII. OPPORTUNITIES   AND CHALLENGES Although the use of self-tracking devices for QS in Saudi Arabia is not mature yet, there are some opportunities that the community can take advantages of it.

Via quantified self approaches, diabetes patients can monitor their glucose level all the time via a wearable device called continuous glucose monitoring (CGM). It is a very small sensor can be attached underneath the skin and lasts for six months, it measures the glucose level and alert the patient and his doctor if his/her glucose level went up or down. With this device, an individual can understand his body better and knew what causes his glucose to be high or low, so he can control his glucose level. On the other hand, the collected data from these sensors can empower researchers in the healthcare sector to reduce the risk among diabetes in the country and hopefully to come up with at least diabetes controlling approaches or cures.

On the other hand, the social impact of the quantified self sensors proven to be positive, most of quantified self members are motivated to exercise more, monitor their health regularly, which will have a very good impact among obese people and it will help them to lose weight or to keep an ideal weight throughout quantified self methods.

Hospitals, obesity and diabetes healthcare centers have a great potential to implement self ?tracking devices to take their healthcare systems outside the hospital boundaries to a different level of what is called nowadays (Patient-driven healthcare      system).

However, there are also challenges in QS movement in Saudi Arabia. First most of QS smartphone applications are not localized to the country, most users prefer Arabic user interface application, while most of the applications now come without an Arabic language support. On the other hand, the enormous amount of data that is generated from QS devices and wearables requires good date mining approaches in order to make use of it. At the moment we could not find any platform that integrates, collects and analyses data from these devices for clinical purposes.



IX. CONCLUSION This paper reviewed the quantified self movement and studied the impact of the wearables and self-tracking devices on one?s health and lifestyle in Saudi Arabia. From the literature review of the quantified self, and from our survey in this paper, we can say that quantified self can improve people?s health in terms of weight monitoring, in terms of encouraging people to walk and to exercise more, which has a very good impact in preventing obesity and diabetes in Saudi Arabia. Although we could not find clinical studies that support these findings due to the disconnectivity between quantified self experts and hospitals in Saudi Arabia, and this is what we are planning to do further in this study by, engaging the QS community with medical experts.



X. FUTURE WORK Saudi Arabia announced recently via its Vision 2030 that one of the key factors of the vision is to increase the average life expectancy from 74 years to 80 years. We believe, based on previous studies in different countries, that Self-Driven health is one of the main controllers that will help to increase the average life expectancy for Saudi citizens via the empowerment of technology combined with a good plan closely tied with the healthcare sector. While diabetes and obesity are the most chronic diseases among Saudi population, and it was proven that diabetes and obesity are preventable through some lifestyle changes, combined with the smartphone revolution, we believe QS is one of the approaches that should be implemented in the national health care system. On the other hand, data mining architecture model is highly recommended as the next step for this study, in order to help both the researchers and the healthcare experts to make use of the massive amount of data that will be collected via quantified self tools and users.

