

Abstract? Security and privacy of big data becomes  challenging as data grows and more accessible by more and more clients. Large-scale data storage is becoming a necessity for healthcare, business segments, government departments, scientific endeavors and individuals. Our research will focus on the privacy, security and how we can make sure that big data is secured. Managing security policy is a challenge that our framework will handle for big data. Privacy policy needs to be integrated, flexible, context-aware and customizable.  We will build a framework to receive data from customer and then analyze data received, extract privacy policy and then identify the sensitive data. In this paper we will present the techniques for privacy policy which will be created to be used in our framework.

Keywords? privacy; big data; security; policy

I. INTRODUCTION Big Data is a new direction of technology in science,  government, industry and business [1]. The size of the datasets for big data is beyond the capabilities of typical database software to handle and manage for capturing, storing, and analyzing data. The idea was limited to the current technology available during those times of processing and storage of huge volume of data. Data is always the most important resource in our society. For example, government agencies are collecting information that contains private data. Big data security has grown fast as a significant concern for clients over the past few years. 88% of the clients were substantially worried on their data privacy [2]. The security issues are increasing and it is happening because of the increasing usage of big data through adaptation of this technology. There are many benefits of big data. Although, it is vulnerable to attacks.

Attackers are consistently trying to find loopholes to attack the big data storage.

Velocity, volume and variety of data magnify the big data [3].  Volume of data is increasing every second from different input resources. Big Data is huge volume of data that is structured or unstructured and itis very difficult to handle by normal databases technologies and software tools   [4].  The exponential growth in volume of data with the speed of data gathering and processing for data inputs coming from large implementation of massive connected devices such   as; cars, smartphones, RFID readers, webcams, and sensor networks require huge resources to handle this size of data and ensuring the security of data. Data streams are generated by these devices continuously without human intervention. With these different sources of unstructured data, it results to have diverse types of data. The massive volume, velocity, and variety of data have a tremendous impact to existing security solutions.

Security solutions for big data were not developed and  intended to handle huge volume of data such as Big Data. The past two years have generated 90% of the world's data [5].

The amount of data is doubled every two years that require having different storage strategies with different storage media [6]. Big data security and privacy are big challenges for customers and service providers [3]. Eighty percent of large organization will endure suffering from major security issues with big data by 2016[7].  Most of these are not in standard forms which make it more difficult to analyze with the available tools today [8]. In 2013 Big Data has been introduced as one of the new technology trends, but facing big challenges with security and privacy issues which threatens to slow the momentum.

There are many challenges facing big data, security and privacy are just some of these challenges. It has been reported that big data advancement increases the threats to the existing security of the data. One issue with big data privacy is policy management and how to enforce it with this huge data and not affecting the performance.

Privacy policy needs to be integrated, flexible, context- aware and customizable [9]. To protect the user?s privacy, many privacy solutions have been proposed. One proposed solution is to use integration of privacy protection mechanism [4]. In most of the studies it concentrates on single mechanism while this study focuses on applying more than one mechanism to secure user privacy. eXtensible Access Control Markup Language  (XACML)  was developed to be used as uniform control policies and has  been used for privacy.

XACML is an XML-based language standardized by the organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS)[7].

Due to its size and volume, especially as they attempt to maximize data efficiency and performance, protecting Big Data (while it is in storage) has been a challenge for the most of organizations. The optimal data protection is to ensure that when it falls into unauthorized hands, it is meaningless.

Big data security is categorized in different levels which includes; communications, processing, authentication, and storage level. Current technology was not built for big data security. Data is stored in plain text, wherein critical information can be easily stolen by hackers. Logging to critical data is not logged in which means any abused of data cannot be identified. This technology is used by most businesses to store and analyze their own data and their customer?s data which makes privacy and security very important in gaining the confidence of customers. Hence, there is a need for investing, studying, and understanding the challenges and providing better solutions to secure big data.

Big data security is a major challenge in the field of research for   scientists. Our research will focus on big data storage and enforcing the privacy policy. First, we will focus on how to protect data in storage. The use of encryption, fragmentation, authentication and secure communication within our framework will secure the big data storage which will be enforced based on the policy identified by client.

Today, business depends on customer?s data protection.

Data about health, shopping, purchasing and traveling is contained collected digital information. The data are collected by businesses to aid in decision making and help to attain their goals. They analyze the data and use it to direct their customers in the way that achieve their goals. While this could be used legally, but sometimes it could be illegal. In 2014, 92% internet users in the US were worried regarding their online privacy while 89% avoid dealing with companies on the cloud as they feel that their data is not secure.

West in [10] defined privacy as ?Privacy is the claim of individuals, groups, or institutions to determine for themselves when, how, and to what extent information about them is communicated to others.?  Big data security and privacy are big challenges for customers and service providers [3]. Eighty percent of large organization will endure suffering from major security issues with big data by 2016[6].  Most of these are not in standard forms which make it more difficult to analyze with the available tools of today [7].

Beneficial information can be extracted and analyzed from digital information collected from different sources such as credit card companies, government agencies, banking, and health care. Regardless of the usage of the information and the benefit, privacy and security is the main challenge in big data.

The privacy problem is main concern these days that comes because of the huge amount of personal information available on internet [11] as digital information.

Managing security policy is a challenge that our framework will handle for big data. Privacy policy needs to be integrated, flexible, context-aware and customizable

II. RELATED WORK  Hassan et al. [12] introduced Policy Management as a Service (PMaaS), a framework for cloud based policy management is designed, so the users can control their policies to access the resources of where they are stored. The framework consists of cloud user who manages the access policies on the policy management service provider. In addition, it also includes a policy management service provider which defines, edits and manages the access policies.

The cloud service provider which is the third component controls the access to the protected resources based on the policies identified by the cloud users. The last one is the requester which is an application which cooperates with a cloud service provider to be able to access the protected resource belonging to the specific cloud user.

Kudakwashe Zvarevashe et al. [5] listed security cases for big data starts with securing computations which may also  return wrong result and at the same time, it is difficult to discover whether  the data is faulty or not. The second one is the security for non-relational data stores where the security depends on the middleware. The next security case is securing data storage and how we can protect unauthorized access to data. Then they explain the importance of validating, the input devices.  Real time security monitoring is  a changes in the area of big data security. Privacy of clients during data mining is another important case for big data security. Securing the data from end to end is one of the big data security cases.

In this paper they recommend solutions to these challenges to big data security which uses Kerberos system for authenticating,  both   users and services to ensure privacy between communicating protocol and users on the Internet, the Transport Layer Security (TLS) is utilized. Data encryption is one way to secure data in storage with having a key encryption saved and available to reuse the data when needed. Secure and validate any software needed to be deployed.

Kevin et al. [13] proposed a framework for enforcing policy in managing cloud data which considers three important items: data type, computation and policy requirements.

A policy-compliant data processing framework with the following modules was proposed:  Policy-reasoning module which maps a policy to a specific set of tasks.

Data processing task rewriting module: enforces policies by considering different rewriting strategies.

Pre-processing module: executes the pre-processing tasks on the underlying data.

Post-processing module: to process the final results to enforce policies.

Most of security tools fail to work with big data environment, so these tools need to be able to scale with the data [14]. The existing big data security solutions which are not developed and intended for huge volume, velocity, and variety cannot protect this amount of data [15]. Big data security is adapting the traditional security tools. They recommend placing the security closer to the data storage instead of having the security at the data center level. It is not bound to the number of policy sets, policies and rules and they showed the enhancement of performance by applying their way. Meanwhile, it still needs more work for better XACML performance.

In [16], for the convenience for the providers of cloud data storage, a security agenda has been offered to implement the security strategies and policies with the help of policy management module.   This allows the system to assess the activities of users and analyze them for every system and finally categorized as fair? or ?malicious?.  To make sure that system is going to work according to the   requirements and set policy definitions, a strategy has been enforced for security maintenance. Maintaining the Integrity of the Specifications

III. SOLUTION ARCHITECTURE This section details the security policy management  framework that efficiently enforces the sensitive data security policy. The policy enforcement framework must support different data processing requirements and must be highly flexible. To implement these modules efficiently, it needs to be specialized for different data types, computation types and policy requirements  It is built on the concept of data distribution on mulita cloud service providers. Figure1 shows a high level view of the framework which includes the main components. The first component is the ?Security Module? which receives data from client and then extracts the security rules and passes it to the ?policy management? which is the second component of our framework. Figure2 illustrates the framework and its components in more detail.

Client: A client uses different cloud service providers to store big data. The client is in charge of defining security policies which will be used by cloud service providers to identify sensitive data when a requester attempts to store data  Security module: the security model is the core part of our solution which applies security polices to data to identify sensitive from non-sensitive and then execute the fragmentation algorithm to sensitive data.

Policy Management: A policy management enables the service provider to edit and manage the security policies  At the beginning the ?Extract Security Policy? receives data with security constraints as part of the data, then analyzes the data and extracts the security rules. Security specification is passed to the Policy Translation Point (PTP) which translates the policy to unify format XACML.  Security policy can be written based on the data type.  It identifies the rules to    be able to identify the sensitive and non-sensitive data. The client specifies the security rules, due to that; they know the data and the sensitivity of it. The sensitive association rules is a special group of association rules which represents the sensitive data. Once the ?Extract Security Policy? identifies the security policy, it will update the policy database.

These security rules are important for making decision and need to remain private (i.e., the rules are private to the company or organization owning the data). The Policy Decision Point (PDP) receives the request to lookup for the security policy for certain user. If it is found, it will be sent to the Policy Enforcement Point (PEP). The PEP will send the security constrains to the data analyzer which will identify sensitive and non-sensitive data based on the security constrains. It can specify their policies as part of their data which are translated by the policy management into XACML language. The policy management acts as a policy administration point (PAP), a policy information point (PIP) and Policy Enforcement Point (PEP). Our framework does not inflict any restrictions on security policies specified by clients and our aim here is to allow clients to specify their policies without any restriction. Once the security policies are determined   in client format, the PTP parses the policy, identifies policy elements, and transforms the policy into XACML. Access controls over the stored data are provided through a XACML_policy-based security. The policies are separated based on client, using the association between client and the security policy.

They do not need to deal with various policies beyond this system. The following algorithm is used to extract the security policy and identify the sensitive data:  Input:  D: Data to be store  C= {c1, c2,??ci}/* a set of security constraints*/  Output:  S ={s1,s2,??.sm} /*Security policy*/  RS ={rs1,rs2,?..,rsk} /* association between data  and Security policy */  Main:  get data  identify data type  extract security constraints ( C )  associate Security policy to data  (RC)  update meta data        Client  Security Module  Policy Specification  Data  Policy Management  Security Policy  Fig.1.  Proposed framework management systems                                  \

IV. CONCLUSION   We presented a framework for the privacy policy as part of the big framework for big data security. The security framework for big data consists of many techniques which are security policy manager, fragmentation approach, encryption approach and security manager. The future work will present the remaining part of our framework.

