Learning Data Analytics through a Problem Based  Learning Course

Abstract?Achieving significant meaningful in Engineering is always a challenge. Problem or Project Based Learning (PBL) is one of the different methodologies that tries to enhance a learning process based on student inquiries and innovative solutions to solve real problems. In the present effort, we present a new approach for assessing the impact of PBL applied to analytics courses for Information Engineering students. We describe the analysis, design, implementation, evaluation and visualization of a Web mining platform as well as of a Library Analysis System.

These projects concern the Web Analytics and Data Mining courses, respectively. The former provides students the oppor- tunity to develop a real project ranging from data acquisition, from a Web site, data storing, analytics and visualization. The latter course furnishes a framework to learn and to apply the Knowledge Data Discovery (KDD) methodology over a library dataset to profile customers and understand business dynamics.

In both courses, students are confronted to handle big amounts of heterogeneous data.

Keywords?Computer and Information, Science Education, Problem Based Learning, Data mining, Web analytics.



I. INTRODUCTION  Increasingly, public and private organizations are looking for professionals able to efficiently solve complex problems.

For this purpose, a student-centered learning process, such as Problem-Based or Project-Based Learning (PBL) encourages students to develop different competences and skills, integrates knowledge to solve specific problems [1]. At Universidad del Pac??fico, innovation on educational methods and didactics is valued and supported. To this extent, the 2014-2019 Strategic Plan states as one objective to innovate about educational methodologies to enhance a significant learning process. For this purpose, the University supports innovative learning pro- cess by providing guidance, encouraging to experiment with new methodologies and assessing them. This process enables the university to acquire the best practices and to improve the evaluation system of the courses, as part of a learning process.

Based on the institutional goal, in the Information Engineering Academic Program of the Engineering Faculty, we aim to innovate the learning process by using PBL in data analytics courses. Thus, the PBL methodology has been im-plemented in two courses: the Web Analytics and Data Mining courses, by developing projects such as a Web mining platform and a Library Analysis System. The former project provides students the opportunity to develop a real project ranging from     [8] due to the closeness of the Data Analytics course to the project-oriented structure. In particular, design is one of the fundamental processes and activities in engineering. Therefore, the strategy for teaching design has many similarities with the problem-based learning method. Thus, one of the first engineering programs to implement PBL was the Chemical Engineering program at McMaster University [4].

Some authors such as, De Graaf et al. [9] explored the relevance of the PBL methodology in the teaching of applied sciences, i.e., engineering. In their work, authors conclude that the traditional method of ?chalk and chat? is insufficient to form the kind of engineers that industries need. Accordingly, in the first years of the engineering program, one must begin in a traditional way and gradually increase the number of subjects that are based on projects. More in detail, Kanan [10] studies the relevance of the emphPBL application in Computer Science, respectively.

Concerning Computer Science programs, they have also implemented PBL in their programs. For instance, Barg et al.

[11] present the results of implementing PBL in the Computer Science department at the University of Sydney. Authors show the results of applying PBL in different courses and years of the aforementioned program. In this work, the educators highlight the complexity of the assessment task to note students. They pointed out that one of the most criticized aspects of their PBL implementation was the absences of clarity about how much the students? need to know, how far to explore their problems and when they can stop learning. In the work of Waters and McCracken [12], authors suggest that assessment techniques should be a part of the learning process. The researchers highlight the importance of the students? self-assessment in the PBL process. There is also the work of Moen [13], which describes the experience of implementing PBL for a Data Mining course. Nevertheless, the author does not explain in detail about the assessment of the methodology. In the following section, we describe our experience implementing the PBL methodology in Web Analytics and Data Mining courses.



III. PBL COURSE PREPARATION  We firmly believe that analytics courses, such as Web Analytics and Data Mining are suitable for PBL methodology.

Both courses are guided by the KDD process, which has a set of well-defined steps to achieve a data analytics project.

The two courses share a learning goal with some particular application differences. In the next subsections, we describe the common learning goal for the Web Analytics and Data Mining courses.

A. Knowledge Data Discovery learning goals  First, It is necessary to explain the Knowledge Data Dis- covery process, KDD [14] to contextualize the mandatory learning goals of Web Analytics and Data Mining courses. This process is composed of six phases, as illustrated in Figure 1.

Therefore, the selection, pre-processing, transformation, data mining, evaluation, and interpretation are a set of steps to know and master for acquiring the learning target, i.e., the knowledge extraction. However, in the KDD process 80% of the time is devoted to the selection, pre-processing and  Fig. 1. Overview of the knowledge extraction process [14].

transformation tasks due to the high complexity of heteroge- neous data and only 20%, is allocated for the Data mining, interpretation and evaluation steps. In the next subsection, we describe the particular learning goals of the Web Analytics and Data Mining courses, respectively.

B. Web Analytics course  The learning target of this course is the extraction of insight or knowledge, through indicators, using data and information contained in the Web pages and the navigation of them in a particulary domain.

1) Course Learning Goals: To perform knowledge extrac- tion from Web sites, we need two different learning goals to gather and to analyze data. For the former learning goal, we use different programming languages (i.e., HTML51, CSS32, PHP3, and Javascript4) and technology platforms (i.e., ELK 5 and AWS6). Both must be learned to perform the data collection tasks, pre-processing, transformation, data mining, and visualization. For the latter learning target, students need to understand Sentiment Analysis [15] and Topic Models [16] implemented in Python7 programming language. The platform uses different programming languages on the client side as well as on the server side. Hence, a Web site using HTML5, CCS3, and JavaScript send data generated from users interaction with the Web site through PHP to the server side. Once data is on the server, it is stored in a Comma Separated File (CSV) in the server to be processed with the ELK platform.

2) Dataset: Since the implementation of the platform, the features in Table I were collected:  Attribute Description Time Unix timestamp Device Connexion device (PC, mobile phone, tablet) Name Web site name IP Anonymized IP OS Operating System Navigator Navigator name(Firefox, Mozilla, etc.) Geolocalization Latitude and longitude of the connexion Cookies Boolean variable to enable cookies Resolution Monitor resolution of the connected device Window Navigator window size Opinion Comments on Twitter8 about the Website  TABLE I. WEB ANALYTICS COURSE DATA DESCRIPTION  Relying on the data mentioned above, students can acquire the analytic learning target by exploring the data and perform-  1HyperText Markup Language, version 5: www.w3schools.com/html/ html5 intro.asp  2Cascading Style Sheets, version 3: www.w3schools.com/css/ 3Hypertext Preprocessor: www.php.net 4JavaScript: www.w3schools.com/js/ 5Elastic, Logstash and Kibana www.elastic.co/webinars/  introduction-elk-stack 6Amazon Web Services: aws.amazon.com 7Python: www.python.org    ing Topic models and Sentiment Analysis. Once the platform gathers data and the analytic algorithms are implemented, we need to evaluate how well the students master the learning goals.

C. Data mining course  In this course, students learn how to deal with semi- structured data and basic mining tasks, such as association, clustering, and classification. Accordingly, a project which encompasses all these challenges was proposed.

1) Course Learning Goal: In the present course, learning target is related to the KDD process. Therefore, students must learn to clean data, pre-process, transform and apply Data Mining algorithms. In this context, they have to deal with real data from an offline information system or database.

The Library Data Management System of the Universidad del Pac??fico generates and stores significant amounts of data with information on checkouts, returns, and consults made by users, on a daily basis. This project aims to transform the library data to obtain insights to improve the management of the library. The process consists of data cleaning, pre- processing, transformation, application of association rules and clustering algorithms. Finally, the visualization and data analysis are performed. Concerning the Data Mining tasks of association and clustering, students should learn about the ba- sic algorithms, such as FP-Growth [17] and K-means [18]. The former permit to find frequent patterns in a dataset. The latter allows to group items sharing some similar characteristics.

Accordingly, the dataset used for this project is described in the following subsection.

2) Dataset: In the present project, student were able to work with different kind of attributes from the library. The features are detailed in Table II.

Attribute Description Id Item Item identification Title Title of the book Place Where the book is placed in the library Id User User unique identification # checkouts Number of checkouts # return Number of returns # consultations Number of consultations Checkouts date Day where user checks out the material Return date Day where user returns the material Consultations date Day where user consults the material Hourday Hour of the day Dayweek Day of the week Book topic Subject of the book  TABLE II. DATA MINING COURSE DATA DESCRIPTION  In the next subsection, we describe the evaluation process.

D. Assessment  To assess the students? performance, in both courses, we implement a different approach by combining five different evaluations in the form of a normalized vector. It is worth noting that the average can be calculated if only one score is needed. Thus, the first assessment was a traditional multiple choice exam. Then, each step of the KDD process was evalu- ated along the project development by taking the final report and an oral presentation. Both report and oral presentation are evaluated based on the qualification criteria detailed in tables  III and IV. Finally, the student auto-evaluation them selves and the lecturer performance. These different and complementary assessments methods allowed us to measure the accomplish- ment of the learning targets from the theoretical and practical point of view. In the next section, we detail the results obtained in both projects.



IV. RESULTS  In the current section, we present the results of the projects as well as the outcome of the evaluation. About the results of the Web Analytics and Data mining projects, the students were able to obtain visualizations and insights from datasets. Thus, the Web analytics platform shows information about the type of device, the operating system of the devices, the navigator used to visit a Web site in the form of pie charts and the number of visits per day using a scatter plot.

Regarding the analysis of the library system, the students clustered the clients of the library into 15 different groups sharing similar habits based on the features described in Table

II. Another interesting analysis of the students, not included in the target learning, was a word cloud of the book?s topics.

Concerning to the result of the learning goals. There are five different evaluation ranging from (1) the traditional exam evaluation, (2) the final report, (3) the oral presentation of the project, (4) the student self-evaluation and (5) lecturer evaluation. About the traditional exams in the Web Analytics and Data Mining courses, the mean of the classes were 16.5/20 and 16/20, respectively. These results allow us to measure the theoretical learning of the students during the course.

With regard to the know-how, the report as weel as the oral presentation measures the experience acquired by the students while implementing the project. Finally, the self-evaluation surveys in Figures 2 and 3 show that most of the students consider that the learned skills were ?very good?/?good? and ?good?/?regular?, respectively.

Fig. 2. Web analytics students? self-evaluation  In both cases, students consider very good and good the management skills development for the Web Analytics and Data Mining courses, respectively. Finally, regarding the lecturer evaluation, students qualified the performance of the teacher with a high score which indirectly addresses the contribution of the PBL method in the learning process for the Web Analytics (6.7/7) and Data Mining (6.5/7) courses.

Our approach consists on grouping these notes in a vector for Web Analytics WA = [0.825, 0.775, 0.74, 0.9, 0.957] and    Fig. 3. Data mining students? self evaluation  Fig. 4. PBL assessment graph.

Data Mining DM = [0.8, 0.75, 0.625, 0.876, 0.928]. These vectors capture the traditional exams, oral presentation, project report, lecturer evaluation and student?s self-evaluation. In Figure 4, we depict the normalized value of these vectors in form the of a spider graph. In the Data Mining course of 2015, the PBL methodology was not implemented. We were able to observe the improvement of the students? average on the Data Mining course from 13.4/20 on the 2015-II semester to 16/20 on the 2016-II semester. From the Lecturer evaluation, we also note that students effort, participation, and motivation was higher when applying PBL. Thus, we use it as a control group. In the next section, we conclude our study.



V. CONCLUSION  In the present effort, we have described a new approach for evaluating PBL impact in Data Analytics courses like Web Analytics and Data Mining. Results are very encouraging to continue using real problems to generate projects that students are able to conduct for delivering products. These projects stimulate students to learn autonomously for fulfilling their projects.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  This paper is developed in the framework of the Citylab project, which is funded by the European Commission. The  Citylab project aims to scale up the use of PBL in order to provide innovative solutions to urban problems.

