Francisco Hallo and Mar?a Hallo

Abstract? Most curricula in Informatics and other sciences at the universities are in permanent change. An informatics  foresight is useful to update the study programs and to develop  and offer new study curricula tuned for the local needs. More of  these types of studies are developed by governmental  departments and specialized groups because of the number of  variables to analyse, the complexity of scenarios, and the wide  number of experts needed, not to mention the cost and the  governmental plans and goals a country has.

In this paper we have adapted a simple method to define an  informatics foresight using the information already available in  internet and specialized electronic libraries. The method was  applied to a study case: the future of the informatics and  computer science majors at Escuela Polit?cnica Nacional of Quito  Ecuador.

Keywords?informatics; foresight

I. INTRODUCTION  In a highly competitive world where fast changing  informatics technologies make a big difference in outcomes of  governmental policies, foresight studies are important for  countries and organizations.

Several definitions have been developed for foresight  related terms. In Africa, a foresight study means ?the study of  the future in order to develop a strategic attitude of mind with a  long-range view of creating a desirable future? [1]. Foresight  has also been recognized as a means for governments to  support strategy designs for the future [2]. Rohrbeck in [3]  reports that research in corporate foresight is defined as ?a  process or as an ability including any structural or cultural  element that enables the company to detect discontinuous  change early, interpret the consequences for the company, and  formulate effective responses to ensure the long-term survival  and success of the company?.

Some countries have carried out forecast studies such as  Canada [4], Czech Republic [5], China [6], Ireland [7], Japan  [8,9], European Union [10], Russia [11]. Those studies are  usually made by large teams with enough financial support,  people, expertise, technology or time.

Although there is no standardized technique to use in  foresight studies, several techniques have been reported [12],  namely: expertise-based, interaction-based, evidence-based,  and creativity-based where the methodology is tailored to the  specific needs of the process and the allocation of resources.

When resources are scarse i.e. people and funding, it is  possible to use online information available through internet.

It also has to take into account the Ecuadorian ecosystem since  the informatics forecast has to fulfill local needs and not to be  out of place otherwise future IT professionals would not fit  into the reality.



II. RELATED WORK  Different methodologies have been developed to identify  technology trends going from complex ones to more  simplified models. For example, Godet [13] constructs several  scenarios and analyses the most probable one using  probabilities. On the other end, G?emes, and Amezcua [14]  synthesize a more simplified model by using logic control  systems.

In 2012, it is proposed a model based on two iterative  steps: trend analysis and change drivers? identification [15].

The first step is to identify the trends in the areas that we want  to develop or innovated, and the second it is to find the factors  affecting the evolution of business development activities.

This activity is a cyclical process and feedbacks to the first  two steps of the model.

Saritas in [16] introduces the Systemic Foresight  Methodology (SFM). This SFM aims at proposing a  conceptual framework for designing and implementing  foresight activities based on the ideas of systems thinking.



III. METHODOLOGY  For the informatics foresight we applied the analysis of six  horizons adapted from the Chilean report proposed for  innovation [17]. Information available on the internet has been  used for this study.

These horizons are:  ? The products of everyday use.

? The opening of new markets for already existing  products.

? The search of new products which fit the markets.

? The search for applications of new principles discovered  in science research.

? The direction of the IT basic science.

? The horizon called ?the shining? where knowledge  accumulation and experience give a way to new  technologies.

An Approach to Informatics Foresight         In order to tailor the forecast to the Ecuadorian ecosystem, we  used several Ecuadorian public and private sector plans and  projections.

Based on the information extracted we developed some  recommendations for developing IT major curricula for an  university in Ecuador.



IV. RESULTS  This section presents the detailed process proposed for the  informatics foresight applied to Ecuador.

A. Everyday use products  In this horizon, the everyday use products already present  in the market are analysed, using information gathered from  marketing research, and from authorized sources such as  professional associations, universities or state associations.

In the study case, we choose AESOFT, an Ecuadorian  association of IT businesses as a source of information.

AESOFT reports that the main activity of IT in Ecuador is  application development with 28% and it is concentrated  around business management SW (software). It also identifies  quality assurance, internationalizing and personalizing SW,  and training as major informatics activities in the private  sector. There are also e-government applications in production  in some sensitive government offices [18]. Additionally, there  is a national policy to use free software on the public sector.

Free software means the freedom of the users for executing,  using, copying, distributing, modifying and improving the  software.

In Ecuador, in the public sector, we can mainly find open  office packages, operating systems and some packages for  highly specific applications such as: Quipux, a document  management system; Moodle, an online course management  system; Dspace, an institutional repository application, OJS a  software for an open journal system management.

B. New markets for already existing products  In this horizon, new markets for existing products are  analysed for orienting new developments in those directions.

According to AESOFT [19], in Ecuador there is room for  existing applications in several markets such as: mobile,  cloud, and e-government, whereas ALES & AESOFT  (Asociaci?n Latinoamericana de Exportadores de Software)  [20] stated interest in education services, business  management related products, not only to sell services but to  develop local SW.

There is also a movement for using free open source  software based on the national policies for the public sector.

ASLE (Asociaci?n de Software Libre del Ecuador) is also  promoting this initiative.

C. New products  In this horizon, new possible products are analysed. These  products have been identified through the analysis of  informatics areas and applications related to each activity  stated on the national governmental plan as shown in table I.

In the current government plan for 2013-2017 [21], we  found the following IT associated areas: e-business, e-  government, e-learning, telecommuting, IT security,  knowledge management, development and optimization of e-  citizen services, information integration, the development of a  national information system, development of accessible  systems, new free software applications. It is also possible to  single out a new area to develop products namely cognitive  development of students, as part of a major reform made to all  levels of education in Ecuador which will last several years to  be completed.

Another important goal shows in the same plan is to  generalize the use of mobile gadgets and improvement of  telecommunications. With a ubiquitous mobile access there  will be a great potential to develop mobile apps for all sort of  areas in the public and also in the private sector such as: e-  business, e-government, e-learning, e-health, e-tourism,  Knowledge Management, Telecommuting, Information  Assurance and Security, Training and Learning Technologies.

Other needs are: Optimization of Citizen Services,  Information Integration, a national Information System,  Information Security, and Accessible Systems.

D. New applications for discovered principles  In this horizon, new probable applications for discovered  principles are analysed.

The governmental office which guides science and  technology in Ecuador [22] has a plan where each university  TABLE I ACTIVITIES FROM THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PLAN VS INFORMATICS AREAS  Activities from the Ecuadorian national  planning/ Informatics Areas  Big  Data  Mobile  Apps  Informatio  n Systems  IT  Security  Knowledge  Production  Cognitiv  e-  sciences  Cloud  computing  e-Gov.

To optimize Gov. services X X X X    X  X  To create new IT services X X X X  X   X  To integrate Gov. data X  X X    X  X  To develop a national information system X X X X  X   X  X  To extract knowledge from the national inf. system X  X X  X   X  X  To  design Gov. policies from the extracted  knowledge  X X X X    X  X  To develop online material for education  X  X  X  X  X  To promote telecommuting   X  X  X   X  To promote e-commerce X X X X  X   X  X  To develop citizen centered  e-government X X X X  X   X  X  To improve the TI security. X X X X  X   X  X        has a fixed type of work assigned by the government, the core  where new scientific principles are supposed to be discovered  is in charge of new universities created with research as its  main focus. According to the SENACYT official documents  [23], the university in charge of IT research is named  YACHAY and its goal regarding IT is oriented to computer  and communication technologies.

In the Ecuadorian national government plan it is stated that  all IT prototypes and applied research programs have to be  related with the national strategic areas. According with the  cited plan the strategic industries to be developed are: refinery,  boat construction, petro chemistry, metallurgic and steelworks.

The national Ecuadorian national plan also presents  ?TICS? industries (software, hardware and informatics  services) as part of a prioritized list. There will be opportunity  to develop Information Systems to support these new  industries and e-government applications. The following  areas: Big data, semantic web, Information Assurance and  Security, Cloud, Data Science, Knowledge Management,  Social Network, Non-structured Data Extraction and  Management, Massive Data Analysis should be considered for  supporting those information systems.

E. Basic science horizon  In this horizon, it is described what is going on in the front  of the informatics. The research centres, laboratories and  universities are the most probable places where this  information can be found.

In order to come up with a profile of future directions of IT  basic science, a collection of opinions from qualified  professionals of IT has been analysed. John Hopcroft [24]  pointed out the idea of information extraction from massive  multidimensional data generated in real time as the case of  streaming from video, as being more important in the future.

In 2013, Alan Grier recommends to take special care, in the  future, in modelling human thought with automatic  reproduction of human behaviour in a collaborative  environment, and also a resource optimization [25].

Liu [26] says that the information will be the centre of the  economy based on knowledge, he foresees the convergence of  Information technology, social networks, mobile devices and  cloud computing to create an ecosystem driven by the users.

He identifies in the medium-term large areas of research such  as: cloud computing, IT security, practical frameworks for  information system developing and big data.

Information published on websites of research groups from  universities was also taken into account in this horizon.

The Fig.1 shows major areas targeted by more than 5  research groups in a sample of 22 outstanding universities  around the world, they were chosen from the top in world  rankings. The main research areas identified are: Computer  Science, which largely focuses on the theory, design, and  implementation of algorithms for manipulating data and  information; Information Retrieval; Social Networks,  Cognitive Sciences, Robots Systems, Information Systems,  Networking and Communication including Social Networks,  Web Development and  Network Security; Software  Development, ;Graphics and Visualization; Intelligent  Systems; Human Computer Interaction.

Fig. 1 Research areas vs. number of research groups  F. The Shining  In this horizon, new ground breaking ideas that would  shape the future area analysed.

Two areas that will impact informatics in the future are  emerging supported by the USA government, one is big data  [27] and the other one is the study of the brain structure [28].

In addition, the convergence of mobility, big data, the cloud,  distributed systems collaboration tools and the internet of  things will be part of the future. Quantum computing and  semantic web are other areas of future development.

Human Culture Digitalization  Markets Social Networks Industrial  Production  Education E-government Health Entertainment  Optimization Security Confidentiality Inf. Retrieval Human thinking  modelling  Autonomous systems  Massive  Processing  Unstructured data High number of data dimensions  Mobile Computing Cloud Computing  Internet of things  Persons Devices  Fig. 2 Stratified vision of the future of the applied informatics        Fig. 2 shows a summary of the trends in this horizon  considering the origin of the information from individuals and  devices.

B. Golden [29] pointed out that software is at the center of  every industry, he also stresses the importance of open  software in major enterprises.

G. Suggested topics for curriculum studies  Table II shows the areas needed for each analyzed horizon  for Ecuador that should be considered for informatics study  programs. These areas cover topics around of Computer  Science and Information Systems from the ACM classification  with emphasis in majors such us: Information assurance and  security, Networking and Communication, Parallel and  Distributing Computing, Big Data.



V. CONCLUSIONS  The developed process has been tested in a study case to  get the informatics foresight for Ecuador.

This process has been applied with few resources in  persons and funding using the information from authorised  sources available on internet.

We identified in Ecuadorian government policies and  plans, some informatics related areas such as: software  Applying this process we determine the most important  future topics of study in informatics for Ecuador.

TABLE  II. HORIZONS VS INFORMATICS AREAS  Horizon/Area Everyday use  products  New markets  for already  existing  products  New  products  New  applications for  discovered  principles  Basic  informatics  science horizon    Shining Horizon  Artificial Intelligence     x Augmented and virtual reality      x Big data    x x x Bioinformatics     x Brain structure      x Cloud computing  x   x Data science    x x x e-business x x x  x e-government x x x e-learning   x Graphics and Visualization     x Information Integration   x Information System Management  x  Information retrieval     x Information assurance and security  x x  High Power Computing      x Knowledge Management   x x x Machine learning     x Mobile computing x x   x Networking and Communication  x  Parallel and distributing  computing x  Security x   x Semantic Web      x Social networks    x Software development x  x Software engineering   x Training and learning  technologies x x x  Web accessibility   x Quantum computing      x          In this study we identified in Ecuadorian government  policies and plans, some informatics related areas such as:  software engineering, citizen centered government  information systems development, IT security, networking, e-  commerce, IT applied to strategic areas of national  development.  Based on these and the areas identified in other  horizons we have defined the informatics areas to be  developed.

The results of this study have been used by an Ecuadorian  university, in the development of new informatics programs  and the update of current ones.

In the future, we will test the process with several  scenarios collecting more variables to model the system and  choose the most probable ones.

