Effective Role-Assignment for Participatory Sensing Systems

Abstract?Mobile phones are equipped with a rich set of sensors which are useful in deploying various sensing activities.

We focus on participatory sensing in which every participant carrying smartphone senses its environment and shares it with server. Most of the applications require location information to perform sensing activity. But, GPS drains considerable amount of energy if used for localization. So, a set of devices are chosen as broadcasters which turn on GPS, and the neighbouring devices rely on them to calculate their position.

We propose an efficient energy model to minimize the power consumption of such a system. The existing scheme for finding optimal set of broadcasters is based on greedy algorithm. This is time efficient only when the number of participants are small.

We propose a sorting based algorithm. This provides better time complexity for moderate and large data sets which is the actual case in real scenarios. We validate our work with extensive experiments on both real and synthetic datasets. Results demonstrate that our proposed approach effectively minimizes energy and saves 12-25% of the time for medium and large data sets.



I. INTRODUCTION  Mobile phones have become an indispensable part of our lives and this has attracted researchers to harness its data sensing capabilities and extract valuable knowledge. Most smartphones are embedded with rich set of sensors such as accelerometer, GPS, gyroscope, microphone, camera and interfaces such as WiFi, bluetooth and other technologies[1].

This has lead to a number of exciting applications based on mobile phone sensing.

In this paper, we focus on participatory sensing in which participants actively participate in sensing activity and col- laborate to accomplish a given task [2]. Participatory sensing supports various applications ranging from health services to environment monitoring, most of which are dependent on location information. For example, a person might want to know closest hospital or movie theatre and prices for the tickets. For accurate location information, devices depend on GPS which is a major source of power depletion in cell phones. Therefore, a number of research focus on providing alternatives to GPS usage. In [7], authors provide a device to device localization scheme to relieve some devices from using GPS and thereby saving their phone?s energy. Energy consumption and accurate real time positioning is crucial for the sensing task. Localization takes into account mobility and relative positioning of devices. For accuracy some devices  need to turn on GPS and others depend on them for calculation of their location.

Motivated by the applications of participatory sensing and the need to minimize energy, we focus on minimizing energy needs of devices and providing better algorithm to find which devices must turn on their GPS so that more time can be utilized in localization, sensing and data processing. In [3], authors propose a framework, providing an energy model and greedy method for collaborative localization. Such greedy methods are good only when there are small number of partic- ipants. In participatory sensing systems, time complexity is an essential aspect so, our main focus is to minimize it by finding global minima for choosing optimal set of broadcasters. We make use of the same framework and provide improvements for it. The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: ? We provide better mathematical model to minimize en-  ergy of the system. For this we make necessary changes to the power consumption of devices depending on their role.

? We propose a sorting based algorithm to select broad- casters for the collaborative localization that effectively minimize time for medium and large datasets.

? The performance of the proposed solutions are thoroughly evaluated by simulations using real and synthetic datasets of varied density.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents related work. Section III provides an overview of system under consideration. In Section IV, we present problem statement. In Section V, we describe improved energy model and present a sorting based algorithm for broadcaster set selection problem in Section VI. The experimental results are presented in Section VII followed by conclusion and future work in Section VIII. In the paper, we have used participants, devices, nodes and smartphones interchangeably.



II. RELATED WORK Energy is one of the most important issues that have  been considered in the study of participatory sensing. In [13], authors provide an energy-efficient participant selection based on quality of information(QoI) which includes sensing region, time period, data granularity and quantity. However, they consider only a subset of participants for performing required sensing task. Jigsaw [16] is another energy efficient  The Fourth International Workshop on Crowd Assisted Sensing, Pervasive Systems and Communications 2017     sensing engine which continuously monitors human activities and contexts. But they do not consider sensing tasks based on location of the devices.

Most sensing techniques which need position information rely on GPS. However, it drains sufficient power of the phones. Hence many alternatives to GPS have been proposed compromising accuracy of the devices. In [12], authors present an indoor WLAN-localization method using accelerometer.

This is an energy efficient technique but can work only in indoor environment. Many localization techniques are based on Bluetooth technology such as in [10][11]. In [8][9], a method for localization using location beacon is provided which requires fixed or mobile beacons to estimate posi- tion. Song et al. [7], propose a device-to-device localization method which uses propagation model of wireless signals.

The movements of devices are calculated by inertial sensors using step-up method and change in distance between devices are modelled by change in signal strength. This method was deployed by Wang [3] for collaborative outdoor localization.

A server selects set of devices which must turn on GPS while neighbouring devices rely on them for calculating their location using device-to-device localization.



III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW Our research is motivated by the application framework  presented in [3] for collaborative sensing. It consists of central server, task publisher and a set of smartphones in a region.

The main idea is to find optimal set broadcasters so as to minimize the energy consumption. The task publisher sends sensing task to server which forwards the same to participating smartphones. These participants are assigned roles by server for some time period after which new roles are assigned according to the updated location information. There are three categories of roles that can be assigned: ? Broadcaster: its function is to obtain location using GPS  and broadcast their location and movement information to the surrounding participants,  ? Location Information Receivers (LIR): they rely on broad- casters to calculate their location using device-to-device localization method, and  ? Normal Participants (NP): they do not receive any broad- cast from their surrounding so, they are required to turn on GPS to obtain location information.

The entire duration from task arrival to task delivery is divided into two phases. In the initialization phase, server receives task and notifies all participants. Each one of them then turns on its GPS to obtain initial location. This is shared with server through cellular network which help server to assign them roles. The assigned roles last for a certain period after which roles are reassigned. During the next collaborative localization phase, broadcasters and normal participants turn on their GPS to obtain location for sensing task. Broadcasters broadcast their location and movement information periodi- cally to their surrounding LIRs which calculate their location using device-to-device localization method. All participants regardless of whether they are broadcaster, LIR or NP contact  server using cellular network and share their location and sensing data.



IV. PROBLEM STATEMENT The goal of our work is to improve the existing energy  model [3] so as to minimize the power consumption of system and individual devices. We also aim to improve the method for finding optimal set of broadcasters for a fix interval (say [t1, t2]). A method for finding the length of localization period is already provided by authors in [3]. The broadcaster set selection problem is formulated as:  Minimize: Energy of all participants during [t1, t2], Et1t2 Subject to:  bm = 0, 1,?m ?M (1)  pij =  { 0, dij > ar ? v ? (t2 ? t1),?i, j ?M 1, dij ? ar ? v ? (t2 ? t1),?i, j ?M  (2)  nm =  { 0, (  ?|M | j=1 pmj ? h,?m ?M \Bt1t2) ? (?m ? Bt1t2)  1, ?|M | j=1 pmj < h,?m ?M \Bt1t2  (3) where M denotes a set of smartphones and Bt1t2 denotes  set of broadcasters for the interval [t1, t2]. The Boolean bm and nm are used to indicate that smartphone m is selected as broadcaster or normal participant respectively. Eqn. 1 is integer constraint. pij in Eqn. 2 represents an element of physical connectivity matrix, Pt1t2 to depict connectivity between par- ticipants i and j for the interval [t1, t2]. It can be determined by current distance matrix dij , length of period (t2 ? t1), location accuracy ar, and moving speed of pedestrian, v.

Eqn. 3 enforces LIR to receive broadcast from at least h broadcasters to calculate its location. However, we consider h = 1 for experiments which can be extended further. Every participant is assumed to have enough power to be chosen as broadcaster.



V. IMPROVEMENT OF ENERGY MODEL In the existing work, we find that every participant after  sensing its environment contacts server using cellular network to share its data and location information. This consumes considerable amount of energy. We extend the role of broad- casters to aggregate location information and the data of its LIR devices. This helps to save battery of LIRs by restricting them to turn on their cellular network for contacting server directly. The aggregation of data at broadcasters is based on the observation that broadcaster set is small and has capability of covering LIRs within its range. It adds energy to the broadcasters but since LIR form the largest set amongst broadcaster and normal participant set so, it helps in saving energy of the system.

Lemma 1. Role of LIRs cannot change to normal participants in the next collaborative localization period.

Proof. Consider that one of the LIRs is assigned a role of NP.

This means there does not exist any node within its range. If  The Fourth International Workshop on Crowd Assisted Sensing, Pervasive Systems and Communications 2017    this would have been the case then LIR could not calculate its location using position of broadcaster. Hence, there exists a contradiction.

The role of broadcaster can change to normal participant; normal participant can become broadcaster or LIR, and LIR can become broadcaster. In any of the role changes, every device will be able to receive new roles from the previous set of broadcasters and normal participants. For this we add another parameter tc? to represent the time needed for LIR to send their information and broadcaster to receive from them. The power consumed if a device is assigned the role of broadcaster, LIR or normal participant is provided below.

Let eb be the power of a broadcaster during interval [t1, t2].

It is illustrated in Fig. 1 and mathematically formulated as:  eb = ((eg+ew1)?(t2?t1)+ew2?tc? +ec?tc)/(t2?t1) (4)  Fig. 1. Energy Consumption of Broadcasters during [t1, t2]  Let el be the power of LIR for the collaborative localization during [t1, t2] which is depicted in Fig. 2 and mathematically written as:  el = (ew2 ? (t2 ? t1) + ew1 ? tc?)/(t2 ? t1) (5)  Fig. 2. Energy Consumption of LIRs during [t1, t2].

Let en be power of NP during [t1, t2]. Fig. 3 shows the energy consumption model for normal participant. We use the same equation as presented in [3].

en = (eg ? (t2 ? t1) + ec ? tc)/(t2 ? t1) (6)  Fig. 3. Energy Consumption of normal participants during [t1, t2].

In Eqns. 4, 5 and 6, eg , ec denote power of GPS and cellular network for localization respectively. ew1 denotes the energy consumption of WiFi communication for sending/broadcasting location information to the surrounding; ew2 denotes energy consumption of WiFi communication for receiving informa- tion. tc denotes the time that participants need for sending data and receiving roles.

The power consumed during [t1, t2] is given by Et1t2 [3] which is the sum of energy depletion of participants on the basis of their role. We denote power of all broadcasters as Eb, the power of all LIRs as El, and power of all normal participants as En.

Let Boolean b and n indicate mobile participant selected as broadcaster and normal participant respectively during an interval [t1, t2].

Given a set of all broadcasters |Bt1t2 | and eb as the power of consumed by a broadcaster, then  Eb = |Bt1t2 |eb = |M |? m=1  bmeb  Similarly, for the set of normal participants Nt1t2 , their energy consumption can be calculated as  En = |Nt1t2 |en = |M |? m=1  nmen  Remaining smartphones play the role of LIR so, their power is calculated by:  El = (|M | ? |M |? m=1  bm ? |M |? m=1  nm)? el  Therefore, the total energy consumption for all participants during the collaborative localization time period Et1t2 comes out to be:  Et1t2 = Eb + El + En

VI. SORTING BASED BROADCASTER-SET SELECTION  The authors in [3] provide a greedy algorithm for finding an optimal set of broadcasters. The idea was to check each participant for the role of broadcaster in every iteration and select the one which minimizes the most system energy. The aim of the algorithm is to get optimal set of broadcasters  The Fourth International Workshop on Crowd Assisted Sensing, Pervasive Systems and Communications 2017    and then filter out normal and LIR participants from the remaining set of devices. We assume that nodes that are physically connected to a device are the ones that are within its broadcasting range.

We provide a sorting based solution for selecting broad- caster set. To explain the proposed algorithm, we introduce few definitions.

Definition 1. Connectivity(?) of a node is defined as the number of participants within node?s boadcasting range.

Mathematically, connectivity of the node i can be given as  ?i = M? j=1  pij  Definition 2. Global Connectivity(G?) of broadcaster set is defined as number of participants that can be part of LIR set as a result of the chosen set of broadcasters.

Definition 3. Local Connectivity(??) of a node is defined as the number of devices that can possibly become LIR (apart from the ones that are already part of LIR set) as a result of this node being chosen for the role of broadcaster.

Lemma 2. Local connectivity of a node is less than equal to its connectivity.

Proof. The connectivity parameter includes all devices reach- able within the broadcasting range of the node. However, devices which are already covered by selected broadcasters are part of LIR set hence do not contribute to the local connectivity.

We maintain a Boolean vector, br initialized to zero. The vector is updated when a node, i is elected as broadcaster, by performing bitwise-OR operation of br and pi. It is assumed that br(j) = 0,?j ? Bt1t2 . The global connectivity can be written as:  G? = ?(br)  We introduce an operator ?(?) to compute G? where ?(t) counts the number of ones in given boolean vector, t. In the above case, number of ones in vector br provides number of devices that become LIR as a result of devices chosen for the role of broadcaster.

Similarly, we have used ? to represent boolean-XOR oper- ation and ? for boolean-OR operation. The local connectivity of a node i (??i) can be formulated as,  ??i = ?((br ? pi)? br)  where pi(j) = 0,?j ? Bt1t2 . This helps to detect unique set of devices that node i contributes for the role of LIR. It is worth noting that devices are not assigned the role of LIR until broadcasters are chosen. Even if a node becomes eligible for LIR role, it is still checked for the role of broadcaster.

The vector br is only used to calculating global and local connectivity.

The idea is to first sort all the participants on the basis of their connectivity. Then choose topmost candidate in the list as  Algorithm 1 Sorting Based Broadcaster Selection (SBS) Input: Set of all participants: M , Current distance matrix with dij ,?i, j?M : Dt Distance threshold when r is the localization accuracy: ar Moving speed of pedestrian: v Output: Set of broadcasters for the localization period: Bt1t2  1: Initialize Et1t2 ; 2: Calculate Pt1t2 ; 3: Bt1t2 = ?; 4: M ? = |M |; 5: Initialize br; 6: Sort all participants in the decreasing order of their  connectivity (?i) in Pt1t2 7: while M ? > 0 do 8: ?max = ?  ? 1;  9: ms = 1; 10: j = 2; 11: while ?j > ?max do 12: if ??j > ?max then 13: ?max = ?  ? j ;  14: ms = j; 15: end if 16: j = j + 1; 17: end while 18: Calculate Ems; 19: if Ems ? Et1t2 then 20: Et1t2 = Ems; 21: Update br; 22: Bt1t2 = Bt1t2 ?ms; 23: Remove ms from Pt1t2 ; 24: M ? = M ? ? 1; 25: else 26: break; 27: end if 28: end while  next broadcaster in every round. However in doing so, it does not provide required optimal set of broadcasters. This happens because candidates change their local connectivity. Only the participant having next highest local connectivity becomes part of broadcaster set. One solution is to sort participants in every iteration (that is, brute-force search) for the selection of next broadcaster. This makes time complexity even worse than greedy solution. To tackle this problem, we sort participants in decreasing order of connectivity; that is, on the basis of number of nodes that are physically connected to each participant. Then, we set an upper bound for every iteration.

Definition 4. Upper bound (?max) is a threshold used to limit the search space. It is initialized to ??1 (local connectivity of first node) which limits search upto the node having ? > ?max.

At any instant, if ??j is greater than ?max then ?max is reassigned to ??j .

We assume that once a node is selected as broadcaster, it is  The Fourth International Workshop on Crowd Assisted Sensing, Pervasive Systems and Communications 2017    removed from the list. Always the first node in the list happens to be the node with highest connectivity. The ?max is set to local connectivity of first node that is ??1 where (?  ? 1 ? ?1).

The node having highest ?? is selected as next broadcaster with search space limited upto the node having ? > ?max.

Lemma 3. The next broadcaster to be chosen exists within the search space limited by upper bound.

Proof. The search space is limited upto the node having con- nectivity greater than the bound. It is assumed that nodes are sorted on the basis of their connectivity and setting ?max = ??1 initially.

Case 1: All nodes with ?j < ?max cannot become broadcaster as there already exists a node with local connectivity higher than its connectivity (list is sorted). ??j ? ?j ? ?max.

Case 2: Updating ?max when ??j > ?max ?j, ?j > ?max further decreases search space and so we need to search only upto nodes having ?k > ?max. All nodes further down the sorted list will have ??k ? ?max.

The proposed algorithm is a heuristic relying on connectiv- ity and upper bound for the selection of broadcaster set. Hence, the efficiency of the algorithm largely depends on how much search space gets reduced in every iteration with the upper bound. In the worst case, it is possible that search space is not reduced and entire set of participants are checked during every iteration for the role of broadcaster which occurs when data set is small and connectivity of participants is low.

A. Algorithm  Algorithm 1 provides steps for the proposed work. Step 6 sorts all participants in decreasing order of their connectivity.

The connectivity index is added as an additional column in Pt1t2 matrix. So, we actually sort Pt1t2 on the basis of last column entry. In Step 8, upper bound is initialized to local connectivity of first node in the list. Step 11 to 15 searches for a participant with highest ??. In Step 16, energy of the system is calculated if node having highest local connectivity is chosen as the broadcaster, and Et1t2 is updated in step 18 if it minimizes energy and included in broadcaster set.



VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed work using both real and synthetic datasets. We use SBS to denote sorting-based broadcaster set selection algorithm and GBS for the existing greedy-based broadcaster set selection algorithm. All experiments are done over a fixed time interval, [t1, t2] and implemented in Matlab. For all simulations, we set parameters with values according to [3][4][5], provided in Table I.

A. Real Datasets  We evaluate performance on the GeoLife (Microsoft Re- search Asia) dataset [6]. This is a GPS trajectory dataset rep- resented by sequence of time stamped points with information of latitude, longitude, and altitude. We extract four datasets from a region of high, low and medium density of sizes 100,  TABLE I PARAMETERS USED FOR EXPERIMENTS  Parameter Values eg 355mW ec 268mW ew1 240mW ew2 50mW l/tc 20 l/t?c 20 ar 10m = 32.8084ft v 4.95ft  t2? t1 5 sec  TABLE II DATASET SUMMARY  Dataset Size Area 1 100 200m? 400m 2 239 400m? 400m 3 320 2000m? 3500m 4 880 1200m? 1000m  239, 320 and 880. A summary of this is provided in Table II.

Each participant is basically a trajectory. We have used WiFi range of 32 m for smartphone to obtain physical connectivity matrix (that is, pij = 1 if j is within WiFi range of node i).

The graph in Fig. 4 shows the energy obtained by running SBS and GBS algorithms. It is shown that there is negligible difference between the two. The slight difference occurs because of the ordering of the nodes. Two nodes can have same connectivity but physically connected to different nodes. This influences the selection of broadcasters. In Fig. 5, we depict the time taken by SBS and GBS algorithms for assigning role to the participants. It can be observed that for small datasets (for instance, size = 100) SBS and GBS takes almost same time. But for larger datasets SBS takes much less time than GBS. In real scenario, the data size is quite large. So, using SBS is more favourable than GBS.

Fig. 4. Energy Consumed by GBS and SBS Algorithms(New Energy Model)  B. Synthetic Datasets  We generate synthetic datasets of different sizes {50, 100, 200, 300, 400, 500}. For each, we generate random  The Fourth International Workshop on Crowd Assisted Sensing, Pervasive Systems and Communications 2017    Fig. 5. Time taken by GBS and SBS Algorithms using New Energy Model  positions in terms of x and y coordinates confined in an area 500? 500m2. Using this we calculate distance between every node and generate a physical connectivity matrix Pt1t2 . Each result was obtained as an average of 20 runs.

Fig. 6. Energy Saving for New Energy Model  The graph in Fig. 6 depicts energy difference of the system obtained by subtracting power consumption when using SBS with existing energy model from the proposed modified model.

It is evident from the graph that the modified energy model is capable of minimizing power consumption of devices and hence for the system. Also, the difference between the two grows linearly with the size of the dataset. In Fig. 7, we once again depict the time taken by GBS and SBS algorithms for synthetic dataset. It can be observed that for dataset of size 50, SBS takes more time than GBS. But, for larger datasets (size ? 100) SBS is taking less time than GBS.



VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  We provide an enhancement to the existing work on partic- ipatory sensing system by suggesting a modification to energy model which is capable of minimizing power consumption of the system. We have also proposed a sorting based algorithm for broadcaster set selection problem. This proves to be better for data sets of moderate and larger data sizes which is  Fig. 7. Time taken by GBS and SBS Algorithms using New Energy Model  actually the scenario in real cases. The current state of work can be easily used on Android and iOS devices; however, it is left as future work. We also aim to consider mobility, relative movement and direction of nodes in future for finding broadcaster set.

