RADAR BIG DATA REDUCTION USING HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE  SOLUTIONS

Abstract?Radars typically handle big data, and ways need to be developed to speed the data acquisition and processing.  Here, we present methods to speed up step frequency continuous wave radar (SFCW) performance upon using multi-channels, compressive sensing algorithms, in addition to efficient OMP algorithms, and accelerated platforms for signal reconstruction based on FPGAs and GPUs.

Keywords?SFCW, compressive sensing, fall detection

I. INTRODUCTION There are different levels of accelerating platforms used for  acquiring massive data in various radar applications.  The acceleration could be in hardware, software or both. For example, using step frequency continuous wave (SFCW) radar has many great features like simplicity, no need for calibration, higher signal to noise ratio, simple ADC circuitry requirements, and the feasibility of operating over ultra wideband.  However, it suffers from long acquisition time compared to UWB impulse radar, as it has to go through a large number of frequency steps.  So, in order to speed up the process, we have designed a multi-channel radar system that simultaneously operates over different frequency bands.

Additionally, we have utilized compressive sensing scheme to reduce these frequency steps significantly below Nyquist threshold.



II. RADAR OPERATION  A. FASTER HARDWARE SFCW radar is an excellent candidate for fast data  acquisition, as it can allow parallel data processing in the frequency domain. Moreover, SFCW radar can cover wide frequency range to improve imaging resolution. For the hardware implementation, the total bandwidth of the system is 2 GHz and the frequency step size is 20 MHz to provide a 7.5 cm resolution. In this case, the system has two channels where each channel has 50 distinct frequency points. Therefore the data processing time is reduced to almost half when compared with the single channel system. For even faster data acquisition, the number of SFCW radar channels can be increased from 2 to 4, 8 or even 16.  Thus significantly reducing the processing time to cover wider band while utilizing low cost ADC circuitries.  The challenge here is the synchronization and the effective combination of these channels. The direct digital synthesizer (DDS) board with two channels driven by one master clock can be used here to  guarantee synchronization. The phase locked look (PLL) can be employed to generate the required stepped frequencies while allowing a frequency shift between the different channels.

The concept of the DDS board is comprised of four blocks: a phase accumulator (PA), a sine waveform lookup table (LUT), a digital-to-analog convertor (DAC) and a low pass filter (LPF), as shown in Figure 1. The DDS frequency step-up can be easily adjusted to be either a single frequency operation, a multi-step operation, or randomly selected.  The frequency is given by  (1)  where F is the frequency control word with I-bit width, is the frequency of the DDS system clock. Typically, the control unit of the DDS reads this I-bit word from an algorithm that can be either sequential stepping, or randomly selected numbers.

Fig. 1 Schematic of a DDS board  B. FASTER DATA PROCESSING SFCW radar system is implemented using compressive  sensing algorithms that are based on the orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) algorithm to further speed up the data acquisition. Definitely, it is a challenging task to randomly select these frequencies and avoid the sequential stepping over all these frequency steps to effectively apply CS, while satisfying the sparseness condition of CS. The radar relates the received baseband signal to the range profile which is expressed as a Fourier transform as    , 2out clkI Ff f=  clkf    where x is the received signal for a given frequency sample m, and can be rewritten in a matrix form as s = ?DFT?x, where s and x are the column vectors obtained by stacking s(fn) and x(rl), respectively. ?DFT is the measurement matrix of dimension (N?N), where each element is defined as exp(- j?2?fn?2rl/c).  In the CS-based approach, due to the sparseness of the target space, the baseband signals, sCS, are measured at a random subset NCS (< N) of frequencies of the total bandwidth.

The reduced measurement matrix ?DFTCS is constructed by randomly selecting NCS rows of matrix ?DFT, i.e. corresponding to the selected frequencies.

Hence the reconstruction of the range profile is formulated as a convex optimization problem. Most CS algorithms are associated with intensive matrix operations, such as matrix-matrix multiplication, Cholesky decomposition, and matrix inversion. With the growth of the matrix size, computational costs will greatly increase, leading to unacceptably high execution time. This hampers applying the CS algorithm to time sensitive applications, such as real- time video pattern recognition, online model regression, and fast signal reconstruction. Therefore, our objective is to obtain acceleration of the CS computation by utilizing special purpose accelerators such as GPUs and FPGAs.

.



III. EXAMPLES The SFCW radar was used to detect the range of a subject,  and it was accurately identified with less than 20% compressive sensing ratio as compared to a complete set of frequency data as seen in Fig. 2. We plan to utilize this approach for human vital sign detection, and results will be presented at the conference.  Our preliminary investigations anticipate that accurate results can be achieved with less than 30% compressive sensing ratio. More cases will be dissucesd in our presentation.



IV. CONCLUSION Many radars handle big data in the range of terabits when  dealing with high resolution, many freqency points, many directions, many objects detection and tracking that could have storage and slow data acquisition processing as well.  SFCW radars have great features besides low cost but relatively slow  in data acquisition,  use of multi-channel SFCW radar, implementing CS, and utilization of OMP algortithm on FPGAs and GPUs can significantly speed up the imaging.

