

Personal data protection in pervasive health systems  Claudio Bettini EveryWare Lab, University of Milan, Italy  KEYNOTE ABSTRACT  Pervasive computing is increasing its impact in several areas related to health-care and well-being. Data collected from sensors in smart-homes are being processed to continuously recognize activities, change of habits, and critical events leading to innovative applications in monitoring patients with chronic diseases, elderly at risk of cognitive decline, and enable new opportunities for active aging. Data collected from wireless medical devices, smart- phones and watches complement data from environmental sensors to continuously collect an increasingly rich ?personal medical context?.

Storing, processing, and analyzing this sensitive information often implies the use of distributed architectures and the exposure to multiple parties. The data protection issues studied for handling and sharing Electronic Medical Records (EMR) have to be faced in this context too, and pose new challenges due to the extremely dynamic nature of this data and to the volume of collected data. While data analysis for scientific research may benefit from privacy preserving data mining techniques or differential privacy approaches, personalized medicine and monitoring require data specific to an individual to be preserved.

This talk provides an overview of the topic, of the legal framework, and of the main data protection techniques with particular focus on the issues involved in data de-identification.

KEYNOTE SPEAKER BIOSKETCH  Claudio Bettini is professor of computer science at the University of Milan, where he leads the EveryWare labora- tory (http://everywarelab.di.unimi.it/). He received his PhD in Computer Science from the University of Milan in 1993. He has worked for IBM Research, NY, and, for more than a decade, he was an affiliate research professor at the Center for Secure Information Systems at George Mason University, VA. His research interests cover the areas of mobile and pervasive computing, data privacy, temporal and spatial data management, and knowledge representation and reasoning.

On these topics he has coordinated several research projects and extensively published in leading conferences and journals.

He has been serving as PC Chair and General chair in the organisation of major events in the Mobile and Pervasive Computing areas. He has been associate editor of The VLDB  Journal, the Journal of Pervasive and Mobile Computing, Computer Science Journal. He is a co-founder of EveryWare Technologies, a startup developing innovative mobile apps and services. He is a member of ACM SIGMOD, a senior member of the IEEE and a member of the IEEE PerCom conference steering committee.

