Consumers? Behavior on Web Based on Data Mining

Abstract?With the advance of the process of information, the need that how the business website extracts the valuable information from the huge amounts of data highlights. By data mining technology we can automatically analyze data, make inductive reasoning, excavate characteristics and classification of web users? consumption behaviors, quantify web consumption tendency and evaluation in order to effectively grasp the web users? consumption expectations and value orientation to provide users with better personalized services for the competitiveness of e-commerce businesses.

Keywords-data mining; network consumption behavior; genetic algorithm

I. INTRODUCTION With the popularization of Internet, Web-based  commercial transaction has become the core of the current impetus to the development of electronic commerce. While new business environment provides the new business opportunities for enterprises, it also brings new challenges.

For the business websites, how to organize and use the e- commerce information effectively, how to understand the latest preferences and value orientations of customers, and to meet the needs of users, to provide users with personalized service, to enhance the competitiveness of e-commerce websites, which have become the problems that the e- business enterprises try to resolve urgently.

Traditional web search engines such as Google, Yahoo, Baidu always use keywords text-matching methods. These generic methods can help for the enterprise business information, but the information of the search results is still a huge amount with a large number of irrelevant contents. In addition, these search methods can not meet the personalized needs of information retrieval. The data mining technology can automatically analyze data to make inductive reasoning, excavate users characteristics and classification of consumption behaviors, quantify web consumption tendency and evaluation to effectively grasp the consumption expectations and value orientation.



II. THE FUNCTION STRUCTURE OF DATA MINING IN CONSUMPTION BEHAVIOR ON WEB  A. Data Mining Technology Data mining (data mining, DM) is the process of  extracting the implicit, potential and useful information  unknown by people in advance from a large number of incomplete, noisy, ambiguous, and random practically applied data. The function of DM is for the model type found in the assigned data mining task. Data mining task can generally be divided into two categories: description and prediction. Descriptive mining task mainly portrays the general characteristics of data in data base. Predictable mining task is to deduce for prediction on the current data [1].

The general techniques are as follows: statistical techniques, association rules, analyses on history: MBR (Memory-based Reasoning), GA(Genetic Algorithm, gathered detection, Link analysis, decision tree, Neural Net, Rough Set, and Regression Analysis .

With the advance of information technology, it is highlighted on how to extract valuable information from mass data. Through data mining technology we can automatically analyze data, make inductive reasoning, mine potential network consumer behavior classification and characteristics of consumer, quantify the effect and evaluation of network consumer to continuously improve the overall quality and consumption ability of them.

B. Functional components of data mining for network consumption behavior The data sources of network user behavior are log file of  the server and the structure information of Web site. Its goal is to divide the user groups on Web into categories, and then analyze the personalized features of various types of users in the unit of user category to help the enterprises make a decision with pertinency. In the process, first of all through the user access logs to identify different users, each user is given a unique user ID, and then divide the different users into categories with user clustering technology, extract relevant data of each category of users, and mine the user's behavior patterns of each category, such as association rules, sequential patterns and so on. The whole process includes Web data collection, data preprocessing, user pattern mining, and pattern analysis.

1) Data preprocessing forms behavior database.

The data we get are generally incomplete, redundant and  ambiguous, it is necessary to provide clean, accurate and concise data to effectively mine the knowledge.

Preprocessing mainly cleans up the data from users? access logs, identifies the users? uniqueness and sessions, and improves the access path and transaction processing recognition. Specifically, it is mainly to make record of every operation for network consumers, collect their_____________________________     registrations, and track the status, styles and preferences of them during network consumer at real time. Preprocess information through network consumer platform, remove irrelevant information, and export the valuable information to the analysis module.

2) Data statistics and mining stage Data statistics and mining stage is to mine out the  effective, novel, potential, useful and ultimately understandable information and knowledge by means of mining algorithm. After data preprocessing stage, according to different needs, select mode of discovery technology, such as statistical analyses, association rules, timing patterns, path analysis and clustering, and classification technologies. That is, make analysis of users data collected by users information collection module through data mining algorithm, extract data features to get the consumption levels, consumption interests focus, completion of the consumption progress, consumption characteristics, consumption deficiencies.

Behavioral characteristics database, learner characteristics database and resource characteristics database are formed.

3) Behavior evaluation and intelligent feedback stage The result obtained on data mining analysis is not only  presented just to the users and persons who make decision, but provides consumption suggestions, such as list the contents that the users are interested in according to the interests characteristics of users. It is impossible for one-step to mine data characteristics based on users? information, but a process of gradual improvement. Therefore, the data mining is a dynamic process, that is, according to the users? reflection on the mining results, we should adjust step by step, and gradually perfect it.

4) Customized module of personalized consumption In particular, monitoring consumption behavior with  Web data mining technology can further understand and grasp the consumption situation, demand, capacity, progress and interest in order to make timely adjustment of consumption programs, present consumption resources in line with the personality of user to obtain personalized service for every user. When users enter the business network, the system will automatically search the recommendation sets, identify the user-owned groups, and match the current visit in accordance with their visit sequences, so as to obtain real-time personalized recommendations to better adapt to the needs of consumer.

5) Network resources platform perfect stage On network consumer platform, each user or  administrator have their user ID or working numbers as the user names. Users should log on and open the Cookie function entering the system. In network consumption, network platform will store the log-in time, IP address, visit resources into the background database, which greatly facilitated the process of data preprocessing. After the preprocessing of Web logs collection and background database, the user network visit behavior information matrix is formed. The data mining is conducted as the following steps: According to the visit frequency threshold assigned by system, the frequent page set and frequent visit time can be searched; according to the relevant page collection, combined with the ergodic matrix and the connection  strength threshold, the frequency path of users access to the sites can be gotten; for each user data clustering analysis, the usage preferences can be obtained; the resulting data will be stored in the database, and the intelligent feedback will be made combined with network user platforms. Rich campus network resources will enhance the comprehensive ability and academic performance of user by means of information technology.



III. NETWORK CONSUMER BEHAVIOR DESIGN BASED ON DATA MINING  A. Make classification of user?s network consumption behaviors by use of decision tree induction.

For the classification of user?s network consumption  behaviors, it can be accomplished with ID3 algorithm or C4.5 algorithm. It will be explained with ID3 algorithm as an example.ID3 algorithm selects the attribute with greatest information gain value in the current sample attribute sets as a test attribute by the use of information entropy theory. The attribute makes information needed by sample category in the result classification minimum, and reflects the smallest random or "impurity" of classification [2]. This information theory approach makes expectation test number needed by an object classification minimum, and ensures to find a simple tree.

Suppose S is a set of S data samples. Assume class label attribute has m different values, defines m different categories of Ci (i = 1, ..., m). Suppose Si is the sample number of category Ci. The expected information needed by a given sample classified information, that is, the system's total entropy is given by the following formula:  m I(S1,S2,?,SM)=-? Pilog2(Pi)?  i=1 Pi is the probability that random sample belongs to Ci,  and Si / S estimates. We can see that the overall system entropy is the weighted average of information amount belonging to various categories.

Suppose attribute A has v different values (a1, a2, a3 .......

av), attribute A can be used to divide S into v sub-sets (s1, s2, s3 ....... sv); in which, Sj contains many samples like S, they have value aj on A. If A is selected as test attribute, these sub-sets correspond to the branches grown from nodes with set S. Suppose Sij is the sample number of category Ci in sub-set Sj, the information amount after partition in accordance with each attribute of A, namely overall system entropy or expected information is given by the following formula:  V E(A)= ?S1J+S2J+?+SMJ I(S1J,S2J,?,SMJ) Items  i=1 S S1J+S2J+?+SMJ  S Serve as J sub-set right, and equal to the number of sub-  samples divided by the total number of samples in S.

Entropy is smaller, the purity of subset division is higher.

Thus the information gain value acquired after the sample set S is divided by attribute:    Gain(A)=I(s1,s2,?,sm )- E(A) Through the above formula, according to computer  simulation calculus, we can get the following expression of consumer behavior decision tree?s classification by users? behaviors.

From the table, users? division accord with the following five kinds of rules: high-earning ability (based on past results and peacetime performance data), long-term online (based on the campus network account online time statistics), general consumption capability (based on the campus network server response Statistics: 10 times more than a week consumption), high-consumption capability (more than 3 times a day access the server to consumption), sustained high consumption capability (more than 5 times a day and more than two hours per visit to buy goods for consumption activities).

Based on the above five kinds different divisions, users are divided into 5 kinds by their different network consumption behaviors: high-quality users, visiting users, potential users, ordinary users and no visiting users.

Y N  Y  N  Y   N Y N  Y   N  Figure 1 users classification decision tree From the decision tree we can easily get "IF-THEN"  form of classification rules, so we can guide and help different types of users to carry out consumptions.

B. Genetic algorithm mining design of network consumption behavior The tracking and prediction of consumer network  consumer through genetic algorithm can decide the utilization in different time of the servers according to their real-time load values for enhancing the e-Consumption behavior preferences and resources utilization efficiency evaluation.

In this paper, in the design of fitness function, firstly per server load value is calculated on every load parameters periodically collected from various servers and the chromosome currently assessed. Parameters include: (1) CPU utilization cpu (SKi%); (2) memory utilization memory (SKi%); (3) current network traffic T (SKi); (4) disk I / O access rate io (SKi%); (5) response time rt (SKi );(6) process  total pr (SKi); (7) Delay time del(Ski); (8)link amount la(Ski) as factors of calculating formula; as Dynamic weight objective is to correctly reflect the situation of load nodes to predict the possible load changes of the nodes. On different systems applications, the importance of each parameter has to be different. In order to appropriately adjust each parameters proportion on different application in the operation of the system, a constant coefficient Qi is set for each parameters to denote the importance of each load parameters, in which ? Qi = 1. Therefore, the weight formula of any node Si can be described as:  Load(SKi)=Q1?cpu(SKi)%+Q2?memory(SKi)%+Q3?T( SKi)+Q4?io(SKi)%+Q5?rt(SKi)+Q6?pr(SKi)+Q7?del(Ski) +Q8 x la(Ski)%  Node dynamic weights acquisition program is operated in cycle, generally 5 s ~ 10s. According to the above formula, in the refresh cycle T (i), the load nodes situation can be inquired and the dynamic weight load (SKi) of each node can also be calculated.

So the genetic algorithm design ideas as follow: 1) Determine population size Size, termination evolution  algebra Max, hybridization probability Pc, mutation probability Pm, individual's fitness Fi =Load (SKi), and individual choice probability Pi. 0.65?Pc?0.85 ? 0.

001?Pm?0. 1.

Chromosome is as a scheduling program, regulating login requiring number of the response process over a period of time. A number of chromosomes are formed into the population with the random number, that is, randomly generate number of distribution program. Fitness function of system is identified by the load values of super nodes. The fitness function of individual S in this design is:  Fitness(Si)=1-(sqrt(?(Load(SKi,T)-?Load(SKi,T)/n)?)/ ?Load(SKi,T))  Load (SKi, T)is the load value when super node Si is at T, n is the super nodes number in system.

2) Random initialization population P (0) = (S1, S2,?, Sn).

3) Select an individual with highest fitness value in individual P (t).Selection operation in genetic algorithm inherits chromosome of higher fitness in the current colony to the next era colony by some rules or models [3]. Selection operation is very important. The chromosome of higher fitness is required to have more opportunities to be inherited to the next era colony. Therefore, selection operation is achieved by roulette wheel algorithm, that is, the selected odds of chromosome and its fitness is of direct ratio, that is, the larger degree of fitness chromosome, the more likely is to be selected. Selecting operation formula is as follows:  Select = rand (0, ? Fitness (Si)) rand (0, ? Fitness (Si))is on behalf of a value selected randomly from 0 to ? Fitness (Si), and the selected chromosomes can be identified.

4) Update the Fi of the individual load value in accordance with the return information of the relative parameters.

high-consumption capability resources  High-quality users general consumption capability  sustained high consumption capability Long-term online  high-quality users  visiting users  potential visiting users ordinary users  no visiting usershigh-earning ability    5) Cycle variables m = 0.

6) A number is randomly generated r = random [0, 1], 0 <r <1.

7) If r ? Pr, implement breeding operation, that is, two parents are inserted into the new group P (t +1) without changes.

8) If r ? Pr + Pc, implement crossover operation, and insert the next two eras into the new P (t +1). Cross- operation is not required each chromosome to participate. In order to get next better era (that is, get better solution), the system will ensure that the optimal chromosome gotten from the selecting operation participates every cross. The other chromosome participated in cross will be selected by the random function which calculates the cross-value. If the value is less than the cross-start value, the cross-operation will be carried out, otherwise will not for the realization of elitism.

9) Otherwise, do mutation operation to the two parents respectively, and insert the next two generations into the two new groups P (t +1).

10) m = m +2, when m <size, return to the step (4).

11) Calculate the individual's fitness in P (t +1), t = t +1;  when termination evolution algebra is not satisfied, return to the step (3).

12) Return to the value of the optimal solution.

Setting iteration times is used as the condition for the end  in the application, and the current optimal value gotten from the colony is the final solution.

C. Evaluation of Data Mining A number of potential valuable information can be  obtained through data mining the consumption behavior historical data. For example, we can find that the time users stay at some chapters or pages is quite different from website designer?s plan, while these are all long pages with much  more information. Especially when the amount of information is beyond a certain amount of knowledge, user stay here much shorter. Through the re-decomposition of knowledge points to reduce the page length, the situation has improved. After webpages data mining, we have found a lot of similar groups of consumer and related pages, which provides the basis for user classification. Aim at different consumption groups, designers can understand their knowledge structure and Consumption style, and provide personalized Consumption contents and Consumption arrangements in accordance with the characteristics of each group. At the same time, because the knowledge level and interests are almost similar, the teams can accomplish a certain projects together to make tele-education service more personalized and human. In addition, the hyperlinks between the relevant webpages will optimize the web sites structure to show the information required by consumer in much faster and more effective way.



IV. CONCLUSION The development of network consumption in China is  still on its primary stage. Online Consumption in the network environment needs to continuously improve their self- Consumption independence, autonomy and self-control ability, so that, making timely feedback for the Consumption in network consumption, inspiring and maintaining consumer's Consumption motivation will be good to the effectiveness of network consumption, and improve the competitiveness of electric business enterprises.

