Rough_Apriori algorithm and The Application of an   Aid System of Campus Student Major Selection

Abstract?Rough Set is an important theory of AI. In this paper, Rough_Apriori Algorithm which is based on the classic Apriori Algorithm and Rough Set theory. The Basic concepts and Algorithm steps of Rough_Apriori were Defined. In accordance with a set of definitions, an aid system of campus student major selection was developed. By comparing with user-expected results, the ultimate experimental results demonstrates the efficiency of this system and the algorithm.

Keywords- Rough set; Apriori; Algorithm; Soft System

I.  INTRODUCTION   Rough set theory [1,2,3,4]was first proposed by Polish scholars Pawlak in 1982. The theory has been successfully applied in Data Mining, Knowledge Discovery, Machine Learning, Decision Support, Pattern Recognition and many other fields of science and engineering.

Rough set theory defined knowledge as a family of indiscernible relationship, giving a clear math model to knowledge which can be dealed with mathematical methods.

Rough set theory consider information granules is the cause that some knowledge concepts can not be expressed accurately. By introduceing Indiscernible relationship as the foundation of Rough set theory, upper and lower approximation conceptions were defined based on this theory. Thus Rough set theory can approach these knowledge which can not be expressed accuratedely more effectively.

Fuzzy set and Probability Statistics are often used to deal with the uncertain information. These methods need some priori knowledge, but rough set theory does not need apriori knowledge.

At present, the rough set theory has become a new academic hotspot in the field of AI, and it is a very important research direction of rough set combines with other Date Mining methods. Based on Rough set theory Apriori algorithm [5], we present Rough_Apriori algorithm in this paper.



II. THE THEORY OF ROUGH_APRIORI ALGORITHM   Definition 1: In the Decision-making Table DT of Rough_Apriori algorithm, C is the set of conditions  attributes ci (C= { ci  | i = 1 , 2 , ?, n}), D is the set of decision-making attributes.Rule C?D indicates that conditions attributes C associated with decision-making attributes; its means that the emergence of C will lead to the emergence of D.

Definition 2: Support Degree (Support) is the  probability of a project set appears in the record set of DT, often shown by Sup ( C), C is an project set.

Sup (C ? D) = Sup (C ? D) =| C ? D |./|DT|   Definition 3: Confidence Degree (Confidence)is the credibility degree of association rules. For Rule C?D, Conf (C?D) is the probability of D emergence in the condition of the emergence of C. Often shown as:  Confidence (C?D) = Support (C ? D)/Support (C).

Definition 4: Determine rule set: if Sup (C?D) ?  Min_Sup and Conf (C?D) ? Min_Conf, then C?D is determine rule sets.( Min_Sup and Min_Conf were defined According to the background )   Definition 5: Candidates K itemsets is KC? ,here  CCK ? .

Strong K itemsets is Lk, here )( KK CL ?? .

Definition 6:The step of Rough_Apriori Algorithm:  Step1 For transaction DT? do begin delete repeated transaction; end;  Step2 For itemsets ci?C  do begin (reduction by Rough set) [1,2] if PosCD=Pos(C-ci )D then delete ci;?Non-core attributes ci were deleted? end;  Step3 )Apriori(CCK =? [5];  End Step4  L k= { Ck?D | Ck?D. Sup (Ck? D) ?Min_Sup   DOI 10.1109/ICRCCS.2009.48       AND Conf (Ck? D) ?Min_Conf  (Ck? D)}; decision rules set = L k.

End

III. THE APPLICATION OF THE ROUGH_APRIORI ALGORITHM   Since 90?s of 20th century, most undergraduate  universities of our country recruit students by Department not by major. Students make a solid foundation of subjects at the lower grade. Students select a specific major direction and streaming cultivate according to the "menu" style curriculum module at high-grade. Undergraduate students have the opportunities for a secondary selection of specific major. Undergraduate students choose the major direction according to their own interests and abilities, which will have a significant impact on the study quality and initial  employment rate  in the future of difference students in the same major. So how to guide students choose a specific major direction more scientific and reasonable is the important question to improve the quality of teaching and expand the employment rate.

We consider this Second Major Selection process as a decision-making process. Decision-making process would be  influenced by the various attributes of the decision conditions. Therefore, the selection of suitable conditions attributes is very important.  The construction of the Aid System of Campus Student Major Selection integrate the personality types theory of the psychometric and their model.

MBTI (Myers-Briggs Type Indicator)[6,7] is a kind of forced selection, self-reports of personality evaluation test which is used to measure and describe the psychological activity rules and the types of character when people get information, make decisions and deal with aspects of life. After 50 years? research and development, MBTI has become the world's most famous and authoritative personality test at the present.

The Aid System of Campus Student Major Selection use the MBTI existing measure table (scale) to evaluate personality, by integrating the factors of affect appropriate major selection with the advices of this subject experts and psychologists, we build our own scale of evaluating.

Four dimensions of MBTI in the conditions attribute set were choosed, such as (extroversion / diffidence), (feeling / intuition), (thinking / emotion), (judgment / aesthesia). The system consider students? learning ability of specific subjects and development potential. Some other conditions attributes impacted decision-making are also presented. The systen original attributes set is as TABLE 1.

TABLE1    ORIGINAL ATTRIBUTES SET  Condition attributes  Where gets power  Ways of obtaining information  Ways of make decision  Process of determine or cognize  Ability  of logical consequence  experience ability  Interest in the programming  Interest in the hardware  Interest in the network  Interested in studying basic subjects  Knowing the extent of the major  the major expected  .knowing the characteristics of major  studying  attitudes of Major studying  motivation of the major learning  extroversion/ diffidence feeling / intuition thinking / emotion  judgment/ aesthesia  Decision-making attributes?Selected direction (Network Communication =1, Software Engineering=2, Embedded=3)   The figure(FIGURE 1 FLOW CHART)shows the Flow  Chart for the Aid System of Campus Student Major Selection. After sampling obtained situation of major selection of previous students, we set up the training database.

By using Rough_Apriori algorithm, the valuable rules and reduced attributes set are obtained from the data source mining. At the basis of these rules, we set up the evaluation system of major selection. At last, reduced attributes set (as TABLE 2) and the advice of major selection are offered by the system.

The training data set  Rough_Apriori Association  Rules Database  Collect personal property value  Rule matching  Recommendations Of the professional direction selection  Reduction of attribute Set   FIGURE 1      FLOW CHART   TABLE2      REDUCTED ATTRIBUTES SET  Condition attributes  Where gets power  Ways of obtaining information  Ways of make decision  Process of determine or cognize  Ability  of logical consequence  experience ability  Interest in the programming  Interest in the hardware  Interest in the network  Interested in studying basic subjects  Knowing the extent of the major  the major expected  .knowing the characteristics of major  studying  attitudes of Major studying  motivation of the major learning  extroversion/ diffidence feeling / intuition thinking / emotion  judgment/ aesthesia  Decision-making attributes?Selected direction (Network Communication =1, Software Engineering=2, Embedded=3)

IV. RESULES OF THE EXPERIMENT   The architecture of the Project design and the operating environment.

J2EE component technology was used.

Operating environment: the suited server operating  systems: MS Windows2000; the suited type of database: Oracle9i, SQL Server, DB2; suited application servers: Tomcat, etc.

After the System completed, through the investigation of senior students, we got a large number of training data.

After the training data imported to the system and got a certain number of rules. We invited a considerable number of employed students to do our system evaluation. The recommendations of the selection system offered with their actual selection matches shown as follows: Software Engineering 88.44%, Network Communications 81.57%, Embedded System 90.92%. The data proves the high accuracy of the testing system. And the number of the user test attributes reduced 40% compared with classic Apriori  algorithm while the Rough_Apriori algorithm keeps its accuracy.



V. CONCLUSION   This paper presents a Rough_Apriori algorithm. And an Aid System of Campus Student Major Selection is developed. This system tells the University students how to face the second major selection, help the students to select a more suitable choice of their own personality characteristics. Finally enhance the enthusiasm of university students study and the satisfaction of their majoy. Study efficiency will eventually improved, and ultimately the probability of employment will be improved too.

