Ontology Based Semantic Relation Verification for  TCM Semantic Grid

Abstract?Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) Semantic Grid is an application of Semantic Grid technique in TCM domain. It comprises TCM ontology and TCM Databases as data resources and Dart Search, Dart Query etc. as TCM application. This paper reports an ontology engineering component of the TCM Semantic Grid. Although ontology engineering has gained significant progress, ontology construction still mainly depends on manual work and tends to be mistaken prone. In this paper, we introduce a semantic relation verification method based on both domain ontology and domain publications. A modified vector space model is used to extract semantic relations from domain publications, which is particularly useful when the semantic relation cannot be extracted directly. Association rule learning method is used to distinguish significant relations from trivial ones. Further verification method is used to give user recommendations of relation types. We use Traditional Chinese Medicine Language System, domain ontology for Traditional Chinese Medicine, and relevant publications to validate our approach. But our method is not limited to this field. In fact, any data source that can be extracted into relevant instance pairs is applicable.

TCM Semantic Grid; ontology; semantic relation verification

I.  INTRODUCTION Semantic Web was introduced by Tim Berners-Lee, the  founder of WWW, to deal with the problem of semantic heterogeneity of World Wide Web. Web resources are annotated and interlinked in semantic web thus enables the ability for web applications to sharing and interchange information more easily. Grid Computing was originally proposed as a computing model, which can solve computation intensive problems by using the computation power of idling computers.  The main feature of grid applications is the ability to dynamic form the Virtual Organizations in an ad hoc way to enable coordinated resource sharing and problem-solving across multiple administrative domains [1].

Semantic Grid is a branch subject derived from Grid Computing and Semantic Web. It can be thought as a combination of Grid technology and Semantic Web technology, in which Grid resources and services are described by explicit semantics so that the information resource can be shared and interchanged more readily and effectively.

Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) e-Science Semantic Grid [2] is an application of Semantic Grid technique in TCM domain, in which Semantic Grid technique is adopted as a core technical solution for the diversification, heterogeneity and interdisciplinary characteristics of this domain. TCM Semantic Grid environment composes multiple applications and services based on TCM ontology and TCM scientific databases. As we can see in Figure 1, TCM ontology is an important basic resource for applications and services in TCM Grid, which can help them to find, share and interchange Grid resources.

Figure 1. TCM Ontology in TCM Semantic Grid  The construction of TCM ontology mainly depends on manual work and tend to be mistaken prone, as the progress of TCM science, domain ontology will quickly become inconsistent with domain knowledge. As shown in Figure 1, Semantic verification is one of the foundation components of  2009 Fourth ChinaGrid Annual Conference  DOI 10.1109/ChinaGrid.2009.35     TCM Semantic Grid, which can help the ontology engineers to verify and enrich the TCM ontology.

The largest knowledge base of TCM is ancient classics written in Classical Chinese, which has its own linguistic characteristic that cannot be parsed by any exist linguistic analysis methods. Even the publications in this domain are likely to have lots of references from the ancient classics, which make them more difficult to analysis.

In this paper, we first review the related works in section 2, and then we propose a semantic relation verification method based on both TCM publications and TCM ontology, which includes a statistic based text analysis method that can extract semantic relations from ancient classics and a relation verify method which given user recommendations about the semantic type of the extracted relations. Section 3.1 and 3.2 is about text processing and relation extraction procedure. Based on the extracted relations, the verification method will be introduced in section 3.3. Section 4 will be the experiment based on TCM ontology and TCM publications. Last section is the conclusion of our work.



II. RELATED WORKS The vector space model was original proposed by G. Salton  and A. Wong for indexing and information retrieval [3]. Now it is widely used as document models for document evaluation and comparison [15, 16]. The vector model is mainly used as a container for isolate words and their weights in a document. In this paper we use the vector model for single sentences rather than documents, and the sequential information and parts of the syntax knowledge will be preserved.

Tao Jiang and Ah-Hwee propose an association rule mining method called GP-Close to extract interesting patterns from text [9]. They use an ontology model to extract RDF from raw text through syntax analysis, and use the hierarchical information of the items to produce generalized patterns. The RDF statements extraction method is heavily depend on the linguistic analysis approach, so it can?t work without syntax analysis. And the GP-Close method became ineffective when account with various semantic relations. In this paper, we propose a statistics based relation extraction method with a high recall and general applicability, and an ontology verification method which can process the complicate semantic relations effectively.

MapFace[11] is a semi-automatic relation verification tool based on MetaMap[10], a program developed by the National Library of Medicine to map biomedical text with UMLS Metthesaurus. It provides a visualized user interface for relation verification and recommendation based on free texts.

The relation extraction method it uses is based on individual sentences, ignoring the generalization association information, and is not suitable for large scale texts analysis. The recommendation approach provided by MapFace simply lists the candidate results without further analysis. We use a vector space model to represent the structure of free texts, and then use association rule mining method to extract significant associations. In the recommendation step, we give candidate relations with their probabilities, which is very important for  ontology engineer who are not very familiar with the domain knowledge.

G. Stumme and A. Maedche proposed an ontology merge method called FCA-Merge [13]. It produces a lattice of concepts based on shared documents and Formal Concept Analysis [14] techniques, the result is provided to ontology engineer for creating merged ontology. The method needs shared documents that can cover all concepts in the domain, which is difficult or even impossible in some situations. And the ontology it processed can only have unary relations.

Aviv Segev and Avigdor Gal gave an ontology verification approach based on contexts [15]. The verification approach maps ontology verification to contexts and then uses them to evaluate the ontology change operators. The approach is used to verify the change operators in the ontology rather than the changes themselves.



III. APPROACH In this section, we will introduce the semantic relation  verification method in detail. As shown in Figure 2, there are two kinds of knowledge source in our method: domain ontology and domain documents. The domain ontology is used as the predefined domain knowledge, which provides the basic domain dictionary and predefined semantic relations. We use the domain dictionary to extract instances from documents.

The domain ontology, which includes both concepts knowledge and semantic relations, is used in both relation extraction and verification stage. The documents provide the raw data from which we can extract candidate semantic relations. Theses relations are then used to verify the domain ontology.

Figure. 2. Overview of the whole approach  The main procedure can be divided into three stages: text processing, relation extraction, relation verification.

Text Processing. The documents are processed in this stage by Nature Language Process (NLP) technique, and the domain dictionary is used to extract semantic information from the text. Vector model is used in this state, too. After this stage, documents will be translated into vector sets.

Relation Extraction. In this section, association rule mining method is used to distinguish useful relations from trivial ones. Valid relations are divided into two     kinds of candidate relations for their different quantity.

The result is used as the source data for relation verification section.

Semantic Relation Verification. In this section, the candidate relations are divided into two different parts, the relations existent in domain ontology and the unknown relations. For candidate existent relations, the purpose of the verification approach is to identify the semantic relation type. For candidate unknown relations, ontology based relation identification technique is used to determine the semantic relation type, or introduce new semantic relations if necessary.

A. Text Processing Because of the informal format and various contents, raw  text must be tokenized before executing text mining methods.

As we can see in figure 3, documents are divided into sentence sets, and the domain dictionary extracted from domain ontology is used to translate sentences into instance vectors in this stage.

Figure. 3. Text Processing Procedure  The sentence division procedure is straightforward, we just scan through the documents, extract sentences when meet a sentence separator, like period, interrogation, etc. After this step, the documents are divided into a set of sentences, which can be treated as a whole knowledge source. Because the semantic relations in documents are mostly existed between instances in the same sentences, most semantic relations will be preserved in the sentence set.

We use the instance names extracted from domain ontology as the domain dictionary, for the instances are in fact the vocabularies of domain knowledge. By using this domain dictionary to extract words, we get domain instances at the same time. The extracted words belong to the same sentence will be put into a word vector, in which they are sorted by the sequence they were in the original sentence. The vector model is defined as follow.

Let K={V1,V2,?Vm}  be the set of instance vectors, where Vi=(Wi1,Wi2,?Win) (0<i<m) is the vector represents sentence i,  and Wij means the jth matched instance in sentence i . Then the sentences set will be replaced by word vectors.

In this model, the sentence structure is preserved by the order of the elements in the word vector. And irrelevant word terms will be filtrated by domain dictionary. It will greatly reduce the dimension of the vector model of documents, and make sentence-heuristic possible.

B. Semantic Relation Extraction We use text mining methods to extract semantic relation  from raw texts. Manually relation extraction method often use specific pattern given by domain experts. Some other methods build the pattern automatically by frequency pattern mining technical. The results of these two kinds of approaches rely on the patterns they use, and are inapplicable when the sentence structure is complicated. Another kind of relation mining approach uses linguistic analysis to extract syntax structure from raw text. This method heavily depends on the performance of the linguistic analysis method and will be inefficient or even unavailable when there is not effective linguistic analysis method exist.

To extract instances pairs from the instance vectors, we use the hypothesis that all the instances in the same sentence are related. And the relation type can be partly identified by the relative position of the instance pairs. And the structure of the sentences includes some syntax information. Base on this hypothesis, we can extract relations from the vector model and identify their type without any prerequisite knowledge, which is very useful in some situations. The vector space model of vector Vj can be defined as?  }0|),{( nkjwrM jkjkj ?<<=  (1)  where  ),)(,( jkjkjjk SWWWWr ?=  jk wjk ?  = 1  },...,{ 21 iniii WWWS =  Si is the instance set of vector Vi, rjk represents the relation between instance Wj  and Wk, and we only extract the relation with positive direction, for the reverse relation is likely to be the passive relation of the original one. wjk  is the weight of rjk, which is measured by the reciprocal of the distance between the related instances, it is obvious that the range of wjk is (0,1).

The weight parameter is used to classify the type of the relations in section 3.3.

It is obvious that the semantic relation extraction method has a very high recall rate, for it extracted all the possible combinations of instances in the same sentence. But many trivial or even invalid relations were extracted at the same time.

For this reason, the candidate relations must be filtrated to extract significant semantic relations. Because the significant     relations are more likely to be used much more frequently than trivial ones, they will emerge much more times. We will use this characteristic to extract significant relations from instance vectors.

Figure. 4. Semantic Relation Extraction Procedure  The instance vectors can be considered as transactions composed with instances, so that the association rule learning method can be used to extract significant relations from them.

To filtrated trivial or even irrelevant relations effectively from the candidate relations, two parameters are used to evaluate the candidate relations: support and lift [4]. The support is the basic criterions, which is used to extract the significant relations from trivial ones, lift or interest measures how many times more often the instances pair occurs than expected, which is used to evaluate the significance of the given relation in all relations. The reason that we do not use confident is that because of the complex relation types in our data, confident will be inefficient. By using these parameters, we can extract significant relations from the massive candidate relations in the instance vector model, and further analysis can be taken.

We distinguish the candidate relations into two kinds: existent   relations   and   unknown   relations.   For the verification procedures are quite different between the two kinds of relations. Relation matching process will separate them from each other. The judgment rule is straightforward: if the relations exist in the domain ontology, we consider them as existent relations, otherwise unknown relations. This is just a potential partition and further analysis will be taken in the verification section.

C. Semantic Relation Verification As we can see in the figure 5, in the semantic relation  verification section, two kinds of relations were verified independently based on domain ontology, producing recommended relations which are sorted by possibilities. We will illustrate the two procedures independently.

Figure. 5. Semantic Relation Verification  For the instance pairs considered as unknown relations, we use the domain ontology to evaluate the relation type. First, we use domain ontology to find the relevant concept of the instances, and then the semantic relations are used as candidate relations of corresponding instance pairs. The candidate relation will be sorted by the probabilities of the relation type for two independent instances are related. As we consider the problem on the concept level, the candidate relations can be seen as a sub graph of the domain ontology, and determine graph isomorphism technical can be used. In our method, we only consider two common structures, the related instance pair and three related instances.

As shown in Figure. 6a, for an instance pair (a, b), where a belongs to concept A and b belongs to concept B. R1, R2, R3 are the semantic relations between concept A and B. The probability of semantic relation r is:   ),,( ),,(),,()(   11 branum  branumBRAPrprob ==  (2)  where  ,,,,,,, 21112121 RrRrRrBbbAaa ?????  R is all the relations between concept A and B in domain ontology. As we can see, the value of P(R1) is the probability of relation R1  between concept A and B. It means that we use the distribution of the existent semantic relations in the domain ontology to estimate the distribution of unknown relations.

For a triple related instance, as we can see in Figure. 5b, we just find corresponding concept pattern in domain ontology, which is straightforward by using SPARQL or other semantic search technique. Then calculate the probabilities of each relation type. And use these semantic relations as the recommended relation types of the instance pair with the probabilities.

The different relation types in the same instance pair of unknown relations must be distinguished before type identification procedure. For the same semantic relation in a candidate instance pair, the relative positions in  text  are  likely      (a) Two related instances: Pattern A   (b) Three related instances: Pattern B  Figure. 6. The semantic relation pattern  to be similar, which is especially obviously for the language with strict syntax rules. This characteristic will be used to distinguish the different relation types among candidate relations. The relative position of an instance pair can be represented by a positive integer, which means the distance between the instances in the vector space model. For two instances with shorter distance are more likely to be related.

We will use the reciprocal of the relative position, which is the weight of an instance pair proposed in 3.1, to distinguish them as different semantic relations. Then clustering method can be applied to the relation classification problem. Expectation Maximization (EM) clustering method [10] is used to divide candidate relations into different clusters with the maximum expectation.  The different clusters are regarded as different semantic relations, which will map to semantic relations in domain ontology, or recommend as unknown relations.

We use the size of the cluster to estimate the probabilities of the relevant semantic relation, and sort the result by probabilities. For the existent relation type is likely to have the largest probability, it is quite obvious for us to map the most possible relation patterns to existent semantic relation. For the relation patterns which are not mapped to existent semantic relations, we use the existent semantic relations between the  relevant concepts to estimate the relation type. For example, for a given instances pair (a, b), where a belongs to concept A and b belongs to concept B, the candidate relation types will be all the semantic relations between concept A and B, which will be sorted by lexicographical order of the binary parameters. For a statement (a, r, b), the index parameter of relation r is defined as:  ))(),(()( 1 rprobrisExistrparm =  (3)  where  Or Or  risExist ? ?  ? ? ?  =  )(  isExist(r) is an Boolean value, represents the existence of relation r in domain ontology, O represent the domain ontology.

prob1(r) is the probability of semantic relation r we defined in the verification of unknown relations. param(r) is sorted by lexicographical order of its content (isExist(r),prob1(r)).

We then sort the clusters by the descent order of the cluster size, which represent the probability of this pattern in the documents. As the cluster set and candidate relations are all ordered by the possibilities, we can map the cluster to semantic relation by the order. Then we can calculate the recommendation probabilities, which are defined as:  )(*)(*)( 1212 rprobcrprpcrprob +=  (4)  where  Rrcccc ?=+> ,1,0, 2121 c1 and c2 are constant that are used to adjust the weight between text construction and predefined ontology. prp(r) is the proportion of the cluster that map to relation R. prob1(r) is the probability of candidate instance pair that defined as (3).

The recommended result will be illustrate to users, so that they can choose relation type from recommended semantic relations, or add new semantic relations if necessary. The result will be writing into the domain ontology, which will be used for next verification procedure.



IV. EXPERIMENT AND APPLICATION The experiment is concentrated on Traditional Chinese  Medicine (TCM) field, with predefined domain ontology and TCM publications.

A. Domain Knowledge We use TCMLS (Traditional Chinese Medicine Language  System), domain ontology of TCM, as the predefined domain ontology. It comprises 58 standard semantic relations, 126 standard concept types, 309,509 instances and 177,984 instance relations. We will use instance names as domain dictionary, and the instance relations as the existent relations.

We use 35 publications of TCM as the document set, which include lots of references from Classical Chinese literatures.

TABLE 1 RECOMMENDED RELATIONS  (a) Recommendations of Existent Relations Relations Parm Prob Type  (?????) (six fu-organs, triple  warmer )  (1, 0.12) 0.54 ???(hyponym)  (0, 0.13) 0.09 ??(contains)  (0, 0.13) 0.07 ?????? (interact with)  ?? 0.30 ?  (?????) (taiyin meridians,  Yangming meridians)  (1, 0.02) 0.52 ??  (exterior and interior)  (0, 0.40) 0.20 ???(hyponym)  (0, 0.36) 0.18 ???(is a)  ?? 0.10 ?  ?? ? ? ?   (b) Recommendations of Unknown Relations Relations Pattern Prob Type  (????) (tumor, sputum) A  0.51 ??(contains)  0.15 ???(is a)  0.06 ???(hyponym)  0.28 ?  (?????) (head ache,  disease) A  0.65 ????(caused by)  0.18 ????  (has tributary)  0.05 ???(is a)  0.12 ?  (?????) (activity, entrails) B  0.18 ?????? (interact with)  0.12 ???(is a)  0.12 ???  (being included)  0.58 ?  (?????) (qi blood, entrails) B  0.50 ?????(manages)  0.10 ???(hyponym)  0.10 ????  (manifestation of)  0.30 ?  ?? ? ? ?   B. Experiment Process In this paper, we use ICTCLAS [8], a Chinese Word  Segmentation tool developed by Institute of Computing Technology of Chinese Academy of Sciences to extract words from TCM documents. And 175,679 instances name are extracted to build the domain dictionary.

We use Apriori [4], a classic association rule learning method to filter the candidate relations with support value bigger than 0.005 and smaller than 0.2, which means at least 10 occurs and at most 428 occurs for 2143 words vectors. The lift of the relations are calculated and used to sort the result.

142 candidate relations were extracted from 2143 instance vectors. In the relation matching process, 113 are labeled as unknown relations and 29 are labeled as known relations.

These relations are verified using the verification method we introduced in section 3.3  Result And Analysis Part of the recommended relations are presented in Table 1,  with the 2 recommendations of existent relations in Table 1a and 4 recommendations of unknown relations in Table 1b which composes 2 relations of pattern A and 2 relations of pattern B.

In Table 1a, the first column is the recommended relations, the second column is the parameters we used to sort the candidate semantic relations, as described in section 3.2, the third column is the probabilities of recommended relations with c1=c2=0.5, and the last column is the recommended relation type. As we can see, the candidate relations (six-fu-organs, triple warmer) and (taiyin meridians, yangming) are heavily domain related, which can only be understood by expert, not mention to identify the semantic relation between them. By using the domain ontology, our method can extract them from domain publications and generate the recommendations of their semantic relations, which can be very helpful for ontology engineers.

In Table 1b, the first, second, and third columns are the same as Table 1a, the second column is the pattern type of the relations we introduced in Figure 6. The two relations we present as pattern A are two typical results of verification approach. The (tumor, sputum) relation indicated that sputum is a kind of tumor, which is very weird at first sight. But you won?t feel surprise when you know the theory that in TCM, tumor is thought to be caused by sediment of sputum, and sputum, on other hand, can represent the garbage in our bodies.

This relation is a typical example for finding tacit knowledge.

On the other hand, some general facts, like head ache can be caused by disease are also extracted. The two example of pattern A showed how our method contributes in finding both tacit knowledge and general facts. The examples of pattern B just shows that how our method works on a different pattern.



V. CONCLUSION In this paper, we propose an ontology engineering  component of the TCM Semantic Grid, which lies in the ontology engineering layer and is used to verify the semantic relations in TCM ontology.

We propose a semantic relation extraction method based on statistical analysis. This approach can extract semantic relations from raw texts without linguistic information. It is very important when linguistic analysis is not available, like the Classic Chinese analysis, etc. In fact, most of the knowledge sources of TCM are ancient classics which are written in Classic Chinese.

A modified vector space model is proposed for relation filtration and semantic relation identification. The probabilities of each candidate semantic relations are calculated based on both domain ontology and the structure of domain publications.

The extracted relations are present to users with recommending semantic relation types and relevant probabilities, which are very helpful for both domain experts and common users.



VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work has been supported by China 973 project under  grant No.2006CB303001, China 863 project under grant No.2006AA01A123, project No.2003CB317000, China 973 project under grant No.NSFC60533040 and DARF under grant No.9140A06060307JW0403, 9140A06050509JW0401.

