

324 ?  2017 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference  ISSCC 2017 / SESSION 19 / FREQUENCY GENERATION / 19.2  19.2 A PVT-Robust -39dBc 1kHz-to-100MHz Integrated- Phase-Noise 29GHz Injection-Locked Frequency Multiplier with a 600?W Frequency-Tracking Loop Using the Averages of Phase Deviations for mm-Band 5G Transceivers  Seyeon Yoo, Seojin Choi, Juyeop Kim, Heein Yoon, Yongsun Lee, Jaehyouk Choi  Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, Korea  To meet requirements of high data-rates, RF transceivers for a 5G standard must have an ultra-wide bandwidth in a mm-wave band. A big challenge of a 5G transceiver is to generate ultra-low-PN (phase noise) local-oscillator (LO) signals to suppress integrated PN (IPN) over such an extremely wide bandwidth. A PLL that directly generates mm-band LO signals is not a good choice due to power- hungry frequency dividers and relatively poor PN. An mm-band LO generator, cascading a GHz-range PLL and a frequency multiplier as shown in Fig. 19.2.1, is an attractive solution. First, a GHz-range PLL can have a higher FOM than a mm- band PLL [1]. Second, the cascaded architecture is naturally able to support the bands for 2G to 4G standards. An injection-locked frequency multiplier (ILFM) is popular in a mm-band, achieving ultra-low PN even in a tight power budget.

However, the vulnerability of PN to PVT variations is a critical problem. For an ILFM, the PN performance can be improved only when the free-running VCO frequency, fVCO, and the target frequency are sufficiently close within the lock range, fL, which is very narrow, especially, at high frequencies. To calibrate fVCO over PVT, many frequency-tracking loops (FTLs) have used a power-hungry circuit (such as a replica-VCO, a TDC, and a counter) operating at fVCO, but they were not suitable for a mm-band ILFM. The sub-sampling FTL [2] used the voltage levels of the VCO outputs, momentarily sampled by injection pulses. However, for the accurate sampling, the pulse width of the injection pulses must be very narrow, since the sampling occurs at the edges of the pulses. For a mm-band VCO, the pulse width must be less than 10ps, but these narrow pulses limit the injection strength and fL. In the mm-band ILFM of [3], the mixers and dividers consumed a lot of power. An envelope detector was used for another mm-band ILFM to enable the calibration operating at low frequencies [4], but it cannot detect fVCO after the VCO is injection-locked and prevent PN degradation due to real-time drifts of fVCO.

In this work, a PVT-robust, low-PN mm-band ILFM with an ultra-low-power FTL is presented. By detecting distortions between the output phases of a quadrature VCO (QVCO), caused when fVCO deviates from the target frequency, the FTL can correct the drifts of fVCO and suppress PN continuously, even when the VCO is injection locked. The proposed FTL monitors the averages of phase deviations rather than detects or samples the instantaneous values; thus, the FTL operates at a low frequency and thus requires low power without the use of high-frequency circuits.

The proposed ILFM consists of a quadrature generator, a QVCO, pulse generators (PGs), a coarse frequency selector (CFS), and a low-power FTL. The PGs receive the quadrature signals and generate the injection pulses, INJ_I+, INJ_I?, INJ_Q+, and INJ_Q?, where the frequency is fINJ. These pulses are injected to the gates of injection transistors, where the drains are connected to the outputs of the QVCO.

When an injection pulse enters the gate, the corresponding output of the QVCO is pulled down, leading to instantaneous phase realignment. Figure 19.2.1 shows the principle of the proposed FTL, which uses the relationship between the phases of INJ_I+, OUT_Q+, and OUT_Q?. At the moment when INJ_I+ is injected, the phase of OUT_I+ is realigned momentarily. Independent of INJ_I+, however, OUT_Q+ and OUT_Q? still maintain their intrinsic phases. Thus, if fVCO deviates from N?fINJ (N is the target multiplication factor) the quadrature relationship between the outputs of the QVCO is distorted instantaneously, i.e. INJ_I+ becomes closer to either OUT_Q+ or OUT_Q?. This distortion can be detected by comparing  the overlapped area of INJ_I+ with OUT_Q+ and that with OUT_Q?. The difference between the two areas corresponds to the difference between fVCO and N?fINJ. In this work, the information of the areas is obtained as voltages, VAQ+ and VAQ?, by multiplying INJ_I+ and OUT_Q+ and INJ_I+ and OUT_Q?, respectively. As shown in Case 1, where fVCO is higher than N?fINJ, VAQ+ is supposed to be lower than VAQ? since INJ_I+ is closer to OUT_Q? than OUT_Q+. Then, the control voltage, VTUNE, decreases to lower fVCO. When fVCO is lower, VAQ+ is higher than VAQ?, and, thus, VTUNE must increase to adjust fVCO to be higher.

Figure 19.2.2 shows the architecture of the proposed FTL. When the coarse tuning is done by the CFS, the FTL starts continuous frequency tracking to monitor the average phase deviations. In the FTL, OUT_Q+ and OUT_Q? are transferred to the lowpass RC-filters through the NMOS switches, which are closed during the pulse width of INJ_I+. Since the effective bandwidth of the lowpass filters, fLPF, is much lower than fINJ, VAQ+ and VAQ? become almost DC voltages, implying the average values of the overlapped areas of OUT_Q+ and OUT_Q?, respectively. The series resistors also prevent the reduction of the tank-Q of the VCO due to the capacitors of the filters, while the switches are on. The following V-to-I amplifier generates the current, IAQ, depending on the difference between VAQ+ and VAQ?. As IAQ charges or discharges the loop capacitor, VTUNE is controlled to adjust fVCO to be tightly close to N?fINJ. Since any drifts of fVCO in a steady-state operation cause mismatches between VAQ+ and VAQ?, the FTL can keep correcting fVCO without the loss of injection locking. The loop bandwidth of the FTL was approximately 2MHz.

As shown in Fig. 19.2.3, the V-to-I amplifier is based on a two-stage OTA, with the first-stage acting as a level shifter. The second-stage has a cascode active load to enhance the gain and reduce current mismatches. To improve the differentiality, the inter-digitation technique was used in the layout of each transistor pair. The CMOS-type QVCO has six-bit binary-weighted MOM capacitors and a varactor.

The mm-band ILFM using a 65nm CMOS process consumed 24.3mW, but the proposed ultra-low-power FTL consumed only 600?W. Figure 19.2.4 shows the spectrum of the output signal with fOUT of 29.25GHz (or 13?2.25GHz). To achieve sufficient output power for the accurate PN-measurement, fOUT was reduced to fDIV3, i.e. 9.75GHz, by an on-chip test divider. The difference between the output and input PNs was very close to 20log(fDIV3/fINJ) up to 100MHz, implying the noise added by the ILFM was extremely small. From the measured data, the 10MHz PN and the IPN were restored to -129.7dBc/Hz and -39.1dBc, respectively. As shown in Fig. 19.2.5, the fL of injection locking was only less than 200MHz, but the FTL was able to regulate the drifts of fVCO and the degradation of PN tightly over temperatures and voltages. The tracking range of the FTL was greater than 1GHz.

The table in Fig. 19.2.6 compares the performances of state-of-the-art mm-band ILFMs. This ILFM achieved the lowest IPN and jitterrms of designs reported in Fig.

19.2.6, irrespective of PVT, while the calibrator consumed less than 1mW.

