

Abstract : Malicious intrusion is the behavior that threats a large  number of computers; therefore, recent research has focused on devising new techniques to detect and control internet intrusion with high efficiency and low cost. Unfortunately some anomaly detection system (ADS) over machine learning may get some false alarms if the results of machine learning cannot cover all the normal or abnormal data. In this paper, to solve this problem, we introduce a new approach for anomaly detection using contiguous expert voting algorithm (CEVS). At first, we present our framework of the anomaly detection system, and then we define a new algorithm based on data mining, at last we will use this algorithm to detect the internet anomaly and report our experimental result. The results show that the proposed approach can improve the detection performance of the ADS, where traditional anomaly detection system is used.

Keywords: Computer security; Anomaly detection; Contiguous  expert voting algorithm; Data mining  1. Introduction  As network-based computer systems play increasingly vital roles in our society and they are so deeply influence our daily life that we can?t live without it.

Therefore, with the tremendous growth of network-based services and information on internet, the number of the network hosts has sharply increased [1]. But the network- based computers are often vulnerable; due to this reason Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) become a crucial part of network security [2].

There are two major intrusion detection approaches: misuse detection and anomaly detection.

The system based on misuse detection we called Misuse-based systems which can detect known attacks with high success detection rate and low time cost, but when faces the unknown attacks it become very powerless.

For this reason, Anomaly-based systems which use anomaly detection techniques are employed to detect the unknown intrusions. An anomaly detection technique identifies the observed activities that deviate significantly from the normal usage as intrusions [3], [4], [5]. Thus, anomaly detection can detect unknown intrusions, which cannot be addressed by misuse detection. But, nearly all the anomaly-based detection techniques have a fatal disadvantage due to the mechanism of machine learning that if the results of machine learning cannot cover all the  normal or abnormal data then we may get some false alarms. [4], [7]  Here, for the problem, we propose a new anomaly detection scheme which we called contiguous expert voting detection system (CEVs) that can avoid the false alarms above. We use tremendous virus datasets for evaluation, which mix Internet trace data, virus data and Trojan attack data. Experiment shows that our approach detects abnormal behavior with very high accuracy and low false alarm.

This rest of paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we discuss the related work. In Section 3, we set out the algorithm of contiguous expert voting and it?s usage of anomaly detection. In Section 4, we introduce our system?s framework then we describe the experiments and evaluation in Section 5. Finally, we summarize the paper and outline our future research plans in Section 6.

2.    Related Works  Focus on the problem of malicious intrusion, research has devised many new techniques we called anomaly detection system (ADS) which can detect unknown attacks and it plays a vital role in intrusion detection. As data mining has been introduced to the ADS, many detection approaches which base on it have been developed. In the past years, data mining techniques such as hidden Markov model, based on machine learning, has been used to build automatic anomaly detection system.

At the same time a technique called association rules were employed to build ADS [8], [9], [10], [11].

Association rules through analyze the connection of malicious behaviors to create a rule which is used to contrast with suspicious data [12]. We can get success detection if the suspicious data?s rule matching our training rules while we use abnormal data to create our training rules.

Among this method, many other approaches based on association rule mining have been proposed for anomaly detection. Then the frequent episode rules (FERs) was first proposed by Mannila and Toivonen. With huge audit records, data mining generates many complex FERs with redundancy or repetitions [6]. Later, a framework was made up by Lee that employed the FERs for anomaly detection by comparing the current activities with normal traffic profiles [7]. They introduced the axis and reference attributes in the JAM project to constrain the rule       generation and to obtain temporal features. Subsequently, Fan extended Lee?s work to find accurate boundaries between known and unknown attacks. Qin and Hwang refined the rule formulation procedure with the base- support algorithm to mine normal traffic data [6].

Compare with Lee?s work, the base-support algorithm is fairer to various axis attribute values. Due to the fact that the same percentage of records is required for different axis attributes, so, higher base-support value will result in fewer FERs.

3. Contiguous Expert Voting Algorithm  3.1 Definition Here we need to introduce some definitions as  follows: Definition 1: (Knowledge) We regard a program  behavior or a network behavior as a knowledge. Such as: Edit regedit, auto-start.

Definition 2: (Expert) An expert is composed of different types of knowledge. For example, suppose we just concern three knowledge k1, k2, k3 and then a normal data just has two knowledge k1 and k2, so we can gain an expert E1(k1, k2).

Definition 3: (Suspicious set) A suspicious set is composed of a set of knowledge which extract from the suspicious data.

Definition 4: (Expert matching) If suspicious set include the same type and number of knowledge as expert, we called it expert matching.

Definition 5: (Expert power) Expert a1 can deduce a result r1 which represent the detection accuracy, and then we regard r1 as expert power.

Definition 6: (Arbitrage value) If the expert power below the arbitrage value we can regard this expert trend to normal or we can regard this expert trend to abnormal.

3.2 The Algorithm  In this part, we will give a brief view about Contiguous Expert Voting Algorithm.

Let K (k1, k2, k3) be a set of knowledge, and suppose we use amount of normal data to gain five experts: E1 (k2), E2 (k3), E3 (k1, k2), E4 (k1, k3), E5 (k1, k2, k3).

Then we give each of them a value that represents expert power: E1=0.3, E2=0.43, E3=0.23, E4=0.63, E5=0.79.

Now, we have a suspicious data, and obtain a suspicious set S (k1, k3) which extracts from the suspicious data.

Obviously, we find that S matches E4, so E4 vote for S with its expert power 0.63. Now if the arbitrage value is 0.54 we can find the suspicious data is normal.

But if we just judge the suspicious data by use the method above, it will degenerate into association rules. So we must introduce the contiguous expert which can bring us a fresh air.

Now we bring another suspicious data, unfortunately, we obtain a suspicious set S2 (k2, k3) that matches none of the expert. But we find the only difference between S2 and E1 is K3, and so the S2 and E2 is K2, S2 and E5 is K1.

We call the E1, E2, E5, are contiguous expert. Luckily, we find only the expert power of E5 beyond the arbitrage value, so we can judge the suspicious data is abnormal. In another word, if the number of expert which its power value below the arbitrage value is more than the number of expert which its power value beyond the arbitrage value, we can judge the data is abnormal if we use normal data to create the expert.

We will discuss how to get the expert power and more details about the application of the contiguous expert in the next part.

3.3 Application of CEVs  In this part, we will through an example to discuss how to get the expert power and the application of the contiguous expert algorithm.

Example: Let E be an expert set by the table shown below:  Table 1. Expert Set  ID Auto- start  KeyLogger ProcessInject Powerval ue  1 Y N Y 0.14 2 N N N 0.57 3 N Y Y 0.14 4 N N N 0.57 5 N N N 0.57 6 Y Y N 0.14 7 N N N 0.57   We find that there are four experts (2, 4, 5, 7) have the same knowledge (Auto-start=N; KeyLogger=N; ProcessInject=N), so we can count the expert power is 4/7=0.57.

Now, we have a Suspicious set S and S=( Auto- start=N; KeyLogger=N; ProcessInject=Y ), obviously, it satisfies none of the expert. But we find the only difference between S and E2 is ProcessInject, S and E1 is Auto-start,         4.   The anomaly detection system architecture  Figure 1 shows four major components of our ADS: Expert Generation and Expert Power Generation Engines, Expert Database, Suspicious Set Generation and Anomaly Detection Engines, Alarm Generation. First we apply normal training data to the Expert Generation and gain enough experts then use the Expert Power Generation to calculate the expert power. Second we store them in the Expert Database and we finish the Training Phase.

Figure 1. Anomaly detection system architecture  When Detection Phase begins, we sent the suspicious data to the Suspicious Set Generation and obtain the Suspicious Set then we use the Anomaly Detection Engine to detect if it exist attack. At the end of this phase, the Anomaly Detection Engine will generate an alarm if there is an attack.

It is worth mentioning that we use virtual machine technology to extract the knowledge.

5.    Experiments And Evaluation  We use tremendous normal datasets for training and Figure 2 shows the relation between training data number and detection accuracy. Due to the fact that more training data will bring more detection accuracy, but the growth trends become more smoothly when the training data  Figure 2. The relation between training data number and detection accuracy  number beyond 3000. Another advantage is if we use more training data to generate the expert and we will get a high first matching rate. Figure 3 shows us this fact  Figure 3. The relation between training data number and First matching rate  Figure 4. The relation between knowledge number and false alarm rate       There is another problem that is how much knowledge  should we concern? Is that more knowledge represent less false alarm? We can find the relation through an experiments and Figure 4 shows the result.

Meanwhile, we find that when use CEVs, an appropriate arbitrage value is very important for judging the data normal or abnormal. This value is decided by diversiform factors such as knowledge number and the number of experts in database. The results over our work are shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5. Percentage of false alarms with different arbitrage value.

At last, we choose to evaluate the intrusion detection rate corresponding to unknown attacks. Our CEVs results in a higher successful detection rate than FER scheme and Association rules scheme. For the MIT attack dataset, we achieved an average detection rate of 54.12%, compared with 31.29% using pure FERs and 20.11% using association rules.

6.  Conclusions and Future work  In this section, we summarize major contributions and make some suggestions for further work on malicious code intrusion in network environment. Early methods can detect most anomalies but there is an obvious problem that the normal rules may not cover all the normal data, thus unsuccessful match does not means we detect an abnormity. Our approach handles this problem with CEVs technique and obtains a nice result.

Our work just a preliminary exploration which use the CEVs; inevitably, it has some drawbacks. In future work, we can improve our approach and attain higher detection rate.

