Kriging-model-based Multi-objective Robust Optimization and  Trade-off-rule Mining Using Association Rule with Aspiration

Abstract?A new design method called MORDE (multi-objective robust design exploration), which conducts both a multi-objective robust optimization and data mining for analyzing trade-offs, is proposed. For the robust optimization, probabilistic representation of design parameters is incorporated into a multi-objective genetic algorithm. The means and standard deviations of responses of evaluation functions to uncertainties in design variables are evaluated by descriptive Latin hypercube sampling using Kriging surrogate models. To extract trade-off control rules further, a new approach, which combines the association rule with an "aspiration vector," is proposed. MORDE is then applied to an industrial design problem concerning a centrifugal fan. Taking dimensional uncertainty into account, MORDE then optimized the means and standard deviations of the resulting distributions of fan efficiency and turbulent noise level. The advantages of MORDE over traditional approaches are shown to be the diversity of the solutions and the quantitative controllability of the trade-off balance among multiple objective functions.



I. INTRODUCTION RACTICAL designs of industrial products have to struggle with uncontrollable uncertainties such as variance in  dimensions due to mass production and unpredictable environmental conditions. To achieve robust designs, it is necessary for designers to take the effects of these uncertainties into account in the stage of design optimization.

Home appliances are typical products that suffer from these uncertainties. Fig. 1 shows a centrifugal fan used in drying system of a washer-dryer. Shorter drying time and lower operating noise are features that are most important to customers. In the fan's design, higher efficiency and lower aerodynamic noise are the keys to improving these features. It thus becomes important to reduce variance in these features under conditions of dimensional uncertainty due to mass production.

Recently, multi-objective design optimization using evolutionary algorithms has become popular in the area of turbomachinery design. However, previous studies [1]-[4] have focused on deterministic designs, and none of these works have considered the uncertainties. In contrast, Egorov [5] took a stochastic approach to the robust design, but  his  Manuscript received November 14, 2008.

K. Sugimura is with Hitachi Ltd., Ibaraki, JAPAN (phone: 81-29-353-  3260; fax: 81-29-353-3857; e-mail: kazuyuki.sugimura.hk@hitachi.com).

S. Jeong and S. Obayashi are with Tohoku University, Miyagi, JAPAN.

T. Kimura is with Hitachi Appliance Inc., Ibaraki, JAPAN.

D0s  b0  b2  RBeta R1  Beta1  Beta2  Beta3  70 mm  D0s  b0  b2  RBeta R1  Beta1  Beta2  Beta3  70 mm  Fig.1 Centrifugal fan for washer-dryer  work was not based on multi-objective optimization. It has therefore been impossible to discuss trade-off relations between the mean and variance of design objectives.

However, the recent developments in surrogate models have made it possible to evaluate the statistical responses to these uncertainties within a practical design lead time. Some researchers like Kumar et al. [6] and Shimoyama [7] have started to apply techniques of multi-objective optimization to robust designs, taking a multi-objective Six Sigma approach.

We took a similar approach to theirs, but, instead, we integrated the multi-objective Six Sigma method with the parameterization method in the Taguchi method [8], which has been widely used for practical robust design. Within this context, we developed a widely applicable multi-objective robust design framework, which integrated a multi-objective genetic algorithm, Kriging surrogate models [9], and a generalized probabilistic representation of design parameters that is compatible with the Taguchi method. Kriging models were chosen for their excellent accuracy in prediction.

Another difficulty arises in multi-objective robust optimization. That is, the number of dimensions of obtained non-dominated solutions becomes much higher than that of a multi-objective non-robust optimization. And it is generally recognized to be difficult to find correlation patterns in such high-dimensional data.

A visualization method such as Self-organizing map (SOM) [10] can be used to visualize the correlation patterns of high-dimensional data. However, the use of SOM is not adequate for finding quantitative high-order correlation patterns of parameters, because analysis by SOM is based on subjective pattern-recognitions by a human designer. It is also difficult for SOM to choose a proper design candidate that  P     meets arbitrarily specified preferences in a trade-off balance.

Nakayama et al. [11] developed the aspiration level method  that enables interactive trade-off analysis in multi-objective optimization problems. In this method, a directional vector located in high-dimensional objective function space is used for specifying a preference in a trade-off balance. We newly applied this traditional concept of directional vector to data mining process. Namely, we combined aspiration vector concept with a design rule extraction method, association rule, to find quantitative rules to control any trade-off balances.

Obayashi et al. [12] originally proposed, a design exploration concept, in which multi-objective optimization and data mining for high-dimensional data are conducted. We extended this paradigm to MORDE (multi-objective robust design exploration), which composes of multi-objective robust optimization and data mining for analyzing trade-offs in high-dimensional data. In this paper, we explain MORDE first and then demonstrate its capabilities with the results of an industrial application of a centrifugal fan design.



II. MULTI-OBJECTIVE ROBUST DESIGN EXPLORATION  A. Generalized Framework The developed framework incorporates probabilistic  representations of design parameters into a real-coded multi-objective genetic algorithm. Kriging models, the tool of which have been already developed by Jeong et al. [13], are used to numerically evaluate probabilistic responses between design variables and evaluation functions such as objective functions and constraint functions. Fig. 2 is a flowchart of MORDE. It consists of the optimization and data mining (trade-off analysis) parts. First, the global design space is sampled by Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) to collect the necessary dataset for constructing Kriging models. The number of Kriging models to be constructed is equal to the number of evaluation functions.

Using the Kriging models, a multi-objective genetic algorithm (MOGA) solves the optimization problem. Each individual in the MOGA's population defines the representative values of uncertainty profiles of design variables, as shown in the right box at the top of Fig. 2. Unlike traditional methods of non-robust optimization, sampling points around the representative values are located by using descriptive LHS in our method. An uncertainty profile is defined by selecting a proper probability density function.

The Kriging models are used to predict the deterministic responses at each sampling point (right box in the middle of Fig. 2). After that, a set of deterministic responses is statistically evaluated, and the means and standard deviations are calculated. Finally, the mean and standard deviation of each evaluation function are assigned to two objective (or constraint) functions (right box at the bottom of Fig. 2). The number of objective and constraint functions thus becomes twice the number of evaluation functions (Kriging models).

jf ix i-th design variable  j-th evaluation function  )(p probability function  Representative value  Uncertainty profile  Kriging model  Sampled data  Standard deviation  Mean  Representative value  )( ixp  ix  ix  jf  jf  )( jfp  Converged ?

no yes  Latin hypercube sampling  Initialize population  Construct Kriging models  Calculate responses by Kriging models  Crossover and mutation  Selection  Analyze trade-offs  Define sampling points by descriptive LHS  Calculate mean and standard deviation  Calculate fitness 121jy  221jy  y objective (constraint) function  jf ix i-th design variable  j-th evaluation function  )(p probability function  Representative value  Uncertainty profile  Kriging model  Sampled data  Standard deviation  Mean  Representative value  )( ixp  ix  ix  jf  jf  )( jfp  Converged ?

no yes  Latin hypercube sampling  Initialize population  Construct Kriging models  Calculate responses by Kriging models  Crossover and mutation  Selection  Analyze trade-offs  Define sampling points by descriptive LHS  Calculate mean and standard deviation  Calculate fitness 121jy  221jy  y objective (constraint) function  Fig.2 Flowchart of MORDE  In the following sequence of genetic operations, a method of evaluating fitness based on Pareto-ranking and fitness sharing [14], roulette selection, BLX-  crossover, and non-uniform mutation methods [15] is used. The best-N strategy is used as an elitist strategy to accelerate convergence.

To avoid having to use penalty functions, the Pareto- optimality-based constraint handling technique [16] is incorporated in the genetic algorithm. After non-dominated solutions are obtained, the trade-off is analyzed by data mining methods.

Regarding uncertainty profiles, rectangular and normal distributions are prepared as options for the current framework. If an uncertainty profile is known through measurements, the normal, or other actual distribution profiles, can be used. If the profile is unknown, a rectangular profile should be used. Evaluation using a rectangular profile corresponds to design of experiments using noise factors as in the case of the Taguchi method. Since our intention was to develop a method of parameterization compatible with the Taguchi method, we generalized parameter representations as summarized in Table 1.

Table 1 compares the setup of design variables in our method and the corresponding factors used in the Taguchi method. By changing the types of uncertainty profiles and types of search regions for design variables in our method,  2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2009) 523    Table 1 Comparison of parameterization methods  Search region in optimization  Min. = Max.Min. Max.

Uncertainty profile  Deterministic  Probabilistic (Profile is known)  Probabilistic (Profile is unknown)  Control factor Constant  Control and noise factor Noise factor  Control and noise factor Noise factor  Min. Max.

x  x  x  x x  p  p  p  Search region in optimization  Min. = Max.Min. Max.

Uncertainty profile  Deterministic  Probabilistic (Profile is known)  Probabilistic (Profile is unknown)  Control factor Constant  Control and noise factor Noise factor  Control and noise factor Noise factor  Min. Max.

x  x  x  x x  p  p  p  the roles of design variables can be assigned to the corresponding ones in  the Taguchi method.

Strength of the Taguchi method is that it explicitly classifies design variables into control factors and noise factors, thereby making designers aware of parameters' roles.

While noise factors cannot be controlled by designers, control factors can be intentionally adjusted in the design and manufacturing processes. However, in case of the Taguchi method, it is difficult to handle continuous uncertainty profiles, like a normal distribution, and the trade-off between multiple design objectives. In regards to these difficulties, the multi-objective Six Sigma method has advantages over the Taguchi method. As a result, we combined the strengths of both methods and defined the parameterization method summarized in Table 1.

B. Quantitative Rule Mining Using Association Rule In the following trade-off analysis, we applied design rule  extraction method, association rule [17], for finding quantitative higher-order correlations among parameters.

Design rules are expressed in if-then form that defines a certain combination of levels of design variables (condition attributes) and a certain level of a design objective (decision attribute).

The association rule mines design rules from a multivariate dataset with categorical data elements (as shown in Table 2).

In engineering design data, condition attributes are design variables and their levels. A decision attribute can be one of the objective functions, but any other scalar variable can be chosen according to the purpose. For example, a weighted-sum of multiple objective functions can be taken as the scalar variable. Because each line of the multivariate dataset represents a rule, which means "if (condition attributes) then (a decision attribute)," the whole dataset is  Table 2 Multivariate dataset for association rule  Decision attribute  Condition attributes  ...

Level 2  Level 3  Level 4  ............4  Level 5Level 2Level 4Level 33  Level 1Level 1Level 4Level 52  Level 2Level 5Level 2Level 11  No  Decision attribute  Condition attributes  ...

Level 2  Level 3  Level 4  ............4  Level 5Level 2Level 4Level 33  Level 1Level 1Level 4Level 52  Level 2Level 5Level 2Level 11  No 1x 2x 3x 4x y  considered to be a rule set. Consequently, the purpose of design rule mining is to find simpler rules that have more compact combinations of condition attributes.

The association rule searches for all the possible combinations of data elements and counts up the number of times they occur. A maximum rule length must be specified to restrict the search space and reduce the computational cost.

The rule length is defined as the total number of data elements that correspond to condition attributes and a decision attribute.

Because so many different rules can still be derived from the dataset even after setting the rule length, important rules are chosen according to the following criteria:  all  BA  N N  BA )(support , and          (1)  A  BA  N N  BA )(confidence ,           (2)  where A and B represents a certain combination of attributes, and N is the number of data that satisfies the conditions denoted by the subscripts. Because the association rule itself does not discriminate x  from and treats all the data elements evenly, some derived rules may have  y x  in B .

However, we are only interested in rules that contain  iny B . Therefore, rules that do not have  iny B  are filtered first, and rules are then sorted or checked by using these criteria.

"Support" indicates a rule's importance in the sense of frequent occurrence. In other words, a large value for support implies the commodity of a rule. "Confidence" means how accurately the same combination of attributes A  and B  is repeated in the data that includes A . If confidence is equal to one or lower than one, the derived rules are sufficient conditions or necessary conditions, respectively. That is, confidence represents the accuracy of a rule.

C. Control of Trade-off Balance Using Aspiration Vector We propose a new definition of the decision attribute in  Table 2, namely one that is suitable for specifying a trade-off balance. Fig. 3 shows a method for defining an aspiration vector in three-dimensional objective function space as an example. Here, the optimization problem is assumed to be a minimization problem.

524 2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2009)    First, the non-dominated solution space is normalized.

Virtual point S, corresponding to the coordinate (1,1,1), is defined as the origin for a vector that controls the trade-off balance. Note that this origin can be taken in a different way according to the purpose, e.g., the corresponding coordinates that represent the current product's performance can be assigned to the origin.

An aspiration vector that specifies the trade-off balance is defined as:  nw  w w  a 2  ,                (3)  where is a positive weight for the -th objective function, and n is the space dimension ( n =3 in Fig. 3). A vector connecting S and the -th non-dominated solution is then defined as a data vector:  iw i  j    )(  )(  )(  j n  j  j  jj  y  y y  SDd ,            (4)  where  ( ) represents the coordinates of the)( jiy mj ,,2,1 j -th non-dominated solution, and is the total number of  non-dominated solutions.

m  To measure the proximity to the preferred trade-off balance, the angle between the aspiration vector and the data vector is calculated as follows:  j  j da  da jacos .             (5)  The design rules that achieve the specified trade-off balance can then be derived by setting j to the decision  attribute in Table 2 and extracting rules that minimize j .

We call a post processing method that uses the aspiration vector, particularly j , for decision-making and design rule  extractions as "the aspiration vector method."

III. INDUSTRIAL DESIGN OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM  For demonstrating the capability of MORDE, we applied it to a real-world design problem, that is, optimizing the shape of a centrifugal fan with dimensional uncertainty.

We used a similar shape-parameterization method to those used in our previous works [18][19]. As explained in Fig. 1, the fan's shape is defined by a combination of meridional profile and blade profile. In the definition of the meridional profile, inlet diameter D0s, inlet height b0, and outlet height b2 are taken as design variables. The meridional lines are modeled by non-uniform rational B-spline (NURBS) curves.

In the definition of the blade profile, the distribution function     S  D  1y  2y  3y  a  d  Non-dominated solution  Non-dominated front     S  D  1y  2y  3y  a  d  Non-dominated solution  Non-dominated front  Fig. 3 Definition of aspiration vector  of blade angle against radius is first defined by a NURBS curve with three control points. The design variables are then assigned to the coordinates of these control points.

Accordingly, the design variables are Beta1, Beta2, Beta3, and r_R1, r_RBeta, where r_R1 and r_RBeta specify normalized radial positions, namely, R1 and RBeta, of the NURBS control points. The blade's thickness is kept constant.

The objectives of this fan design were to increase fan efficiency and reduce turbulent noise level while taking the effect of dimensional uncertainty into account. These aerodynamic features were evaluated by using a steady-state flow analysis of a Reynolds-averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) simulation by commercial software, STAR-CDTM (CD- adapco).

The fan efficiency is defined at the design point (flow rate: 1.5 m3/min; number of revolutions: 19,000 min-1) as  ax s W  pQ ,           (6)  where Q , p , and correspond to flow rate, static pressure rise, and shaft power.

axW  The turbulent noise level is evaluated by a theoretical prediction model [20], which relates the noise level to the magnitudes of relative velocities in the fan:  ZDWWLtb   110log10 ,   (7)  where , , , and 1W 2W 2D Z correspond to average relative velocity at the impeller inlet, average relative velocity at the impeller outlet, outlet diameter of the fan, and number of blades.  and 2D Z were taken as constant in this study.

These aerodynamic features are affected by dimensional uncertainty. The mean, , and standard deviation, , of the distributions of the aerodynamic features (6) and (7) are assigned to objective functions: - s , s , tbL , and  2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2009) 525    Table 3 List of design parameters  -557517(Wax) [W]  55025Beta3 [deg.]  Minimize- ( s)  Minimize( s)  Minimize(Ltb) [dB]  Minimize(Ltb) [dB]  -200(Wax) [W]  55020Beta2 [deg.]  53520Beta1 [deg.]  0.00660.950.05r_RBeta  0.006650.080.001r_R1  0.0007180.360.33D0s/D2  0.007192.31.7b0/b2  0.186b2 [mm]  ToleranceMax.Min.NameType  -557517(Wax) [W]  55025Beta3 [deg.]  Minimize- ( s)  Minimize( s)  Minimize(Ltb) [dB]  Minimize(Ltb) [dB]  -200(Wax) [W]  55020Beta2 [deg.]  53520Beta1 [deg.]  0.00660.950.05r_RBeta  0.006650.080.001r_R1  0.0007180.360.33D0s/D2  0.007192.31.7b0/b2  0.186b2 [mm]  ToleranceMax.Min.NameType D  es ig  n va  ria bl  e O  bj ec  tiv e  fu nc  tio n  C on  st ra  in t  tbL . Note that these four objective functions are defined as a minimization problem. Moreover,  and of the shaft power are also considered as constraints.

As dimensional uncertainty could not be measured on actual production lines, the rectangular profile in Table 1 was used. The width of the rectangular profile was set to equal the specified tolerance by designers. All the design parameters, with their definition ranges, are summarized in Table 3.



IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  A. Confirmation of Solution Diversity and Trade-off Balance 79 valid samples were obtained by flow simulations using  LHS. Three Kriging models were constructed to predict fan efficiency, turbulent noise level, and shaft power. Cross validations of these Kriging models were conducted, and the means and standard deviations of prediction errors for fan efficiency, turbulent noise level, and shaft power were (0.022%, 0.44%), (0.006%, 0.30%), and (0.022%, 0.69%), respectively. Considering these results, we conclude that the models are sufficiently accurate for approximation.

The optimization problem was then solved by using MOGA. The population was set to 100, and 162 generations were altered. The responses to uncertainty were calculated with 1000 samples of descriptive LHS, after confirming that almost the same results had been obtained as when using 2000 samples.

We obtained 1268 feasible non-dominated solutions. It took a week to sample the simulation data on a single-node dual core AMD OpteronTM 2.2-GHz computer and another week to build the models, carry out optimization, and perform  data mining. We considered two weeks to be within a practical design lead-time.

Fig. 4 visualizes all the obtained non-dominated solutions as small black dots in scatter plots. The four-dimensional objective function space is projected onto a two-dimensional plane, with mean performance as axes.

To investigate the trade-offs, we defined the following four different preferences as test cases:  Solution A (weighting s )  1w : : : = 1 : 0 : 0 : 0, (8)2w 3w 4w Solution B (weighting s  and tbL )  1w : : : = 1 : 0 : 1 : 0,         (9) 2w 3w 4w Solution C (weighting s  and tbL )  1w : : : = 0 : 1 : 0 : 1, and (10)2w 3w 4w Solution D (equal weighting)  1w : : : = 1 : 1 : 1: 1,          (11) 2w 3w 4w  where , , , and correspond to preference  weights for 1w 2w 3w 4w  s , s , tbL , and tbL .

Solution A is an extreme design in terms of s .

Solution B aims to simultaneously improve mean performances s  and tbL similar to the traditional approach as multi-objective non-robust optimization. In contrast, Solution C intends to decrease standard deviations  s  and tbL , as a quality-engineering approach like the Taguchi method does. Solution D is an equally compromised solution in terms of all the objective functions.

To check how the proposed method of aspiration vectors works, non-dominated solutions for Solutions A, B, C, and D were extracted as ones that had the smallest  with the aspiration vectors of (8), (9), (10), and (11), respectively.

These solutions are indicated by the large rectangles in Fig. 4.

In the figures, variations in the solutions due to the dimensional uncertainty are also plotted as collections of small gray-scaled circles. Arrows indicate regions of perturbations in performance. Note that the dots are mean values while the small circles are exact values.

Fig. 4 confirms that Solutions A, B, and D are in the right balanced positions as specified by the weights of mean properties  and ((8), (9), and (11)). Namely, Solution A is located in the left-end area, and Solutions B and D are in the middle area in terms of the two mean properties.

1w 3w  It is also confirmed that the variations in performance of Solution C and D are smaller than those of Solution D and B, respectively ((10) vs. (11), and (11) vs. (9)). These are comparisons of solutions with different weights on standard deviations in the total balances. In summary, standard deviations of Solutions C, D and B increase in this order.

526 2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2009)           -0.52 -0.51 -0.50 -0.49 -0.48  -?( s)  ?( Lt  b )         -0.52 -0.51 -0.50 -0.49 -0.48  -?( s)  ?( Lt  b )  (a) Solution A and its variance   -0.52 -0.51 -0.50 -0.49 -0.48  -?( s)  ?( Lt  b )   -0.52 -0.51 -0.50 -0.49 -0.48  -?( s)  ?( Lt  b )  (b) Solution B and its variance         -0.52 -0.51 -0.50 -0.49 -0.48  -?( s)  ?( Lt  b )         -0.52 -0.51 -0.50 -0.49 -0.48  -?( s)  ?( Lt  b )  (c) Solution C and its variance         -0.52 -0.51 -0.50 -0.49 -0.48  -?( s)  ?( Lt  b )         -0.52 -0.51 -0.50 -0.49 -0.48  -?( s)  ?( Lt  b )  (d) Solution D and its variance  Fig.4 Trade-offs in non-dominated solutions  Since the locations of the solutions in the objective function space agree with the specification of trade-off balance, it is concluded that the aspiration vector can be used for specifying a desired trade-off balance.

It is beneficial to have as much non-dominated solutions as possible, like the solutions shown in Fig. 4, because we can choose a design solution to a given design requirement afterward. For example, Solution B is superior in terms of mean performance, so it is a good compromise between fan efficiency and noise level in the case that dimensional uncertainty can be kept as low as possible by production efforts. In contrast, the variance of Solution C is small, so it is suitable for mass-produced products.

As explained above, MORDE is characterized in its diversity of solutions, which concern not only the mean performance but also the robustness of performance. These diverse solutions could not be obtained by traditional design methods.

B. Derivation of Quantitative Trade-off Rules Association rule was applied to obtain the design rules  needed to realize each solution. In applying the association rule, all the design variables are first discretized into five levels with equal intervals. Angle in (5) was used as the decision attribute, and discretized into 7, 4, 5, and 4 levels for solutions corresponding to A, B, C, and D, in such a way that the minimum (optimum) levels contain a sufficient amount of data.

The rule length must be given for the association rule in advance. As found in a previous work [18], another method of extracting design rules, namely, rough set theory, can rationally minimize the necessary number of condition attributes according to logical set operations. Thus, we applied rough set theory to the same dataset, and it was found that the rule length should be set to four for association rule.

Tables 4(a), (b), (c), and (d) respectively list extracted rules that minimize the levels of for Solutions A, B, C, and D, namely, is at level 1. Because it was intended to extract accurate rules as sufficient conditions, rules with a confidence of one were chosen and then sorted by their values of support.

For instance, Table 4(a) lists the major rules that make for s keep at level 1. Thus, the rule No.1 in Table 4(a) means  if (b2 is level 2), (b0/b2 is level 1), and (Beta3 is level 1), then (  for s is level 1).        (12)  As it is clear from Table 4, the association rule can extract multiple design rules (design candidates) for achieving prescribed trade-off balances. Another advantage of the association rule over a visualization method like SOM is that discrete but quantitative rules are available. The counts in the  2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2009) 527    right column of the table are the total number of decision attributes extracted in the rule set. The counts are used to approximately determine the importance of design variables, and those variables with larger counts are called cores. The individual setup to achieve the trade-off balance is stated in each rule, while the average setup that all the rule sets imply can be obtained by identifying the condition attributes of these cores.

From Table 4 (a), blade angles, Beta3 and Beta1, are determined as cores for s . All rule sets indicate that Beta3 should be at level 1 (0-20%) or 2 (20-40%), while Beta1 should be at levels 2 or 4, on average. Small Beta3 results in a large relative flow velocity at the fan outlet and increases the static pressure rise in the fan. These results provide the design knowledge that the reaction factor of the fan should be reinforced to improve s .

From Table 4 (b), blade angle Beta3 and r_RBeta are determined as cores. As Solution B aims to improve both  s  and tbL , Beta3 is set slightly larger than that in Table 4 (a) as a compromise. These rules indicate that the blade-load balance, which these cores are related to, is the key to improving the mean performance.

Table 4 (c) indicates that b2, D0s/D2, r_RBeta, and Beta3 are the keys to robust designs. The lowest level of b2 and the largest level of Beta3 mean that the velocity triangle at the fan outlet has a better aspect ratio, consequently velocity variations against dimensional uncertainty become smaller.

As it is clear from Table 4 (d), the counts become similar and the dominant cores are not as clear as those in Tables 4 (a), (b), and (c). The design variables also seem to acquire various levels. This implies that there are multiple solutions to achieve the same trade-off balance as in the case of Solution D.

From these investigations with the association rule described above, we conclude that the association rule can derive multiple design rules for quantitative expressions, where more than three parameters are related. This capability of analyzing high-dimensional data helps designers more in understanding the trade-offs, reinforcing graphical methods such as SOM.



V. CONCLUSION A new design paradigm called MORDE which combines  methods of multi-objective robust optimization and data mining was proposed.

A generalized framework for multi-objective robust optimization was developed. By incorporating probabilistic representation of design parameters, which is compatible with the parameterization used in the Taguchi method, multi-objective robust design optimization based on Kriging models becomes feasible within a practical design lead-time.

A method of controlling a trade-off balance by using an aspiration vector, which measures the proximity to a  designated preference for a trade-off balance, was also proposed. This method was used to extract the design rules for achieving the preference by applying the newly adopted association rule to a data of non-dominated solutions. The association rule can determine the multiple and quantitative design rules needed to achieve trade-off balances, even from a high-dimensional data, while it is difficult to do the same analysis with SOMs.

MORDE was applied to an industrial-design problem concerning the centrifugal fan of washer-dryer. This design was aimed at statistically improving both the efficiency of the fan and reducing its turbulence noise level in the case that dimensional uncertainty due to mass production exists. It was demonstrated that a design candidate can be flexibly chosen and quantitative rules to accomplish the trade-off balance can be found. It was also demonstrated that both results of traditional non-robust optimal design and quality-engineering robust design like the Taguchi method can be simultaneously obtained with the MORDE approach.

