Application of new A riori lgorithm MDNC to

Abstract?How to utilize a variety of derivatives so as to obtain  positive investment return in different economies concerns the  general investors.  The present research utilizes a modified  APRIORI algorithm called Multi-Dimension Non-Continuous  (MDNC), an algorithm by eliminating the limitations imposed by  traditional pattern matching of continuous data, to mine the  associated rules in the cross-day discrete trading data and find  out some valuable information[1 ].  This paper further capitalizes  on low cost and tax and trading flexibility characteristics of ETF  along with a successful and effective data mining methodology to  develop a day-trade strategy with high probability of positive  investment return.  The current approach outperforms Random  Walk Transaction strategy with superior investment return and  lower risk level, as evidenced by a 95-percent confidence interval.

In other words, the investment strategy proposed by the present  research is applicable in any economy situation for positive  investment return.

Keywords- Apriori Algorithm; Association rules; Data Mining;  ETF

I.  INTRODUCTION  Since firstly introduced in 1993, Exchange Traded Fund (ETF) has been widely regarded as one of the most successful financial innovations.  ETF offers several advantages such as tax efficiency, low cost, and transparency over individual stocks and traditional equity mutual fund.  Additionally, ETF also provides global strategies that diversify risk across country-specific ETF, which may generate efficiency gains that cannot be achieved by simply investing in a global index open or closed-end fund [11]. Another advantage ETF may provide is opportunity of arbitrage as being capable of being sold short without significant premium [11].

Since ETF tracks its associated index, which fluctuates in different economies, to have positive investment return from ETF the prediction of the stock market becomes critically important.  Of many different theories for predicting the turns of the economies, R.E. Elliot's wave theory is one of them.  Mr.

Elliot proposed a period consisting of five rising waves and three descending waves for prediction of a stock market.  The rising waves and the descending waves also can be categorized into nine different types including super mega cycle wave, super cycle wave, cycle wave, primary wave, medium wave, sma  ll wave, short wave, and super short wave.  Different investment strategies should be in place for periods defined by the different waves.  For the wave theory to be applied, statistics analysis or complicated mathematical model was necessary in the past.  Unfortunately, when it comes to complex interactions and non-linear attributes, the traditional analysis is limited.  Moreover, it is impractical to manually retrieve useful data for decision making from the trading database.  Since data mining has gained widespread attention and increasing popularity in recent years [3] [4] [9] [10], it provides the technology for analysis of mass volume of data and/or for detecting of hidden patterns within the data before converting raw data into valuable information.  A variety of techniques such as Neural nets, Bayesian Networks, Association Rules, Decision Trees are available to achieve the above goals.  However, association rule is a tool looking for patterns of coincidence within the data.

Association rule analysis is useful in discovering patterns of behavior but does not produce a predictive model.  This paper presents a successful and effective association mining methodology for analysis of mass volume of data retrieved from database so as to develop investment strategy with improved investment return.



II. LITERATURE REVIEW  A. Data Mining Methodology  A variety of techniques are available to enable the above goals. The most commonly used techniques can be categorized in the following groups[2], [3], [4], [5], [6]: ?  Statistical Methods: Historically, statistical work has focused mainly on testing of preconceived hypotheses and on fitting models to data. ? Decision Trees: A decision tree is a tree where each non-terminal node represents a test or decision on the considered data item. Depending on the outcome of the test, one chooses a certain branch.

P A   DOI 10.1109/CSE.2009.281    DOI 10.1109/CSE.2009.281    DOI 10.1109/CSE.2009.281    DOI 10.1109/CSE.2009.281    DOI 10.1109/CSE.2009.281    DOI 10.1109/CSE.2009.281    DOI 10.1109/CSE.2009.281    DOI 10.1109/CSE.2009.281     ? Case-Based Reasoning: Case-based reasoning (CBR) is a technology that tries to solve a given problem by making direct use of past experiences and solutions. ? Rough Sets: A rough set is defined by a lower and upper of a set. Every member of the lower bound is a certain member of the set. Every non-member of the upper bound is a certain non-member of the set. A member of the boundary region is possibly a member of the set. Therefore, rough sets may be viewed as fuzzy set with a three-valued membership function (yes, no, perhaps). ? Neural Networks: Neural network (NN) is a class of systems modeled after the human brain. Like in the human brain, the strength of neuron interconnections may change in response to a presented stimulus or an obtained output, which enables the network to "learn". ?  Bayesian Belief Networks: Bayesian belief network (BBN) are graphical representations of probability distributions, derived from co-occurrence counts in the set of data items.  ? Fuzzy Sets: Fuzzy sets from a key methodology for representing and processing uncertainty. Uncertainty arises in many forms in today's databases: imprecision, non-specificity, inconsistency, vagueness, etc.

.

B. Association Rule Mining    Association rule mining is used to search for interesting relationships among data items in a given data set.  The first algorithm of mining association rules was proposed by Agrawal, Imeilinski, and Swami in 1993[12].

Association rule can be analyzed for buying patterns that reflect items frequently associated or purchased together.  For example, the information that customers who purchase computers also tend to buy financial management software at the same time is represented in Association Rule (2.1) as below (Han and Kamber, 2001)[14]:  Bread?jelly [support = 20%, confidence = 50%]      (2.1) A support of 20% for association rule (2.1) means that 20%  of all the transactions within this analysis are instances where  bread and jelly are purchased together. A confidence of 50%  means that 50% of the customers who have purchased bread  also bought jelly.

Let I = {i1, i2? im} be a set of data. Let D, the task-  relevant data, is a set of database transactions where each  transaction T = {t1, t2? tm} is a set of items.

By the definition of confidence and support:  A_containing_tuples_#  B_and_A_both_containing_tuples_# )B(A confidence =?    tuplestotal  BandAbothcontainingtuples B  __#  ______# )(Asupport =?    Rules that satisfy both a minimum support and confidence thresholds are called strong.

C. The Apriori Algorithm and MDNC    1) Modified Apriori Algorithm   The first algorithm of mining association rules, called Apriori algorithm, was proposed by Agrawal and Srikant in 1994[13].  The methodology is so important in frequent pattern mining that there are many approaches adapting from it.

This paper using the modified Apriori algorithm as the MDNC (Multi-Dimension Non-Continuous) algorithm proposed on Nov. 2004 [1].

Figure 1 shows the traditional Apriori algorithm. Next, MDNC algorithm allows users to define the maximum days for cross-day transaction, and successively generates various cross- day data according to the maximum setting days. After saving the assorted data through an array, the formula can automatically locate all possible correlations during the appointed maximum days. In the end, the minsupport threshold and min-confidence threshold are set up to discover the relationship. The result could be a particular model that exists only on the mth or nth day, consecutively or not. In applying this discrete proposal, the limitations imposed by pattern matching of continuous data are eliminated, and more helpful information is revealed. From Figure 2 to Figure 3 demonstrate MDNC algorithm with 2 days shift.

Figure 1.   Traditional Apriori algorithm example algorithm           Figure 2.  MDNC algorithm (shift 1 day)          Figure 3.  MDNC algorithm (shift 2 day)    2) Interestingness Measures   Although a data mining process may generate a large number of patterns, only a small fraction of these will actually be of interests to any given users. Thus, users need to further confine the number of uninteresting patterns returned by the  process. This can be achieved by specifying interestingness measures that estimate the simplicity, certainty, utility, and novelty of patterns. In this study, novelty test is used to measure pattern interestingness. The interestingness is also referred as "the degree" of a pattern being useful for users. The measures of interestingness are divided into two classifications [15].

(1) Objective measure: This measure depends only on the structure of a pattern and the underlying data used in the discovery process.

(2) Subjective measure: This measure also depends on the class of users who examine the patterns.

Novel patterns are ones that contribute new information or increased performance to a given pattern set. For example, a data exception may be considered novel in that it differs from what was expected based on a statistical model. Another strategy for detecting novelty is to remove redundant patterns.

If a discovered rule can be implied by another rule that is already in the knowledge base or the derived rule set, this rule should be reexamined to avoid potential redundancy

III. EXPERIMENT    A. Problem Definition  Fund investment likely generates a positive return in a good economy.  On the other hand, in the economy downturn or recession even the investment with a less loss could be setting apart from others.  From the perspective of investor, the positive investment return is always desirable regardless of where the economy stands.

B. Implementation  This section presents the experiment flow from the retrieval of data to conclusion of experiment. The architecture is illustrated in Figure. 4                       Figure 4.  Experiment architecture    The period for the retrieved data is from June 23, 2000 to Apr. 3, 2009 of iShares MSCI Taiwan Index (EWT).  Table 1 includes attributes of the data such as opening price (open), highest price (high), lowest price (low), closing price (close), volume of transactions (volume), and adjusted closing price (Adj).

TABLE I.  RAW DATA OF EWT    Step 1: Date pre-processing Categorize the raw data into a training group and an  investment strategy verification group.  The training group comprises data from a period starting from June 23, 2000 to Apr. 2, 2008, while the investment strategy verification group includes data from another period starting from Apr. 3, 2008 to Apr. 3, 2009.  The collected data is further divided into twelve groups according to the aforementioned attributes associated with the data.

Step 2: Data mining using MDNC algorithm Determine strong association rules in each of the twelve  classes by operating MDNC algorithm on the data for one to twelve days.

Several example rules in different classes are as follows:  In class 10  Support (10-day shift open ? 2-day shift open) = 44.1%  Confidence (10-day shift open ? 2-day shift open) = 56.1%  In class 4  Support (4-day and 3-day shift ? 1-day shift open) = 13.9%  Confidence (4-day and 3-day shift ? 1-day shift open) = 60.1%  In class 2  Support (open price lower then 1-day shift open price?  close price ranking is ?D?) = 49.0%  Confidence (open price lower then 1-day shift open price?  close price ranking is ?D?) = 71.6%  Support (open price higher then 1-day shift open price?  close price ranking is ?C?) = 51.0%  Confidence (open price higher then 1-day shift open price?  close price ranking is ?C?) = 76.5%    Step 3: Novelty Test A data mining process may generate a large number of  patterns.  However, only a small percentage of the patterns will actually be meaningful for the development of investment strategy.  Novel patterns are the patterns that contribute new information or increased performance to a given pattern set.

After Novelty Test, the following rule from group 2 could be obtained:   ? x ? T, open price(X, 0) = ?B? ?  open price(X,-1) = ?A? ? close price. (X, 0) [49.0%, 71.6%]    Step 4: Develop trading strategy  According to Step 3, the following investment strategy  could be developed:  Condition 1: Opening price on trading day A lower than  closing price on trading day A-1  Condition 2: Closing price on trading day A lower than  closing price on trading day A-1 When satisfaction of both condition 1 and condition 2 has  been taking place in any of previous two consecutive trading days and the condition 1 is satisfied after the opening bell for the current trading, short and repurchase before the end of the current trading day     Step 5: Apply to the real data and statistical test Verifying feasibility and practicability of the investment  strategy proposed in Step 4 on the basis of the data of the investment strategy verification group, as detailed in below section C.

C. Investment Application    After obtaining the strong association rules shown in section 3.2, the current research utilizes the trading strategy in terms of the conditions 1 and 2 in section 3.2 for investment in iShare MSCI Taiwan Index (EWT).

After the application of such trading strategy, the consequential investment return is illustrated in an excel spreadsheet (Table II) and a drawing (Figure 5).

Figure 5 shows an aggregated investment return in pink and the investment return for each date in yellow.

TABLE II.  RETURN OF PROPOSED TRADING STRATEGY          Figure 5.  Investment  return chart of proposed trading strategy    Another spreadsheet (Table III) and Figure 6 are for showing the investment return for the comparative group adopting Random Walk Transaction  TABLE III.  RETURN OF RANDOM WALK             Figure 6.  Investment  return chart of Random Walk  Table IV is summarized table showing the difference between the proposed investment strategy and the Random Walk Transaction strategy.

TABLE IV.  SUMMARY TABLE          D. Statistical Test    To verify the significance of the present research, a comparative group on the basis of data arising out of random walk transactions during the same period is generated.  And investment return and risk level for both of the comparative group and an experiment group are further determined through statistical hypothesis. Table V lists necessary information for statistical test.

TABLE V.  INFORMATION FOR STATISTICAL TEST        Testing hypothesis-variance test:  This work uses the Right-tailed test to verify the risk level.

The variance test calculated is as follows:  RWDMH  0 : ?? ?   RWDMH  1 : ?? <   1),(456144.0 ?  ?  05.0699.143  5473.65   0 =??<=== F  S  S F  RW  DM      The difference of variance tests will reject Ho.  The  variance shown above would indicate the risk associated with  the investment strategy adopting Data Mining (DM) is  significantly lower than that of the strategy of Random Walk  Transaction.

Testing hypothesis-means test:  The means test calculated is as follows:  DMRWH ?? ?:0   RWDMH ?? <:1   645.165.1 ?  )326;95.0(  93738.15  5473.65  7638.60 ?=<?== ?  = ? t  n  S  d t  d    The difference of means tests will reject Ho. The  difference in means shows that the investment return  associated with the strategy adopting DM is superior to its  counterpart associated with Random Walk Transaction  strategy.

E. Benefit Analysis of Results    The MDNC algorithm in the paper provides a strong association rule to develop day-trading strategy. The periods of significance are as follows:  a. 2000/06/23 ~ 2008/04/02: Trial period for testing the  proposed data mining algorithm.

b. Develop investment strategy for day trading according  to above strong association rule  c. 2008/04/03 ~ 2009/04/03:  Experiment period for  evaluating performance of proposed investment strategy on  basis of ETF trading data.  Proof the day-trading strategy has  achieved the anticipated targets.

The results of the entire beneficial analysis are listed as the  followings:  (1) Minimize overnight risk without any cost through day trading  (2) Fully utilize financial leverage inherent in characteristic of ETF according to individual investor?s risk level  tolerance to determine units of day trading  (3) Applicable in any situation without any adjustment to investment strategy in response to different situations  (4) Confidence interval at 95 percents indicative of higher positive investment return and lower risk when compared  with strategy of Random Walk Transaction  (5) Practically viable even in absence of complicated software, and ensure positive return in any situation

I. CONCLUSION  Siegel (1991) proposed making a switch between stocks and bonds before junctures of business cycle may significantly improve investment return.  However, the ordinary investors could have hard time figuring out when such junctures may arrive.  Despite Elliot's wave theory for investment return during different periods defined by different wave types has been in place for a while, its application still posses a challenge for the ordinary investors.  In this paper, we utilize a new and successful modified apriori algorithm called Multi-Dimension Non-Continuous algorithm to mine the association rule in time series data, and furthermore, applies it to the cross-day discrete trading data to find out some valuable information in EWT.

This paper retrieves actual data for the proposed data mining technique and conducts experiments to prove that the trading strategy proposed is feasible.  The overall investment return has substantially improved.  This research has the following significant achievements.

? Develop investment strategy applicable in any economy  ? 95-percent confidence interval suggest proposed investment strategy superior to Random Walk Transaction in investment return with lower risk level  ? Day trading ETF using proposed investment strategy absent significant premium, without over-night risk, and utilize financial leverage inherent in characteristics of ETF for positive investment return  Despite the current research, for the purpose of simplifying the investment strategy, proposes a method of shorting ETF at the opening of the trade session and repurchasing the same at the end of the trading day, the method could be applicable in any given point of the trade session so as to fully utilize the characteristic of ETF for a more superior investment return.

