Local Area Network Anomaly Detection using Association Rules Mining

Abstract?In a local area network (LAN) where users are relatively stable, the usage patterns of systems and working habits are also stable. This character implies that there exist many rules in corresponding network applications. By intercepting all the frames in the LAN and pre-processing the collected data, association rules mining techniques can be used to extract association rules from the network data. These rules can latter be effectively applied to network anomaly detection in the LAN. This paper discusses the method of using association rules mining in anomaly detection of LAN, and analyzes its working principle. We give a detailed discussion on several steps, including the method of data acquisition and preprocessing, association rules mining, the usage of similarity to determine whether the network behavior conform to the extracted association rules and the detection of anomalous behaviors.

Finally, the corresponding experimental results are given.

Keywords?network anomaly detection; local area network; association rules mining; similarity

I.  INTRODUCTION With the development of network technology, there is a  growing concern for network security and needs for network performance management. Network anomaly detection is one important aspect of the problem.

It is used to monitor network behavior and spot anomalies in time, such as anomalous network flow, unauthorized visit, and ext. Working closely with network management systems, alarm systems and protection systems, it plays an essential role in information security. Network anomaly detection differs from traditional encryption, authentication, access control and other security technologies in that it provides solutions to the problems those traditional protection mechanisms unable to address. It serves as a good complement to the traditional protection mechanisms.



II. USING ASSOCIATION RULES MINING IN THE LOCAL AREA NETWORK ANOMALY DETECTION  By capturing the normal behavior of the system, a reference library of normal usage profile can be built. By comparing the current behavior and the reference library, anomaly detection mechanism spots events that deviate from normal behavior. (1) In this way, unknown attacks, uncommon network fault and abnormal network applications can be found.(2,3)  From the perspective of practical experience, in a local area network where users are relatively stable, the usage patterns of systems and working habits are also stable. Therefore, many laws are existed in corresponding network applications. In the LAN environment, for example, there will be less access to entertainment and news sites and more communication between local hosts at working time. There will be more traffic in a server host since communication between server host and other hosts will be more often than communication between client hosts. By the help of mining techniques, these laws can be effectively utilized to (evaluate network performance and) determine whether anomalous network operation exists.

Association rules mining generally refers to the process of extracting useful information that describes correlation between data items from large volume of data.(4,5) Such technique is able to discover hidden knowledge from data that contains large volume of redundant information, so as to provide a basis for correct diagnosis. Association rules mining is applied to network anomaly detection in the intelligent processing of mass network data. The purpose is to extract association rules that can be used to support judgments and comparisons. Through the mining of association rules in a normal network, a reference library can be built. By comparing the current network behavior to the library, anomalies can be detected.



III. PRINCIPLES OF LOCAL AREA NETWORK ANOMALY DETECTION  We implement a local network anomaly detection system in this paper. It is consisted of several modules, including data acquisition and pre-processing module, association rules mining module, statistic module, manual rules adjustment module and comparison module. The system works as follows: First data acquisition is performed on a normal network. After the pre-processing of data, association rules mining is performed to establish a reference library of association rules for normal behaviors. Then data acquisition is performed on the network and data statistic is done on collected data. The results will be matched with the association rules to determine whether there is any anomalous behavior in the network. At the same time, the reference library can be manually adjusted to set sensitive rules and block certain extracted rules. Meanwhile, when an unusual event is captured, it can be checked by means of manual work to decide whether it is a new normal behavior.

If it is classified as normal behavior, the data is reanalyzed in the way normal data is analyzed. After new association rules are extracted, the reference library is updated. The schematic diagram of the anomaly detection system is illustrated in Figure 1.

In the local network anomaly detection system, frames transmitted in the LAN are intercepted and analyzed using corresponding protocols. Thus information can be obtained, including frame type, source address, destination address, time that the frame is sent, type of protocol for the upper-layer, as well as data encapsulated in the frame. By further analyzing the encapsulated data, information such as port numbers contained in the TCP and UDP segments can be obtained. By calculating the number of frames traveled in the LAN per time unit, the overall network flow as well as each host?s contribution to the flow can be measured.

In the local network anomaly detection system, inspection mainly focus on information carried by TCP and UDP segments, which are encapsulated in the frames sent and received by hosts in the LAN. This includes timestamp, source IP address, destination IP address, source port number, destination port number and length of data. For each frame, a record is formed. Fields of the records are shown in TABLE I.

TABLE I.  PRIMIVE RECORDS  timestamp source IP  destination IP  source port number  destination port number  length of data     After data pre-processing, records are formed for each host.

Each record includes following fields: time interval, number of communicating hosts, number of ports used by local host, number of ports for visiting computers, number of received packets, number of received bytes , number of sent packets, number of sent bytes, flow volume from external networks, which is shown in TABLE II.

TABLE II.  PROCESSED RECORDS    The number is expressed using intervals in the table. For example, the number of communicating hosts in different situations is stored as follows: 0~10,10~100,100~500, and ext.

In the next step, association rules analysis is performed on the records to extract association rules for normal behavior.

Then for each user, that is each host, a reference library of association rules is built. This is used as a basis for judgment in the anomaly detection process.

Data acquisition  and preprocessing  Data of normal behaviors Current data  Comparison  Library of association rules  Association rules mining Statistics  Output  Statistic resultsManual rules adjustment    Figure 1.  Schematic diagram of local area network anomaly detection test system  It should be noted that here association rules are used to describe the correlation of fields in the same record. For example:  access time= working time (5 minutes) ? number of hosts<10(60%, 80%)  This association rule indicates that at working time, the user visited less than 10 hosts with 60% support and 80% confidence.

Here we use the following formula for support and confidence:  1) Support(R)=Nr/Na 2) Confidence?R?= Nr/Ntime=working time    Nr denotes number of records that satisfy the association rules in the record sets. Na denotes number of total records.

Ntime=work time denotes number of records for working hour with 5 minutes a piece.

According to the above association rules extracted by data mining techniques, a user can be regarded as working if he/ she visits less than 10 hosts within 5 minutes. In other words, he/she doesn?t surfing the Internet or under the circumstance that worms use his/her computer to scan other hosts.

Time interval number of communicating hosts  number of ports used by local host  number of ports for visiting computers  number of received packets  number of received bytes  number of sent packets  number of sent bytes  flow volume from external networks      If during the detection process, it is found that a user at the working time visits a large number of hosts in a sudden. It can be deduced that an anomalous event occurs. He/She might surf the Internet at working time or his/her host might scan other hosts. Such an occasion does not necessarily mean that the host has been attacked, but it should arouse the attention of network managers.



IV. DATA ACQUISITION AND PREPROCESSING We use WinPcap as the network data acquisition engine.

Procedures are developed to collect frames in the network.

In order to collect all the frames in the LAN, the network card is put into promiscuous mode. Meanwhile, there are certain requirements for network topology. Switches with port mirroring are used. After port mirroring has been set up, connect the monitor machine to the port. The network structure is illustrated in Figure 2.

Figure 2.  network structure of the detecting system  Data pre-processing is performed after the acquisition process. During the rest time in the evening, statistic is performed at every 30 minutes. At any other time, it is performed at every 5 minutes. A record is generated for each host during each time unit. At present, statistics is only performed on TCP and UDP protocols. Taking the information of one host for example, after pre-processing, records are shown in TABLE III.

TABLE III.  RECORDS OF ONE HOST AFTER DATA PRE-PROCESSING    For specific data, enumeration is used to describe different levels. Since at different time period users? behavior varies on a large scale, the overall period is divided into several subintervals according to the schedule. It includes working  time ? 8:00~12:00 ? and ? 13:30~17:30 ? , lunch time(12:00~13:30 ? ,dinner time ? 17:30~19:00 ? ,working time in the evening?19:00~22:00? , and rest time in the evening ?22:00~8:00?.



V. ASSOCIATION RULES MINING Association rules are a reflection of interdependence and  correlation between one object and another. If there exists more than two correlations, predictions of an object involved can be made based on known objects(6).  Association rules refer to the rules that satisfy the support and confidence threshold from a given dataset. Suppose I={i1,i2,...,im), I is an item set. D is a transaction set (called transaction database). Every transaction T in D is a subset of I Evidently, T?I. Each transaction is uniquely identified by TID. For dataset X, we regard T includes X if and only if X?T. Association rule is usually presented in the form as: X=>Y, here X?I, Y?I, and X?Y??.

If  s? of the transaction records in D include X?Y, s is the support value for rule X=>Y. If c? of the transaction records in D include both X and Y, the confidence value for rule X=>Y on the base of set D is defined as c.

Association rule mining is to find out association rules that satisfy the predefined minimum support min_sup and confidence min_conf from a given database D. The operation can be performed in the following two steps:  1) Find out all frequent item sets in the transaction database through iterative search. In other words, the support value for frequent item sets is no less than user defined threshold (minimum support).

2) Generate association rules from frequent item sets and the minimum confidence value.

Apriori algorithm is a classic association rules analysis algorithm. It can effectively discover associations between different fields in records. See reference (7) for detailed description of the algorithm.

Our system uses the classic Apriori algorithm to extract association rules. Due to the fact that the working habit differs from one another, the analysis is performed on hosts individually and association rules are extracted. The rules extracted are stored in the database. The meaning of the fields in the table of the database is shown in the table IV.



VI. RULE COMPARISON    After the association rules mining process, a reference library of association rules which reflects normal behavior of the network has been built. In this step, data acquisition is performed on current network and data statistic is done on  Time interval number of communicating hosts  number of ports used by local host  number of ports for visiting computers  number of received packets  number of received bytes  number of sent packets  number of sent bytes  flow volume from external networks  8:00~8:05 10~100 10~100 0~10 1K~10K 1M~10M 1K~10K 100K~1M 1M~10M 8:05~8:10 10~100 10~100 0~10 1K~10K 1M~10M 1K~10K 100K~1M 1M~10M 8:10~8:15 0~10 0~10 0~10 0~1K 0~1M 0~1K 0~100K 0~1M 8:15~8:20 0~10 0~10 0~10 0~1K 0~1M 0~1K 0~100K 0~1M    collected data. The results will be matched with the association rules to determine whether there is any anomalous behavior in the network.

TABLE IV.  TABLE FOR ASSOCIATION RULES  Field Name Type Meaning  HostIP VarChar?16? Host IP address, used to uniquely identify each host  RuleID VarChar?10? Association Rules ID  RuleDescribe  VarChar?500? Description of association rules, using XML file format  Support Float Support Value  Confidence Float Confidence Value    In order to reduce the chances of erroneous warning, we use the concept of similarity (8) to describe the level of resemblance between association rules involved and statistic results of frames in the network. Similarity is expressed using the range interval [0,1]. Greater value indicates a higher level of resemblance. The result 1 indicates the two are the same while 0 means they have nothing in common.

In the records of association rules, fields are described using various ranges. The statistic results also include several fields. By comparing the values of these fields and corresponding ranges in the fields of association rules records, similarity of each field can be obtained. Then the level of overall similarity can be calculated. It is calculated as follows:  Firstly, similarity for a single field is calculated as figure 3.

When calculating the overall similarity, it is required that the similarity for each field can not equal to 0. In case there is a 0 for one field, the overall similarity is set to 0. When none of the field similarity is 0, for association rule that has n fields, its calculation formula is as follows:  n  field single of Similarity similarity Overall 1  ? ==  n  i   ?1?    When comparing the association rules and current statistic results, a threshold of overall similarity can be set. Value that greater than the threshold is considered to be conform to the association rules. In our system, the threshold is set to 0.9.



VII. EXPERIMENT RESULTS Table V gives the association rules obtained under different  support levels for the database server.

For ordinary hosts, use the same method to extract association rules. In this way, a reference library for each host is obtained. Some association rules extracted by an ordinary host are shown in TABLE VI    Figure 3.  calculation flow chart of similarity for single field  TABLE V.  ASSOCIATION RULES OBTAINED UNDER DIFFERENT SUPPORT LEVELS FOR THE DATABASE SERVER  Minimum support  Minimum confidence  Number of rules  Rule examples Explanations  30% 93% 5 Access Time Interval= Working Time( 5 minutes) ?  number of hosts< 10  Limited number of hosts can simultaneously access to database server   40% 81% 6 Access Time Interval= Working Time( 5 minutes) ? number of sent bytes=10M~100M   The existence of a large number of data services in the database server   50% 100% 6 Access Time Interval= Working Time( 5 minutes) ? flow volume from external networks=0~100K   The database server almost don?t have any access to external networks      TABLE VI.  ASSOCIATION RULES OBTAINED UNDER DIFFERENT SUPPORT LEVELS FOR A USER'S HOST  Minimum support  Minimum confidence  Number of rules  Rule examples Explanations  10% 99% 10 Access Time Interval= Working Time( 30 minutes) ?  number of received bytes=0~100K  The user get to and off work on time and seldom use the host after at off work time  40% 83% 9 Access Time Interval= Working Time( 5 minutes) ? flow volume from external networks =0~100K  The user occasionally get on the Internet at work  50% 85% 5 Access Time Interval =Lunch Time?5 minutes ? ?flow volume from external networks =1M~10M  The user surf on the Internet during lunch time  10% 99% 10 Access Time Interval= Working Time( 30 minutes) ?  number of received bytes=0~100K  The user get to and off work on time and seldom use the host after at off work time    During the experiment, training data is used to extract association rules for each host that describe the normal behavior of corresponding host, as illustrated in the table above. The association rules listed in the table either have a high level of support or certain level of support, but all have a high level of confidence.

In order to test the system?s ability of anomaly detection, two experiments were carried out with one in a normal situation and the other has simulated anomalous behaviors (in the network). In the first experiment, statistic results of frames in the network conform to the extracted association rules. In the second experiment, port scanning attack was simulated. As soon as the attack was launched, the system prompted an anomaly alarm, suggesting that the behavior of the host violated association rules.

Access Time Period=Working Time( 5 minutes) ?Number of Ports Access to other Hosts(0, 10)  From the above comparison results, it can be observed that normal network behavior conformed to the association rules while anomalous behaviors didn?t, which is just what we have expected.

Experiments prove that association rules mining techniques works effectively to discover association rules for the normal behavior of the network. By comparing the statistic results of frames in the network and the extracted association rules, anomalous behaviors can be detected accurately on time.

