Mobile-Agent Based Distributed Fuzzy Associative Classification Rules Generation for OLAM

Abstract- The capabilities of distribute data base to store huge amount of data and providing scalability, integrity leads to many of real time databases are stored in distributed nature. In order to apply data mining in real time applications it is important to provide efficient distributed data mining techniques. As a result of the use of Online analytical mining (OLAM) technology in new fields of knowledge and the merging of data from different sources, it has become necessary for OLAM models to support distributed data mining technology. Data from different sources are not always consistent with the format and some sources may not reliable. In this paper we proposed a frame work for mobile- agent-based distributed analytical mining which can perform analytical mining on distributed and heterogeneous database systems and can manage reliable and unreliable sources differently. More over this architecture capable of performing mining on global and local data bases separately. Based on this architecture a flexible and efficient mobile-agent-based fuzzy association classification rules generation algorithm which can mine and present the global and local associative classification rules at the same time.

Keywords-Mobile Agents; Online Analystical Mining; Classification

I. INTRODUCTION  The efficient integration of the concept of data warehousing, online analytical processing (OLAP) and data mining systems converges to OLAM results in an efficient decision support system. OLAM is first proposed by J.Han [1]. The conventional mining algorithm faces complexity for multidimensional data mining and also provides results with interpretation difficulties. Consideration of user defined meta rules is also a difficult task in traditional mining approaches.

Considering the effective and easiness of OLAP [2] technology in data analysis, the proposal for On-Line Analytical Mining came which combines the features of OLAP operations with data mining technique in order to perform effectively on multidimensional databases and data cubes. The advantage of OLAM is that using OLAP operators it provides interactive data mining by allowing user to select required dimensions, abstraction levels of data and also make it possible to view results using different visualization techniques.

G.Aghila Department of Computer Science  Pondicherry University Pondicherry, India  aghilaa@yahoo.com  In real time many databases are distributed in nature. Many of companies are spread across different regions, so the data transactions are likely stored at different sites. As such it leading companies to adopt distributed database structure to store databases. At the same time the transactions in the distributed database may be changed time to time. Because of that, developing distributed and incremental mining algorithm on distributed information sources is very important and challenging. So in order to apply OLAM on real time databases it is important to explore and develop applications ofOLAM on distributed databases.

In case of performing OLAM operation on distributed data bases systems, collecting data form different distributed local sources for data warehouse is major challenge because the data in distributed data bases keep on changing. The data in different sources may contain most of not related fields so selecting subject oriented data is another problem. The data in distributed local sources are in different formats so changing that format as data warehouse requirements is one more problem.

It quite obvious that out of the different data sources some of the data sources may not be company owned so that kind of data should be considered as unreliable data so showing the results distinctly with out considering unreliable source information and with considering unreliable source information is preferable one. Out of information in distributed data sources identifying unreliable data is another problem to be faced in case of using distributed data sources forOLAM.

By considering need of up dating information at frequently and considering the selection and changes that as to be carried out on data and mainly considering dynamic nature of system we conceive that fallowing mobile agent oriented architecture will be use full for performing OLAM on distributed databases. In order to realize that we proposed mobile agent oriented distributed analytical mining architecture. Mobile agents [3] are intelligent programs that can migrate on computer networks. The concept of having mobile agents carrying out tasks is creating a new paradigm for network- enabled distributed computing.

The classification is a significant technique in data mining with applications in industrial and scientific domains. The  lAMA 2009    efficiency of a classification model is evaluated by two parameters, namely the accuracy and the interpretability of the model. Many studies show that Associative Classifiers give better accuracy and interpretability than other traditional classification models [4].Considering the importance of associative classification we proposed an algorithm for performing associative classification of data cube and we shown how this algorithm can be adopted for our architecture.

In order to provide model which manages information distinctly form reliable sources and form unreliable sources our proposed model uses a fuzzy multi dimensional model proposed by Carlos Molina et al [5]. The model provides aggregations intuitively to end user by means of fuzzy logic.

All OLAP operators of model can effectively manage data imprecision resulting from merging of data from heterogeneous sources both in fact and dimension. The model provides low fuzzy confidence value for data from unreliable source comparing to data from reliable sources. The information with confidence more or equal to user specified threshold will be considered by aggregation operators.

Motivating from the efficiency of the model in performing fuzzy taxonomies and managing imprecision the fuzzy multidimensional data cube [5] has been adopted as base in our model.

The contribution of this paper is as follows. 1) The architecture of the mobile-agent-based distributed analytical mining model proposed for applying OLAM in the distributed, heterogeneous database systems. The architecture consists of a distributed analytical mining system (DAMS) and sub-DAMS.

DAMS is located in the management system of the distributed database system. The sub-DAMS is located in each site of the distributed database. 2) Based on the architecture of the mobile-agent-based distributed analytical mining model an associative classification rule generation algorithm on fuzzy data cube has been proposed.

The remaining of page organized as fallows. Related work is presented in section2, the proposed architecture of mobile agent based distributed analytical mining model presented in section3, mobile agent based distributed associative classification algorithm presented in section4, evaluation presented in section 5and this paper ends with conclusion and feature work  II . RELATED WORK  Before The model for integrating business intelligence and intelligent agent for distribute data sources are proposed by SamoBobek [6]. The proposed model mainly concentrates to overcome problem of integrating data form different sources but the model won't consider the reliable and unreliable source differently and another disadvantageous is that the model can perform mining operations only on global databases only it can not perform mining on local databases.

The other model that can perform mining operations on both local and global databases proposed by Yun-Lan et.al [7] but disadvantage of model is it can not consider reliable and unreliable sources differently.

In associative classification rule mining the generation of association rules are very much important and crucial step.

Because associative classification is performing associative classification on distributed data base system it is interesting to study the applying distributed association rule generation algorithm and generating associative classification rules.

Algorithm Count Distribution [8], which is the adaptation of Apriori algorithm [9], has been proposed for the parallel mining environment. The PDM [10] algorithm tries to parallelism the DHP algorithm. FPM [11] adopts the count distribution approach and has incorporated two powerful candidate pruning techniques, distributed pruning and global pruning. The problems with such approaches are (1) only the global large itemsets can be mined. The information of the local large itemsets on each site cannot be provided. So it may not provided support for local business decision. (2) The information in the previous mining cannot be used to reduce the cost of current mining, since they are not incremental algorithm.

In order to overcome such problem with distributed mining algorithms and other agent based models we proposed architecture that perform analytical mining operations on global and local databases separately and that can perform mining with reliable and unreliable data bases separately.

III . ARCHITECTURE OF THE DISTRIBUTED ANA YTICAL MINING BASED ON MOBILE AGENT  After the architecture of the distributed analytical mmmg system, which is based on mobile agent, is illustrated in fig. 1.

The system includes the distributed analytical mining system (DAMS) and the distributed analytical mining sub-system (sub-DAMS), the structures of DAMS and sub-DAMS are as follows:  Data Warehouse  Fig I : Architecture of Distributed analytical miningbasedon Mobileagent    A. The Structure ofDAMS Analytical Mining Controller Agent: This is the core agent  of the distributed knowledge discovery system. The function of this agent is as follows: 1) Dispatches the mobile agent to each sub-dam and obtain the frequent item set information form local data base and storing the local frequent item sets information in to data warehouse to get the global knowledge.

2) Analyzes the data in the data warehouse by the means of OLAM.

Data Warehouse: The history data is stored in the data warehouse. The databases in the different sites of the distributed information system are often heterogeneous. The data warehouse techniques should be adopted to transfer the data to uniform format so the data can be organized and accessed efficiently. In this data warehouse data form reliable source and data from unreliable source will be distinctly store.

OLAM: OLAM is the combine of OLAP and data mining.

Data warehouse provides the platform for the multi-dimension data cube which can be analyzed and mined. In OLAM the mining operation can effectively make use OLAP operators for mine data in across dimensions and multi levels. The operating of slice, scan, drill and rotate can be processed.

Fuzzy Data Cube: Fuzzy datacube extracts the information from data warehouse as directed by AMCAgent. The fuzzy data cube used in this process provides different degrees of reliability to data from reliable sources and data from unreliable sources. Depends up on the cut off value for membership reliability the data cube decides whether the value should be considered for further operations or not.

Global Knowledge Base: The knowledge in the global knowledge base includes the knowledge mined using OALM engine from the data warehouse and the knowledge which is mined from all the sub-DAMS by the mobile agents and integrated by the analytical mining controller agent.

Mobile Agent Controller: MAC is the framework within which the mobile agent activities in the distributed data mining system take place. MAC is responsible for generating, activating and assembling the agents required for the data mining process. The different agent types and their tasks are briefly discussed below.

1) Global Information Extraction Agent (GIEA): This agent can be dispatched to data warehouse to extract the global data which is require by fuzzy data cube.

2) Data Subjectivity Check Agent (DSCA): This agent can be dispatched to sub-DAMS to select subject oriented data with respect to data warehouse out of the various data fields available in local databases.

3) Data Consistency Check Agent (DCCA): This agent can be dispatched to sub-DAMS to checks whether data retrieved from local data bases are in compatible format with data warehouse format or not and pre-process the data in the local database to the format of data warehouse.

4) Data Reliability Check Agent (DRCA): This agent can be dispatched to sub-DAMS to checks whether local database is reliable source (company owned) or from unreliable source (external data source) and intimate the information to data  warehouse, so that unreliable data in data warehouse can be stored distinctly.

5) Frequent Item Extraction Agent (FlEA): This agent can be dispatched to sub-KDS to mine the local large itemsets and to dispatch entire information to Data warehouse.

B. The Structure ofsub- DAMS Local database: The local real time information is stored in  the local database, which can be queried by the local supervisor and at the same time can be mined by the mobile agent dispatched by the supervisor.

