

Abstract - Recently, interests in the notion of collaborative product innovation (CPI) from academia and industry have been significantly increased. Comprehensive requirements analysis along with a cogent framework, however, do not address the problem that how to support product innovation with the distributed knowledge resources.

A knowledge decision support model is proposed including collaborative knowledge database setting, knowledge mining and innovative design support. Accordingly, customer knowledge and requirements, product character, prototypes and instances are pushed to product innovator actively. The validity of the model is illustrated with an example of motorcycle innovation design.

Keywords - CPI, knowledge decision support, active push, innovation degree evaluation

I.  INTRODUCTION  Manufacturing enterprise?s are confronted with some urgent issues in changing and complex market for instance the rapid product upgrade, the evanescence of advantages coming from enterprise innovation, the difficulty to forecast technology development and evolution, the aroused innovation investment and innovation risk[1~5][8]. It is a formidable obstacle for each manufacturing enterprise to master all the design knowledge and technologies; therefore, it should transform from the traditional closed innovation model to the open networked collaborative product innovation (CPI) model. CPI is beneficial to seek cooperation with other organizations or resources and form the product innovation network, decrease innovation risk and improve innovation efficiency[6~8].

However, some problems about how to support CPI process with distributed innovation knowledge need to be addressed, including lack of appropriate knowledge support tools; paying less attention to the potential customers? requirements knowledge; less utilization of qualitative knowledge and its transformation; with a lower knowledge support level; lack of intelligent tools support to enhance collaboration efficiency[9~14]. Therefore, the knowledge decision support model (KDSM) is proposed to meet the requirements mentioned above. New innovation product database was founded through data mining technology and integrative modeling technology.

In KDSM, an innovative design support system (IDSS) pushes innovation knowledge and methods for designers initiatively, evaluates innovation product?s innovation degree and extends innovation product example  database[15]. Meanwhile, The IDSS can maintain and coordinate the system data according to data negotiation strategy and communication mechanism. It also can manage the distributed knowledge warehouses and extract the required data to support decision and maintain the coherence of data.



II.  INNOVATION KNOWLEDGE DECISION SUPPORT MODEL  The architecture of KDSM consists of knowledge acquirement layer, knowledge storage layer, data mining layer and knowledge denotation layer. (Fig 1) Knowledge storage layer mines data from original data and constructs data mining platform; knowledge denotation layer forms new models based on various mining mode?s API provided by the knowledge storage layer. The KDSM controls and manages the data mining process, knowledge integration process and other relative knowledge support for innovation design schemes. The knowledge-active- push module implements system?s initiative work.

Fig. 1.  The architecture of KDSM  A.  Data Mining of Innovation Attribute  The technology of data mining focuses on finding the knowledge, gathering the knowledge and mining the anticipant knowledge from the database, data warehouse or other information database. Aiming at applying data mining technology in the CPI process, the data mining technology in KDSM includes three items: 1) Mining the association rules between customer attribute and innovation attribute: The key issue during the CPI process is the mapping between customer attribute and innovation attribute. After locking target customers, the index of innovation product model is  Knowledge Decision Support Model for Collaborative Product Innovation  Yu Yang1, Xuedong Liang1, Jie Yang2 , Zijun Zhou1, Jing Wang1 1 Chongqing University, 400030  2Chongqing Communication College, 400035 yuyang@cqu.edu.cn     constructed by analyzing the target customer?s requirements and knowledge.

2) Mining association rules between the innovation attribute and manufacturing attribute and its regression forecast: The affecting potential factors of product innovation degree, production cycle and product cost is mined by Association Technology. Selected data is pretreated in data warehouse through regression forecast technology and affecting factor data. Furthermore, the functions of innovation degree evaluation, product cycle and cost evaluation should be accomplished.

3) Mining association rules among the innovation attributes: Operational data in enterprise data warehouse is processed by data mining tools and algorithms such as association algorithm and regression algorithm. Then, output is combined with the CPI?s knowledge including specific industry, field and application knowledge. Data mining tools filter relative industry data with the guide of CPI?s field knowledge, which make data information pushed to the designer in a professional way.

B.  Integrative Knowledge-base Modeling  Integrative knowledge base modeling should support the activities of data warehouses in different places with heterogeneous structure, support to load or unload various knowledge warehouses, configuring data warehouse flexibly and executing tailoring/recompose/reuse operations, which support complex product design in KDSM.

C.  Knowledge Active Push (AP) Mechanism  The active push of knowledge offer the knowledge support to designers and reduce the complicated search work, which redounds to propose, feed back, modify and acquire innovation design scheme rapidly and effectively.

The intelligent knowledge AP structure based on the CPI?s knowledge support is demonstrated (Fig 2) in order to push the knowledge to the right designers on schedule.

Internet  Machine learning knowledge discovery  Control of issue strategy  Filtration of knowledge content  Collection of innovation knowledge  Client software of active push  Knowledge triggerKnowledge memory  Design task, Demand Feedback  Knowledge of Innovation design  Anticipant knowledge  Client of active push  Server of active push  Knowledge- base 1  Knowledge- base 2  Method- base  Product- base  Instance- base  Knowledge- base i  Fig. 2.  Intelligent structure of AP knowledge In AP structure, the collaborative system with multi-  database is formed based on the product innovation  knowledge-base, innovation design method, product instance-base and other artificial intelligence theories and methods such as machine study and knowledge discovery, which improve the intelligence level to acquire product innovation knowledge. And knowledge-base is to store and query knowledge; instance-base is used to store and transfer product instance; method-base is to store and transfer innovation design method, which includes different methods during the process of product innovation decision such as instance based reasoning, TRIZ method and other optimization methods.

D.  Evaluation of Innovation Degree for Product Design Scheme  Evaluation content should involves some product basic knowledge such as graph information, tags, serial number of parts, all kinds of sizes, materials, function, variety criterions, manufactory information and other relative information. The evaluation value of innovation degree in new design scheme can be achieved by analyzing, comparing and judging the similarity of characteristics attributes between the new product scheme and the existent one.

Product knowledge-base consists of many attributes which form an attribute aggregate, while each attribute is a unit vector for a hyperspace. For each record in the database is a tuple, which is looked as the addition-weight sum vector of these unit vector, the weight is the value of tuple on each attribute. The degree of approximation among the attributes can be measured by the distance, which is defined as the sum of shortest path?s length among the attributes.



III.  KNOWLEDGE INNOVATION DATABASE FOR COLLABORATIVE PRODUCT INNOVATION  The system structure of product innovation knowledge-base includes product characteristic information knowledge-base, customer knowledge-base and innovation design method-base etc. Based on the CSCW technology, artificial intelligence technology, database technology and so on, these databases are integrated and described through the far and near relation of database association and changed with product innovation object. Hereby, the integration of innovation knowledge system is the dynamic or static integration of information about these databases within the enterprise and among the enterprises.

A.   Product characteristic information knowledge-base  The product characteristic consists of geometry characteristic, engineering characteristic and semantic characteristic. Considering the primary and secondary relationship of attributes in each product innovation design phases, the modularization of prototype system?s interior data structure and the universal character of whole  Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE IEEM     product design process, product characteristic are classified into general characteristic, layout characteristic and shape characteristic. The three characteristics form corresponding product characteristics knowledge-base.

1) General characteristic knowledge-base, including characteristic name, ID, material, color, surface texture, decoration technology and management information etc.

2) Shape characteristic knowledge-base, including the geometry information such as size, place and direction, which is used to describe shape parameters and positional parameters.

3) Composition characteristic knowledge-base.

Layout characteristic is the impetus of innovation design, whose continuous change leads to the change of general characteristics and shape characteristics. The expansion function of product characteristic knowledge-base is to evaluate the instance combined with product similarity rules after getting the new design scheme, then, if the innovation degree achieves suitable level, the new instance will be stored in the instance-base, and this process fits product characteristics knowledge-base as well.

Fig. 3.  Product characteristic knowledge-base based on instance reasoning  B.  Collaborative innovation customer knowledge-base  It includes customer innovation knowledge and customer requirement knowledge. With the assistance of integrative modeling technology, customer innovation knowledge and customer requirement knowledge are mined, clustered, filtered and then are stored in corresponding database. Implicit knowledge should be transformed into explicit knowledge and represented by computer code and algorithm. These works serve product innovation design and will make product designer share and utilize the customer collaborative innovation knowledge, improving the competition of innovation product. The pertinent knowledge includes: 1) Customer behavior character (k1)  2) Customer innovation psychology knowledge (k2) 3) Customer innovation organization management?s thoughts and experience k3 4) Customer-participated innovation R&D knowledge (k4) 5) Customer basic information (k5) 6) Customer relationship management (CRM) (k6) 7) Product attribute knowledge (k7)  C.  Innovation design method-base  Innovation design method-base includes not only traditional design knowledge, but also the instance reasoning, TRIZ and optimization method etc. Design knowledge is represented in different way such as design formula, design constrains, rule knowledge, manual knowledge, design process knowledge, structural knowledge, charts and tables and so on.

For the different form of design knowledge representation, knowledge element is constructed by object-oriented method. Knowledge encapsulated by knowledge element can be represented in appropriate mode. And knowledge element has independent knowledge handling capacity. The up-layer of knowledge element is the deliverable breakdown design object which is the carrier of knowledge, and the design object is also the knowledge element?s integrative representation.

Furthermore, product design process can be separated to some sub-processes. The product design process knowledge can be represented by the object class of design process which be brought with the object-oriented method. The design object and knowledge element can be handled by design process. The object-oriented organization model of innovation design method-base is shown as Fig4, and it includes product design task class, design object class and knowledge element.

Fig. 4.  Object-oriented organization model of innovation design method-base

IV.  CASE STUDY  A motorcycle innovation design prototype system based on KDSM is demonstrated as Fig 5.

Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE IEEM     Fig. 5.  Motorcycle innovation design prototype system based on KDSM  The knowledge-base of motorcycle innovation design is set up firstly, and composing parts of product characteristic-base and instance-base is demonstrated as Table I.

Using these interfaces, product innovator can get the selected knowledge, parameter knowledge and process knowledge automatically. Then the innovation design of motorcycle's frame was carried through with the support of KDSM. So this innovation design process include: the knowledge of frame intension, main board and shock absorber's bracket is pushed actively. With evaluating, pushing, modifying, revaluating the scheme, the final new innovation scheme is set up: 1) A support part, which has been connected to guide ways of cushion, is added over the shock. The part changes the structure of cantilever beam. For the stress of frame is less, this innovation scheme improves the stress situation of bracket's root; 2) Increase the diameter of installing axial in the back arm; 3) Adding the reinforced plate on main board and its place of rear overhang; 4) Increase the thickness of the place of bracket. After designing with KDSM, we can obtain the finite element model of innovation design scheme for motorcycle frame, shown as Fig 6.

Fig. 6.  Innovation design scheme for motorcycle frame  In order to estimate innovation degree of this innovation design scheme, we compare the attribute of appearance and technology effect for the new product.

Under the action condition of a person load, 18 km/h speed and protruding road, the unit dynamic stress of motorcycle is used to be reference attribute. Then innovation degree evaluation was demonstrated in Table  .

According to the data in Table , the innovation design scheme of new frame beholds high innovation degree and fulfills the innovation design requirement.

This result validates availability and feasibility of KDSM.



V.  CONCLUSION  To sum up, the improvement of the product innovation and quality can be proved through the integration of the customer knowledge, innovation method and other knowledge into the collaborative product design process. Moreover, knowledge is afforded to the product designer actively in time. The product innovation design is the tentative research in CPI field.

KDSM can integrate and gather the existed knowledge resources and the new knowledge resources derived from  TABLE THE EVALUATION RESULT OF MOTORCYCLE INNOVATION  DESIGN BASED ON SUPPORT SYSTEM  Existent product Innovation product  Vehicle type Bestriding Bestriding  p/ml 125 125  Appearance 1 none Support parts  Appearance 2 none Transition round-angle  Average of stress (MPa) 200 50  Stress at 0.7s (MPa) 450 210  Stress at 10s (MPa) 400 200  Innovation degree none 0.7381  TABLE I THE PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS KNOWLEDGE-BASE AND  INSTANCE DATABASE IN MOTORCYCLE DESIGN  Instance database Product characteristics knowledge-base  Process knowledge -base  Rules knowledge- base  Parameter knowledge-base  Full vehicle instance- base  Engine instance - base  Frame instance - base  None  Rules of motorcycle vehicle type, engine type, frame type  Main size parameter of vehicle, main characteristic parameter, vehicle type parameter, engine structure parameter  Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE IEEM     data mining, which has the advantages of maneuverability and practicality. And that corresponding design knowledge, which can be shared and updated, actively pushing to innovator, so active push process should help to form innovation scheme quickly. Research fruit can be applied in the field of product innovation design. Case study shows that the KDSM is beneficial to improve the product innovation and create the competitive products.

