Study on the Recommendation Technology for Tourism Information Service

Abstract?Now the tourism information is overflow in the internet, but the useful information is had to find out. So, it takes the recommendation technology in common use as the research object, and adopts the comparison method to study different recommendation technologies, such as the association rules, collaborative filtering and item-based recommendation.

The Apriori algorithm is discussed in the association rules first, therefore an improved Apriori method has been considered as an appropriate recommendation ways for tourism information service. Second, there are more and more evaluation record for those new or old tourist destinations or scenic spot by visitor can be found in internet, so it is easy to generate recommendation itemset. Then the collaborative filtering recommendation is selected as a promising recommend technology for tourism. Besides, the best feature of the item- based collaborative filtering recommendation is its expansibility so it is also a useful method for massive tourism information service. Lastly, the applicable tourism information recommendation method has been defined based on the user modeling.

Keywords-tourism information service; recommendation technology; association rules; collaborative filtering; user modeling

I. INTRODUCTION The tourism information service features wide-data and  diverse types, such as travel agency, hotels, and tourist route as well as scenic spots. Facing with so wide tourism resources, tourists need to spend a lot of time in searching for information. Besides, tourists are not willing to spend too much time in searching online. Therefore, users need an intelligent online assistant could offer real-time and effective recommendation.

In the setting of E-commerce, tourist enterprises and scenic spots have published plenty of travel product information. And it is impossible for tourists examining and selecting products in the real setting. Therefore, tour entrepreneurs should offer some intellectualized purchase  instructions to recommend the products those users may be interested or satisfied in accord with their preference so as to help users select their favorable products conveniently.

According to present experience, the user?s demand tends to be unclear and ambiguous. That is to say, they may have potential demand for certain products, while they are not sure which product can meet their ambiguous demand. In this circumstance, if tour enterprise could recommend the product which meets user?s ambiguous demand, then user?s potential demand could be turned into the realistic one and the sales would be eventually increased.

In this background, Recommendation System comes into being. It recommends the object that meets user?s satisfaction tailoring his characteristics such as interests and preference. In practice, the most widely applied is customized recommendation system in the setting of purchase on line (specially, B2C) with the product as the recommended object. What?s more, it recommends user?s favorable products such as books, movies and video etc.

In recent years, the research on the recommendation system for tourism is boosting. The recommendation system for tourism is to provide information or suggestions on items concerning tourism, such as travel agencies, hotels, tourism route, and tourism attractions; it can simulate a travel consultant to help the users to realize the recommendation services process like an intelligent on-line assistant. The functions of this system are: Converting Browsers into real Tourists; increasing the cross-sell of the related products of this website and building users? loyalty to the website.



II. REVIEW OF THE RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM AND ITS APPLICATION  Along with the development of study and application of e-commerce, people began to pay attention to the integration of artificial intelligence, Web technology, and commercial mode [1]. In B2C, the study and application of recommendation system is becoming a key point [2].

Recommendation system can analyze the customer?s need  2009 Second International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design  DOI 10.1109/ISCID.2009.111   2009 Second International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design  DOI 10.1109/ISCID.2009.111     and preference in the massive information on line, and thus recommend customized product and service, that is, to supply a guiding service for shopping. As a result, it will enhance the performance and service of the e-commerce.

Almost all the e-commerce system, like Amazon, CDNOW, eBay, have applied various forms of the customized recommendation system [3]. Recommendation system has won great success in e-commerce website in the following sectors: increase new users, promote sales, and enhance the satisfaction of users.

In 1997, Resnickp and Varian had defined the concept of e-commerce recommendation system: the e-commerce website offers information and suggestions of commodities to the users to help them decide to purchase the product; it is a simulated purchasing process of sales personnel to help the users [4].

Recommendation technology has always been the core for the research of the recommendation system. With the development of the application and research of e-commerce system, people have begun realizing the complexity of e- commerce system, different circumstances requiring different type of recommendation. Hence, a new type e- commerce recommendation system structure is called for, it should be able to collect various types of data and supply multiple recommendation models to meet the different need.

Therefore the current trend for the research is a recommendation system with multiple modes. Yang et al.

has proposed and realized a recommendation system with multiple modes which can provide recommendation modules with association rules, best-seller selection, and collaborative filtering, it also has extendible interface. In this way new modules can be added easily to be applied in different business environment [5]. User modeling is a key step in realizing customized function, Song and Sun has made a user model assumption based on Ontology [6]. Wu and Liu have summarized the research on user modeling [7].

In the recommendation system framework, Li et al. viewed from the recommendation system market, they proposed a recommendation system market consisted of users, providers, and manufactures of different services. On the basis of this market, they also proposed a recommendation system framework based on modules, it can generate different customized recommendation based on different commercial strategies [8]. Zuo et al. have proposed an open e-commerce recommendation system OARs; the architecture of OARs is consisted of recommendation engine and managing environment [9].

Based upon the above discussion, the study on recommendation technology and system has achieved many theories and applicative achievement, in general, they can be divided in the following fields:  Some people research on the recommendation?s real time ability and quality. For most recommendation systems, in order to maintain the requirement of real time ability, they sacrifice the recommendation?s quality [10~11].

Current recommender system mainly bases on the content  based recommendation and collaborative filtering technology. The former technology?s biggest shortcoming is its necessity to analyze the content of the resources, but not music, images, or video [12~13]. The focus of current research is collaborative recommendation technology, the biggest advantage is that it doesn?t need to analyze the feature and attribute of the items  [14], such as the customized recommendation algorithm under the multiple interests of users proposed by Yu et al. [15]; and OBPC based on semantic ontology proposed by Yuan and Cheng [16]. Collaborative filtering technology also has its own shortcoming, especially when users? grading data on the product is limited, the quality of recommendation will be low. In order to improve the above deficiencies of the two technologies, people propose a recommendation technology based on knowledge, it does not depend on the grading data, so it can enhance the quality of recommendation. Bin and his colleagues adopted a recommendation technology CBR (Case Based Reasoning) based on case reasoning, and designed an artificial recommendation system PC Finder for e-commerce product. They believed that the tough point of recommendation technology based on knowledge is the acquisition of knowledge [17].

The research of recommendation systems on a larger scale is also a hot field. So far most e-commerce recommending technology and system research base their study on specific website; they can not meet the application on websites on a larger scale. Chiu et al. proposed an e- commerce virtual community recommendation system. It was set in an e-commerce community and there were many e-commerce websites with similar commodities, so they designed a community recommendation system based on intelligent substitution [18]. Cyrus et al. integrated the advantages of the two recommendation technologies, one based on content filtering and the other on the collaborative filtering, and then designed a recommendation model, an off-line training model and an on-line application model? Yoda, and this model enhances the quality and scale of recommendation system based on Web [19].

Now the researches of e-commerce recommendation system under grid technology become a new trend. Now more countries have just started the research on the recommendation algorithm and knowledge acquisition based on information grid. Lan and Zhou proposed the information grid structure for the e-commerce recommendation system; it can be realized by multiple proxy nodes configuration basing on the memory. It can reduce the on-line users? information transfer volume. But this method can not bring significant elevation in the recommendation quality, recommendation depth or application on a larger scale [20]. Alexander et al. proposed the knowledge logic based on ontology and multiple Agent structure model (KS-Net), this method can solve the problem of users? knowledge acquisition and aggregation under the condition of grid technology [21].

Knowledge grid is an intelligent interlink environment, in which users can acquire, post, share and administrate the knowledge resources effectively, thus it provides the knowledge services that users need. It can also help realize the innovation of knowledge, work collaboratively, solve problems and decision-making. In May 2000, Tim Berners- Lee officially introduced the concept of semantic web. In order to realize the sharing and utilization of knowledge, the research of semantic web introduced ontology technology, and it was under constant practice. If semantic ontology technology is widely applied, an accurate, correct and automatic searching and intelligent recommendation can be realized [22~23].

The recommendation service seldom appear in tourism, so this work just study base on the similar technology application in the other ecommerce fields.



III. PERSONALIZED RECOMMENDATION TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS FOR TRAVEL SERVICES  In the general ecommerce application before, a common recommendation engine mainly adopts user-based collaborative filtering and association rules recommendation.

A. Association rules recommendation Association rules recommendation is a realization of an elementary level recommendation technology, and it is also the most widely used technology [24]. It originates from data mining filed, people used it to discover some interesting or useful relevance among massive data [25].

The technology itself is a key subject in data mining field.

In recent years, it is getting more attention for it?s more widely application. Association-based recommendation technology usually uses the actual exchange data as the source, because it fits the universal property of data source.

It uses the association rule as basis, and the purchased product as the rule header, the recommended item as the rule body. The discovering of the association rule is the most important and also the most time-consuming process, but it can be done off-line. The feature of this technology is that it can be realized very simply, and the recommendation is good, it can dynamically reflect the change in users? interests in the recommendation result. The algorithms for the discovering of association rule are many, such as Apriori, AprioriTid, DHP, FP-tree etc. SurfLen is an association rules recommendation system [26]. SurfLen is a recommendation system with Apriori as the core technology, and the recommended item is the website that the customers browse, not the product itself.

Apriori Algorithm is the most influential basic algorithm in association rule field, it was proposed by Rakesh and Agrawal [27]. Apriori is a breadth first algorithm; it uses multiple scanning of the database to get the frequent itemset which can get a support higher than the minimum support.

The basis of this theory is two monotonicity principles in frequent itemset: any subset of frequent itemset must be frequent; any superset of non-frequent itemset must be non- frequent. For many years, many scholars have made many  improvement of Apriori Algorithm, but compared with the situation in 1994, the data volume now is tens even hundreds of times because of the rapid development of Internet. So, now the disadvantage of high-cost by Apriori Algorithm is now beginning to show. People start to find a faster algorithm which can lessen the system load, and many improved algorithms are produced, like AprioriTid DHP Tree Projection, FP-tree etc. All of these algorithms are classified as Apriori algorithm, and the process can be viewed as the following two steps: first to find a dataitem itemset which can meet the minimum support requirement, these itemset can be called frequent itemset or large itemset; then for every frequent itemset, to calculate the rule which can meet the minimum confidence level requirement (See Figure 1).

Input  To identify all data items sets those meet the Min Support requirements  Generating rules that meet the Min Confidence requirements  for each frequent itemsets No  Whether the candidate generation is empty?

B. A theoretical analysis of the user-based collaborative filtering system The travel recommendation system with recommendation  function is able to estimate user s demand preference according to his personal information, interest and user log with filtering the less relevant information, and then seeking for matching information from tour product databank and finally recommending users relevant product information in line with their preference.

Collaborative Filtering technology is one of the most widely used technologies in the recommendation system. It can be divided into three types, namely, collaborative filtering based on users, items and models. There are three steps to build a user-based collaborative filtering system.

Collecting information representing users? interests.

Traditionally, the system uses scoring to collect information, such as famous MovieLens, which is called explicit scoring [28]. However, it has an obvious defect, the difficulty of data collection; users are usually not willing to provide such data to you. This problem makes this system usually appears in Labs or thesis more frequently. In spite of it?s occasionally appearance in real business system, it usually is disguised with a label of ?user-friendly?.

Generating association rules  Figure 1.  Improved Apriori algorithms     Another more effective way is ?implicit scoring method?.

No need to ask users to input evaluation data, this method can take place of users to finish evaluation according to their behavior characteristics. Web Mining is one of the kinds of methods which are deeply researched [29]. E-commerce websites have congenital merits in data collection of implicit scoring; purchasing records of users are very useful data.

By comparing a series of choices behavior of the target user with that of other users, User-based Collaborative Filtering is to identify a team of users who share similar interests. Once the system can identify them, it can recommend their interested contents to them.

Searching Nearest Neighbor.

The start point of Collaborative Filtering is to find a team of users who share the same interests with you, namely Nearest Neighbor in terminology. Similarity between users is resulted from comparison of two users? choice behavior vector. Recently, many methods are used in comparison of the similarity of choice behavior vector, such as some popular similarity measures like Person Correlation Coefficient, Cosine-based Similarity, and Adjusted Cosine Similarity.

Generating recommendation results  After resulting ?Nearest Neighbor?, we can get user?s most possible property set through calculating. To get recommendation sets, we can respectively make a statistic on interesting degree to different contents from the users in Nearest Neighbor, and select the content in first place as the recommended set. Top-N and association rule are two common recommendation sets.

Top-N recommendation is not the same as ?Mostpopular List? in common website. Mostpopular List is based on total data aggregation, is all the same to everyone; Top-N recommendation, focuses on a single user, is different from one another: it chooses the most frequently appeared item in the statistics of the Nearest Neighbors, which also doesn't exist in all scoring items, as recommendation result.

User-based Collaborative Filtering technology is a big success in the customization recommendation system; however, it has its limitation. The way to get recommendation aggregation means an item can only be recommended to other users after it has been chosen once.

As for TRS, new tourist routs or information will have few chances to be chosen into Nearest Neighbor?s recommendation sets because it doesn?t have so many records of purchasing or evaluation. This problem also is called the problem of ?cold boot? in Collaborative Filtering.

C. Item-based recommendation s Furthermore, when calculating the similarity of users, it  compares historical behavior records of the target user with of other user. Therefore, expansibility is a very severe problem for the realization of a recommendation system.

Hence, the second generation Item-based Collaborative Filtering technology comes into being. Different from user- based technology, this method compares the similarity between items [30].

Item-based coordinative filtering recommendation is grounded in such a hypothesis: If majority of users share in common on some items grade, then the current user will have the similar grade for the same items. As a result, we can predict the current user?s grade for the object item based on his nearest neighbor ?s grade to the same item and then select the several items with highest predicting score as the result for the user).

The advance of the item-based recommendation system is its expansibility. Instead of calculating similarity between users, item-based method counts on similarity between items.

It?s comparative stable in item?s quantity for common application of internet. For an example, in a large online TRS, there may be thousands of tourist routs, while the quantity of users may be up to millions. Therefore, contrasted with user, similarity between items is much easier to calculate, then it can largely reduce online calculation and enhance system performance.



IV. A VISITOR-BASED MODELING METHOD User modeling is an important study field of Human-  Computer Interaction, it makes computer understand the way user apperceiving, the course user knowing and the mode user behaving through changing user knowledge model to computing model. On the basis of understanding user model, computer can change its own behavior mode to form the compatible interaction and interface and make cost least. So, modeling a better user model is the first step of implementing the natural interaction between system and user. User model has been widely used in related fields of Human-Computer Interaction, such as Adaptive Human Computer Interface, Intelligent Agent, Intelligent Tutoring Systems and Information Seeking. There are many different user modeling approaches and have made considerable research results [31~32].

User modeling approaches can be divided into two sorts: One sort includes static user modeling and dynamic user modeling according to the way user model updating. The other sort includes Stereotype approach, Machine Learning approach, Bayesian Network approach, Neural Network approach, Logic-based approach and Fuzzy Set approach according to the techniques for constructing user model.

The current common model for visitor?s interest analysis includes: representations based on vector space model, Neural Networks, user-evaluation matrix, case and Ontology theory. According to the features of tourism, author tries to adopt a flow to study and solve the process of user modeling:  A. Data collection It is a process getting and maintaining knowledge that  meet the user?s interests, requirement and related habits. It provides necessary data source for the construction of the user modeling. Both the implicit and explicit data collection ways are useful in collecting data. Due to their respective advantages and disadvantages, the author believes that, for the consideration of the features of tourism, we can take the mixed way that combines them together.

B. Profile representation The authors consider adopting the representation based  on vector space model. It uses the n  dimension feature vector:  nni wtwtwtu ,,,,, 2211                              (1) Each dimension of the vector is composed of one key  word and its related weight. The weight can be a Boolean number or real one which respectively stand for whether the user is interested in some concept and the degree of interest.

Document model also represents as a n -dimension feature vector:  ninlilii wtwtwtwtd ,,,,,, 2211  (2) Every dimension of vector is constituted by a key word  and its weight. tj  is the key word ? j ? in the document,  is the weight of ?ji w j ? in the document ? ?. This method is effective to present the importance degree of conception in various user models to benefit the matching task in the latter phase.

i  It can reflect the different importance of different concepts in the user model. Also, it facilitates the following item matching task that uses standard vector to calculate.

C. Profile learning The user model learning can explain and reason the  collected data, and isolate the noise, and format useful knowledge about the user?s interests, also format that knowledge, in order to produce the final structure of the user model.

D. Profile adaptation According to users? feedbacks, both implicit and explicit  on the recommendation, improve the existing model, to ensure that the model can match the latest preferences of the user, thereby enhancing the model accuracy and recommendation quality.

The renewal of user model adopts dynamic information supplement technology which adjusts various weights of vectors after the feedback filtering information is added in the user model. And the feature vector irrelevant with user  will be deleted from the model with the decrease of its weight.



V. CONCLUSIONS After This paper accomplishes following tasks according  to the development trend of current tourism information.

It introduced the overall picture of major  recommendation system application profiles all over world with analyzing in details on the popular user modeling methods and comparing the weakness and strength of various methods. Moreover, as one of the important research fields of artificial intelligence, dada mining is applied widely in recent years. Therefore, customized information recommendation service based on data service has become a hot research topic.

Concerning the particularity of tourism, that is, the product offered are mostly tour service products. So Technology of Collaborative Filtering is chosen as the major approach to study. It focuses on looking for the user who shares the similar preference with object user, referring to his preferred product to predict the object user?s favorable product, and finally figure out the recommendation.

The advantage of travel recommendation system is to collect user?s characteristics information and make the customized recommendation referring to user?s feature such as preference. Moreover, the recommendation given by system could be real-time renewed. That is, when the commodity base or user characteristic bank in the system changes, the given recommendation order will change automatically. It increases the simplicity and efficiency of E- commerce activity, at the same time; it improves the service of tour enterprise.

