Navigation of Mobile Robot Using Global  Positioning System (GPS) and Obstacle Avoidance

Abstract- Mobile robot has been a major role to the application in military, industrial and agricultural purposes. Mobile robot should navigate through desire route and avoid the obstacle within the path. Many researcher come with the solution by using the various type of control and instrumentation system. The complexity of mobile robot system can make the system cost intensive and high risk. Proposed is a mobile robot equipped with GPS navigation system and obstacle avoidance system with low cost mobile structure, GPS module and sonar sensor. The combination GPS and Sonar will determine the position and obstacle avoidance for the mobile robot.  Mobile robot should navigate according to waypoint that preset to the GPS module and sonar sensor detects the obstacle during mobile robot navigation by triggering the sonar sensor in sequence by using commanded loop daisy chaining application method.

Mobile Robot can navigate through desired waypoint and at the same time apply the obstacle avoidance rules  Keyword- Global Positioning System (GPS), National Marine Electronics Association (NMEA), Autonomous Mobile robot, Sonar Sensor, Daisy Chaining.



I.   INTRODUCTION  Autonomous Mobile Robot is an automated vehicle that does not required operation from operator to navigate the robot. All the movements are pre determined before the operation and the mobile robot will navigate accordingly.

Autonomous mobile robot can be divided into three different type of area which is ground, air and submarine.  The implementation of autonomous mobile robot such as in military, agricultural purposes, surveillance and other application can lower the risk of injury and time consuming.

Many researchers are spending a lot of time and money to develop an autonomous mobile robot.  Applications on military for bomb defusing give major impact to reduce the fatal injury.  In other area the military can use the autonomous mobile robot to rescue injured army from the battle field.

Other application for military purposes is autonomous mobile  robot for de-mining [3]. All of these applications will save life and suitable for unexpected war nowadays.

A possible task of Autonomous Mobile Robot is ready to navigate from point to point that pre-programmed routed to Autonomous Mobile Robot while avoiding the obstacle. This function is useful in applications such as an autonomous log- skidder, security surveillance robot, fire suppression system, and a terrain-mapping vehicle. The vehicle can accomplish this task by using sensors to ?see? where it is and what is around it. These sensors vary from close range infrared sensors to longer ranged high frequency radar and global positioning satellites. [1]  This project used low cost equipment and instrumentation.

Remote control truck with skid steer application is used as a test bed for GPS navigation and obstacle avoidance. This remote control truck is suitable on semi-rugged terrain such a football field and outdoor application. The system was designed as a prototype for small vehicle and it can be implemented to larger vehicle for various type of application.



II.   MOBILE ROBOT SPECIFICATION  Mobile robot for this experiment utilized the use of remote control (RC) truck with the dimension of 50 cm in length, 25 cm in width and 15 cm in height. The RC truck equipped with four independent motor that can actuated individually which can skid steer to turn the mobile robot in immediate 360 degree turn. Equipped with seal lead acid battery, mobile robot increases the capability to move in longer time.  Figure 1 show mobile robot structures integrated with GPS and sonar sensor.

2009 5th International Colloquium on Signal Processing & Its Applications (CSPA)     Fig. 1. Mobile Robot Structure

III.   MICROCONTROLLER  There are many micro controllers in the market consist of various type capability from basic input output to high end micro controller.  These various types of micro controller are purposes made for general application.  For this project the suitable micro controller is Basic stamp BS2 and BS2p. For BS2 it offer processor speed 20 MHz and it can execute approximately 4000 instruction per second. RAM size for BS2 is 32 bytes and 2K bytes memory for EEPROM about 500 instructions can be store in flash memory. BS2 also offer 16 input output for interfacing with hardware and 2 dedicated serial communications. BS2P is an upgrade unit microcontroller from BS2 that offer processor speed 20 M Hz and execution speed approximately 12000 instruction per second. RAM size is 38 bytes and flash memory to store programming code is 16k bytes roughly about 4000 instruction can be saved. 24 input output and 2 dedicated serial communication integrated in BS2p module. Voltage requirement for both BS2 and BS2p vary along 5-12 vdc and current draw at 5v is 40 mA and 350 ?A for inactive situation.

Programming language for both controllers is using PBASIC code.  GPS data acquisition will be store in BS2p by serial communication and all the movement and obstacle avoidance come from the BS2.  Figure 2 show block diagram of the mobile robot system.

Fig. 2. Block Diagram for Microcontroller Input and Outputs

IV.   NAVIGATION  Global Positioning System (GPS) is widely use in navigation and localization. Nowadays many vehicles are equipped with GPS for navigation from desire route. From the GPS user can determine which direction they should follow with time and other data such as bearing etc. This project will benefit the use of data transmit from satellite to GPS module.

Autonomous mobile robot for this application will use Garmin E-trex Vista for GPS module. Many considerations have been made for this application. The main factor for the consideration is the 12 channel GPS receiver designed to operate with L1 frequency and GPS receiver continuously tracks and uses the signal to compute and update position.

Small sizes make it light and easy to handle and also can be use in rugged terrain because of water proofing. Due to minimum power requirement which is 3v it is suitable for autonomous mobile robot that needs longer power for localization and navigation. With proper calibration the accuracy will be ?2 with ?5 degrees extreme northern and southern latitudes and 1 degree resolution.

The experiment has been conducted and the data that from the GPS that suitable for navigation and localization is $GPRMC, $GPRMB, $$GPGGA and HCHDG.  GPS data being utilized in this project include latitude and longitude and also bearing.  Specified waypoint can be pre determine and the autonomous mobile robot will follow waypoint accordingly.

All the data will be read as ASCII code that need to be parse to various type of information.  Usually the accuracy of the GPS module can up to 9 meter.

Fig. 3. Mobile robot Navigation using heading and waypoint information.

Mobile robot will navigate as shown in Figure 3 through desire point according to rule below:  Lets True Course=Heading = TR Waypoint Heading = WP  If WP>TR Move RIGHT If TR>WP Move LEFT     If TR=WP Move FORWARD  Garmin E-Trex Vista will submit string to micro controller through serial port in form of text file.  Microcontroller will recognize the sentence by identifying the character of $GPRMC at the beginning of the sentence. The data description for $GPRMC can be shown as Figure 4. Many data can be used as a guideline for navigation. For example latitude and longitude can be parsed respectively data 3 and 5.

This data can be use as an initial coordinate where the mobile robot to navigate through specified route.

Fig. 4. Data string from Garmin E-Trex Vista  All $GPRMC data must be valid status for new value for each point before continue for another string.

Figure 5 show graph for latitude value from $GPGGA which has been taken before the navigation has been conducted to see the accuracy of the GPS module. Four hundred data has been taken. Within 300 data all the data start with the same value which indicates the value for latitude is ready to be used for navigation.  Figure 6 show graph for between longitude and latitude.

Fig. 5. Graph Latitude versus Number of data  Fig. 6. Graph Longitude versus Latitude

V.   OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE  Along the navigation from the first waypoint to final waypoint sonar sensor will detect the obstacle within range.

Basic principle of movement of mobile robot is avoid the obstacle and after successfully avoid the particular obstacle mobile robot will correct the waypoint from the current position. This paper focused on the LV-MAX Sonar for obstacle avoidance system. The selection of sonar sensor is base on the specification of the LV-MAX Sonar. The advantages of the LV-MAX Sonar are very low cost sonar sensor with reliable and stable range data and also very fast measurement cycle.

On the mobile robot four sonar sensors implemented in front of mobile robot for obstacle avoidance system. For each left and right the position of the sensor are 20 cm in between with 45 angle and two sonar sensor in the middle of left and right sonar sensor with 10 cm between both sensor.

The left and right sensor will detect the obstacle on each side and the centre sensor will detect the opposite obstacle of mobile robot. The system did not include back sensor because mobile robot only avoid obstacle by moving left and right only. From this experiment output data from the sonar sensor using pulse width output.  Pulse data can be converted to centimeter or inches from equation (1) and (2).

The main problem of sonar sensor is the crosstalk between those sensors. For this system it will have 4 main sonar sensors in front of the autonomous mobile robot. The sonar system will ping immediately after the system is turn on. All of the four sonar sensor will ping at the same time and sound pulse will be sent to the environment and bounce back to the sonar sensor. When the sonar simultaneously trigger it may happen when the second sonar sensor receive sound pulse information from the first sonar sensor. The data are invalid     because of the crosstalk of the system. To overcome the problem is by triggering the sonar sensor one by one within the required time but this system only applicable for one or two sonar sensor. The more sonar the more complicated the timing to trigger the sonar sensor.

Fig. 7. Commanded loop Daisy chaining schematic  The best way to deal with this complexity is the daisy chasing application method that will concentrate on the electronic circuit rather than software method. The sensors will be chained together as shown in Figure 7 by linking the TX of unit 1 to RX unit 2 an so on and the entire BW pin is tied to high. To run the system in sequence, strobe the first sensor within 20 us and both input data can be read in sequence. From LV-MAX-sonar sensors two outputs can be manipulate which are AN (analog output) and PW (pulse width output). This system will use PW as an output.

Figure 8 shows the data from 4 sonar sensors which has been placed in line between each with 3.5 cm between each sensor. The data show the range of 18 inches the value approximately within range 1287 s to 1310s. The conversion of pulse value to inches using equation (2), give data as in Figure9 which is 17 inches.  Figure 10 show data from the sonar sensor without daisy chaining application method gave the unpredicted value vary between 1500 s to 2000 pulse for 18 inches obstacle. The false data happen when the crosstalk between the sonar sensors as discuss above.

Time Delay versus Time  Black: Sonar 1(s1) Red: Sonar 2(s2) Blue: Sonar 3(s3)  Yellow: Sonar 4(s4) Range:  18? where s1=1291 s2=1288 s3=1287 s4=1310  Fig. 8. Data in pulse from Sonar sensor for range 18?  Inches   versus Time  Black: Sonar 1(s1) Red: Sonar 2(s2) Blue: Sonar 3(s3)  Yellow: Sonar 4(s4) Range:  18? where s1=17 s2=17 s3=17 s4=17  Fig. 9. Data in inches from Sonar sensor for range 18?     Time Delay versus Time  Black: Sonar 1(s1) Red: Sonar 2(s2) Blue: Sonar 3(s3)  Yellow: Sonar 4(s4)  Fig. 10. Data in pulse from Sonar sensor without Daisy Chaining application

VI.   DECISION MAKING  The microcontroller is responsible to collect all the data from the GPS module and also from the sonar sensor. The decision making is based on the data collection to control the DC motor. Figure 11 show the flow chart of the system. All the waypoints need to be preset to the GPS module before mobile robot can be navigated. Base on NMEA code the data are parsed and the suitable data are waypoint and heading information. From this data the decision making can be made whether mobile robot to move left or right to correct the error of the system. During the navigation mobile robot also need to avoid obstacle. If there any obstacles the mobile robot avoid the obstacle and return to the preset path.



VII.   RESULT  The mobile robot is able to move according to preset waypoint with obstacle avoidance implemented in the system.

The accuracy of the navigation highly depend on the signal from satellite with vary from 4 to 12 input satellites. The accuracy of hitting the mark can drift from 10 feet to 20 feet.

If the waypoints are preset from one point to another between 12 feet and the accuracy is 20 feet the waypoint 1 and 2 will be recognize as one point. To make system more effective due to the less accuracy of the system the preset waypoint need to be far from each more than 20 feet.

The obstacle avoidance can detect rock and small tree on it path. The main issues of the obstacle avoidance system are the detection of the grass as an obstacle can make the system unreliable. The position of the sonar sensor needs to move higher than the grass.

Fig. 11. Flow chart for GPS navigation and obstacle avoidance.



VIII.  CONCLUSION  This project shows that the mobile robot navigation using GPS module can be built using combination of RC truck between GPS and sonar sensor. The concept of the system can be applied to bigger scale mobile robot with better accuracy of GPS system and better obstacle avoidance system such as vision and laser range finder.

