Mining Association Rules for Intrusion Detection

Abstract?Intrusion detection system has been a powerful weapon to protect networks from attacks and has gained more and more attention. Data mining has been proven as an important method to detect intrusions. It has been the recent research focus and trend to apply data mining techniques in intrusion detection system for discovering new types of attacks, but it is still in its infancy. This paper reviews the new development of association rules mining technologies for intrusion detection in wired as well as wireless networks. The challenges and advanced developments of technologies to use association rule mining for intrusion detection are discussed.

Keywords-data mining; association rule; wired network; wireless network; intrusion detection

I.  INTRODUCTION With the more and more dependence on computer  networks in today?s information age, it?s so crucial to guarantee the security of computer systems. The intrusion detection system (IDS) has been a powerful weapon to protect networks from attacks and has gained more and more attention.

Currently, most IDSs are developed by manual and ad hoc means. With the amount of information passed over networks and the very size of these networks has been increasing exponentially, the so-called expert knowledge is often limited and unreliable.

On the other hand, data mining approaches can be used to find unknown patterns hidden in the vast amount of audit trail data so that it can be more objective than the ones hand- picked by experts.  Therefore, data mining approaches can be very promising for intrusion detection system development.

Generally, IDSs are based on the belief that an intruder?s behavior will be noticeable different from that of a legitimate user and that many unauthorized actions are detectable. So it is possible to determine weather there is an attack occurring by collecting and analysing operating system and network activity data.

There are two major categories of analysis: misuse detection and anomaly detection. Misuse detection uses the signatures of known attacks to identify a matched activity as an attack instance, while anomaly detection uses established normal profiles to identify any unacceptable deviation as the result of an attack. Usually, misuse detection is more effective against known attacks with higher true positive  rate, while anomaly detection could catch new attacks but with higher false positive rate.

With wide spread use of Wireless Local Area Networks (WLAN), intrusion detection in wireless networks has become a vital part in wireless network security systems.

Currently, almost all devices are Wi-Fi (Wireless Fidelity) capable and can access WLAN. In the last few years, wireless technology has advanced rapidly, providing convenience and flexibility.  More applicable methods are needed to study for guarantee the security of wireless networks.

It is reviewed in the paper the new development of association rules mining for intrusion detection in wired as well as wireless networks. The organization of the rest of the paper is as follow: association rules mining related work are described in the second part as a base to understand the methods. Important development of association rules mining for intrusion detection for wired and wireless networks are reviewed in the third and the forth part, respectively.

Challenges and advanced developments are discussed in part 5. A brief conclusion is in the final part of the paper.



II. ASSOCIATION RULES MINING RELATED WORK  Association rule mining is a classical task in data mining and has being studied quite deeply. Association rules describe correlation among different factors and can be used to find such kind of relationship.

A well-known example is market basket analysis, which analyses customer buying habits by finding associations between the different items that customers place in their shopping baskets. If most customers who buy milk also buy bread, we can put milk and bread in the same shelf to increase sales and profit.

Association rule mining was proposed in [1] by T.

Imielinski, A. Swami, and R. Agarwal, where the formal definition of the problem is presented as:  Let I = {i1, . . . , in} be a set of  items. Let database D be a set of transaction records, where each transaction T is a set of items such that  IT ? . Associated with each transaction is a unique identifier. We say that a transaction T contains X, a set of some items in I, if IX ? . An association rule is an implication of the form YX ?  , where IX ? , IY ? and ?=?YX  . The rule YX ?  holds in the   DOI 10.1109/FCST.2009.22     transaction set D with confidence c if c% of transactions in D that contain X also contain Y. The rule YX ?  has support s in the transaction set D if s% of transactions in D contain  YX ?  .

The problem of mining association rules can be  decomposed into the following two steps: Discovering the frequent itemsets or patterns that have transaction support above a pre-determined minimum support . Using the frequent itemsets to generate association rules for the database that has confidence above a pre-determined minimum confidence .

Apriori[1] and FP-growth[2] can be the most representative algorithms for association rule mining, which are commonly used in network intrusion detection systems.

The basic idea behind the Apriori algorithm is to level- wise, use shorter frequent k-itemsets (Lk) to deduce longer frequent (k+1)-itemsets (Lk+1) starting from candidate 1- itemsets consisting of single items in the set I defined above, until either no more frequent itemsets or candidate itemsets can be found. Thus, the Apriori algorithm finds frequent k- itemsets Lk from the set of frequent (k-1)-itemsets Lk 1 using the following two main steps involving Joining the Lk with Lk Apriori-gen way to generate candidate k-itemsets Ck, and secondly, pruning the Ck of itemsets not meeting the Apriori property or not having all their subsets frequent in previous large itemsets. To obtain the next frequent Lk from candidate Ck, the database has to be scanned for support counts of all itemsets in Ck.

Level-wise candidate generation as well as numerous scans of the database had been seen as a limitation of Apriori-based approaches, many optimization techniques of this approach had appeared in the literature.

Comparatively, FP-growth approach scans the database once to build the frequent header list L1, then, represents the database transaction records in descending order of support of the L1 list so that these frequent transactions are used to construct the FP-tree. The FP-tree is now mined for frequent patterns recursively through conditional pattern base of the conditional FP-tree and suffix growing of the frequent patterns.



III. ASSOCIATION RULES MINING  FOR WIRED NETWORKS INTRUSION DETECTION  Association rules mining technologies have been applied successfully to wired network intrusion detection since early 2000. Among many association rules mining algorithms, ADAM[3], MADAMID [4], MINDS [5] and MinMax [6] are worthy to be given more attention to. Some other methods are still worthy to comment.

ADAM was one of the early researches that featured a system applying data mining techniques to the problem of network intrusion detection, using association rule mining Apriori algorithm. It is a wired Apriori based network intrusion detection system. First, ADAM collects normal, known frequent datasets through mining as training datasets.

Secondly, during detection, it runs an on-line algorithm to find last frequent connections, which it compares with known mined training normal datasets and it discards those  recent connections which seem to be normal. With suspicious records, it then uses a classifier, previously trained to classify and label suspicious connections as a known type of attack, unknown type of attack or a false alarm.

MADAMID applies data mining programs to the extensively gathered audit data to compute models that accurately capture the actual behavior or patterns of intrusions and normal activities. In MADAMID they have used association and frequent episode rule for sequence analysis. MADAMID used a machine learning classifier, RIPPER, to produce rules to classify system call sequences as ?normal? or ?abnormal?.

MINDS uses a suite of data mining techniques to automatically detect attacks against computer networks and systems. In their research they presented two specific contributions:  an unsupervised anomaly detection technique that assigns a score to each network connection that reflects how anomalous the connection is, and  an association pattern analysis based module that summarizes those network connections that are ranked highly anomalous by the anomaly detection module. A limitation of MINDS is that it needs training data to learn the classifier and another limitation of MINDS is that it only analyses the header parts of data and does not pay attention to payload. As a result, U2R (User to Root) or R2U (Root to User) attacks may go undetected in their system.

Factually, frequent patterns, more directly, maximal frequent patterns, can be used to detect intrusions, in such way, needless learning association rules from frequent patterns and the performance of intrusion detection system can be improved. MinMax tried this new way. It is a novel algorithm for maximal frequent patterns which can be used in intrusion detection and showed good performance in experiments.

Warrender et al.[7] showed that a number of machine- learning approaches , e.g., rule induction, can be used to learn the normal execution profile of a program, which is the short sequences of its run-time system calls made.

ADMIT [8] proposed by Karlton Sequeira and Mohammed J. Zaki  worked with user command-level data to recognize masquerader.

Signature-Apriori [9] analyses the previously known signatures to find the signature of related attacks quickly.

The only limitation of their system is that it is a misuse detection system and is unable to detect totally new types of attacks.

One limitation of these systems is that some of them are currently off-line but a more effective intrusion detection system should be real time. Another limitation in some models is that they compute only frequent patterns in connection records. However, many intrusions like those that embed all activities within a single connection, do not have frequent patterns in connection data. These types of intrusions might go undetected in these models.



IV. ASSOCIATION RULES MINING  FOR WIRELESS NETWORKS INTRUSION DETECTION  Wireless intrusions belong to four broad categories [10], namely:  passive attacks, active attacks, man-in-the- middle attack and  jamming attacks.

A passive attack (e.g., war driving) occurs when someone listens to (or eavesdrops) on network traffic. Armed with a wireless network adaptor that supports promiscuous mode, the eavesdropper can capture network traffic for analysis using easily available tools, such as Network Monitor in Microsoft products, or (Transmission Control Protocol) TCP dump in Linux-based products, or AirSnort in Windows or Linux. War driving is the act of searching unsecured Wi-Fi networks by a person with a Wi-Fi equipped computer. As long as somebody is sniffing the network packets and trying to discover some useful information from gathered packets (e.g., WEP key used in the network or available open ports), we classify these activities as passive attacks. Once this information is discovered through passive attacks, then hackers can launch some active attacks.

Active attacks launched by hackers who access the network to launch these active attacks include unauthorized access, Denial of Service (DoS) and Flooding attacks like (SYNchronized) SYN Flood attacks, and (User Data-gram Protocol) UDP Flood attacks. DoS attack attempts to engage a host of computer resources so that these resources are not available to other users. DoS is an attack in which the attacker keeps the resource too busy or too full to handle other legitimate requests, and thus, it denies legitimate users access to a machine. In SYN Flood attack, the attacker sends a lot of TCP packets, where both SYN and (ACKnowledgment) ACK flags in the header are set to 1 using tools like Engage Packet Builder. The attacker?s IP address is a fake and destination IP address is the server victim?s address. Receiving so many packets from attacker prevents victim from accepting new legitimate requests and may crash the victim server.

Man-in-the-middle attack entails placing a rogue AP (Access Point) within range of wireless stations. If the attacker knows the SSID in use by the network (which is easily discoverable) and the rogue AP has enough strength, wireless users have no way of knowing that they are connecting to an unauthorized AP. Because of their undetectable nature, the only defense against rogue APs is vigilance through frequent site surveys using tools such as Netstumbler and AiroPeek, and physical security.

Jamming is a special kind of DoS attack specific to wireless networks. Jamming occurs when spurious RF (Radio Frequency) frequencies interfere with the operation of the wireless network. Intentional and malicious jamming occurs when an attacker analyses the spectrum being used by wireless networks and then transmits a powerful signal to interfere with communication on the discovered frequencies.

Fortunately, this kind of attack is not very common because of the expense of acquiring hardware capable of launching jamming attacks and it leads to a lot of time and effort being expended merely to disable communications.

KMO [11] is an Online K-means algorithm which was used to analyse network traffic data streams collected and recorded from a WLAN system and detected all types of attack behaviors through data mining clustering technique.

The log they used is specifically for wireless traffic and they extracted these data from several access points (APs). The main limitation of the approach was that it used training data which is hard to get.

[12] is a anomaly detection approach in ad hoc networks, which uses association rule mining technique and cross feature mining to build normal behavior profiles of network activities for an individual node.

WiFi Miner [13] is for dealing with intrusion detection in wireless networks. It is capable of finding frequent and infrequent patterns from pre-processed wireless connection records using infrequent pattern finding Apriori algorithm.

This online Apriori-infrequent algorithm improves the join and prune step of the traditional Apriori algorithm with a rule that avoids joining itemsets not likely to produce frequent itemsets.

An anomaly score is then assigned to each packet (record) based on whether the record has more frequent or infrequent patterns. Connection records with positive anomaly scores have more infrequent patterns than frequent patterns and are considered as anomalous packets. The authors described a solution that eliminates the need for hard-to-obtain training data in wireless network environments, and increases intrusion detection rate and reduces false alarms.

WiFi Miner has two main advantages.

Firstly, it eliminates the need for hard-to-get training  data. This it does with a proposed Online Apriori-Infrequent algorithm, which does not use the confidence value parameter and does not create any rules, but efficiently uses only frequent and non-frequent patterns in a record to compute an anomaly score for the record to determine whether this record is anomalous or not on the fly.

Secondly, it detects intrusions in wireless environments in real time. By integrating proprietary hardware sensors, where streams of wireless packets from Access Points are promptly captured and processed with the proposed Online Apriori-Infrequent algorithm. It improves the join and prune steps of the traditional Apriori algorithm, detects frequent and infrequent patterns in connection records, assigns anomaly scores to connection records without generating association rules from frequent patterns, and increases the efficiency and run times significantly. The proposed system targets mostly active, passive and main-in-the-middle wireless attacks, which are not easily detected by existing wired attacks.

WiFi Miner, however, has no mechanism for detecting Jamming Wireless attacks. Also, if the minimum support is set too low, there may be large number of frequent itemsets and fewer infrequent itemsets. As a result, the attacks may go undetected.



V. CHALLENGES AND DEVELOPMENTS It has been a great challenge to improve the efficiency of  association rule mining. Pruning and parallelization can be two efficient technologies to deal with it.

Counting itemsets support is recognized as the most time cost task during the association rule mining. So it is considered as the most efficient way for cutting down the time cost to decrease the number of candidate itemsets. Since all the frequent itemsets are including in the maximum frequent itemsets, the task of mining frequent itemsets can be converted as mining maximum frequent itemsets. Mining maximum frequent itemsets is more important for data mining.

There are not enough studies currently for maximum frequent itemsets mining. The representative works include MaxMiner [14] by Roberto J., MAFIA [15] by Doug Berdick  and GenMax [16] by Zaki M.J..  These algorithms make use of pruning strategies to cut down the search space, but still lots of redundant nodes are computed.

Parallelizing is another important way to improve the efficiency of association rule mining. The representative works include CD, DD and CaD by Rakesh Agrawal [17] , ParEclat, ParMaxEclat, ParClique and ParMaxClique by Zaki M.J. [18] . They need either multi scanning of datasets or synchronizing the computing. Load balance during data partitioning and task scheduling is a very important and can badly affect the efficiency of pruning process but is not considered enough.

The advancing is emerging for association rule mining and application. New algorithms are improving in pruning and paralleling. New pruning strategies make good down of search space. New paralleling strategies arrive good load balance,  efficient pruning, less data record duplicating and less execute time by asynchronous style among processors.

Ye Changguo, Wei Nianzhong, Wang Tailei, Zhang Qin and Zhu Xiaorong proposed a method based fuzzy association rule mining to discover intrusion action [19]. The work by Arman Tajbakhsh , Mohammad Rahmati and Abdolreza Mirzaei are also with fuzzy association rule mining [20]. Their experimental results showed that fuzzy association rule mining can be more convenient than apriori based methods for intrusion detection precision. Ye Changguo, Zhang Qin, Zhou Jingwei, Wei Nianzhong, Zhu Xiaorong, Wang Tailei proposed a method for wireless network intrusion detection based on fuzzy association rules mining which showed feasible [21].

A new area for investigation of the problem of the frequent itemsets is mining data streaming for frequent itemsets [22] [23] [24] . In such kind of problem, the data is so massive that all data cannot be stored in the memory of a computer and cannot be processed by traditional algorithms.

The objective of all proposed algorithm is to store as few as possible and to minimize the error generated by some estimation in the model. [25]  recently proposed a false negative oriented algorithm for frequent itemset mining.

Malicious users can influence online recommendation systems by providing biased data. Such attacks generally lead to the erosion of user trust in the objectivity and  accuracy of the system. [26] presented new attack strategies that explore the importance of the targeted items and ?filler? items. Unlike previous approaches, their strategies were built specifically for user-based and item based collaborative filtering systems, with a particular focus on the intelligent selection of filler items. Empirical results demonstrated that the strategies may be effective against both types of filtering environments.

The growth of network usage has motivated the creation of emerging malicious code for various purposes. Although signature-based anti-viruses methods are accurate, they cannot detect newly created malicious code. [27] presented a methodology to detect unknown malicious code based on text categorization concepts. Through an active-learning framework, which enables the selection of unknown files for fast acquisition, the proposed methodology can be further improved to achieve a more accurate and efficient acquisition of unknown malicious files

VI. CONCLUSIONS Security of computer networks has become a very crucial  issue. Since data mining technologies have been applied for intrusion detection systems, but it is still needed go a long way to be more efficient and accurate for detecting new types of attacks for wired as well as wirelessed networks.

Association rule mining plays an important role in the literature of data mining. It poses many challenging issues for the development of efficient and effective methods. After taking a closer look, we find that the application of association rules requires much more investigations in order to aid in more specific targets. We may see a trend towards the study of applications of association rules.

