A Privacy-Preserving Book Recommendation Model Based on Multi-Agent

Abstract?Recommendation systems are widely used to cope with the problem of information overload in digital libraries, consequently, many recommendation methods have been successfully applied in the present book recommendation systems, such as collaborative filtering, content-based, association rule mining-based and so on. But they are always lack of user?s privacy concerns. Aiming at this disadvantage, in this work, a privacy-preserving book recommendation system (PPBRS) is introduced. This paper discusses the system structure of PPBRS at first. In addition, it discusses the functions of every agents and the operating process in the system. This recommendation system allows multiple recommendation methods to cooperate with one another to present their best recommendations to the user, can meet the needs of multiple recommendation, and also can protect users' privacy while providing high-quality recommendations efficiently. Finally, we give a simple review of the work accomplished and conclude further research directions of the system by analyzing the existing work.

Keywords-privacy-preserving; recommendation system; multi-agent; digital library

I. INTRODUCTION  With the development of information technology, the university library becomes digital library from traditional library gradually. Book information and circulation historical data are accumulated rapidly in university library in the past few years [1]. Facing with the abundant digitalizing resource, recommendation systems are a promising tool for libraries to assist patrons as a popular personal information service, which offer recommendation information to users by analyzing their personality and habit [2].

Recommendation systems are widely used to cope with the problem of information overload and, consequently, many recommendation methods have been developed for the present recommendation systems, such as content-based, social networking, collaborative filtering, web mining-based, customer relationship management (CRM), statistical inference and so on [3, 4]. The basic idea behind  recommendation techniques is to recommend products according to the users? preferences, which are either explicitly stated by the users or implicitly inferred from previous transaction records. Currently, collaborative filtering algorithms are popularly applied in various recommendation systems according to its good recommendation quality. The system popularized by Amazon.com can be a familiar example of a collaborative filtering system.

The privacy issue is perhaps the most disconcerting in the use of recommendation systems in e-commerce, also in digital libraries. Obviously most of users in libraries begin to care about the privacy issues and hope their transaction- level data as well as reading histories must be protected.

Privacy in the context of recommendation systems for digital libraries is a central and complex challenge for digital library research is the balance between privacy and collaboration  Since some of present recommendation systems are always lack of intelligence, self-adaptiveness and initiative, and more importantly, they can not solve the issue of privacy protection. Aiming at these disadvantages, in this work, a privacy-preserving book recommendation system model based on multi-agent (PPBRS) is presented here. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The system architecture and its main function agents are described in Section 2. The system workflow is presented in Section 3.

Finally, some conclusions and the possibilities for future work are mentioned in Section 4.



II. THE SYSTEM STRUCTURE  As a multi-agent system, PPBRS is divided into four layers some of which is made up of multiple agents: human- machine interaction layer at the top, information processing layer in the middle and information collection layer and database layer on the bottom. The system structure is shown in Figure 1 [4, 5].

The PPBRS model could provide the users some related book information they are interested while they needn?t worry about their privacy to be released. Based on the multi agent architecture, it could implement high efficient communication by applying the XML-based-Agent  2009 Second International Workshop on Computer Science and Engineering  DOI 10.1109/WCSE.2009.200   2009 Second International Workshop on Computer Science and Engineering  DOI 10.1109/WCSE.2009.200   2009 Second International Workshop on Computer Science and Engineering  DOI 10.1109/WCSE.2009.822     communication architecture, and self-adapting adjustment of the users? interest models by applying self-learning technology to offer the active book recommendation service.

The PPBRS model is composed of several agents, such as user request agent, privacy-preserving agent, learning agent, book recommendation agent, information collection agent and so on. Their functions in detail are as follows.

Figure 1. PPBRS model.

A. User Request Agent  User request agent is in charge of interacting with the users. Thus it must be in a meaningful user-centric way and should be designed to understand the user in the best way and facilitate the bellow functions with great efficiency.

? Receiving the request. When the users query book bibliography information by the recommendation system, the agent should receive the search keyword (title, ISBN, author, etc.) and the user?s demand of the personal privacy.

? Receiving the feedback. After book recommendation agent submits the selected books to the users, the users could feedback their opinions to learning agent that could make machine learning and improve the users? models to describe the users? interest better. User request agent offers learning agent the users? feedback, and learning agent studies the users? interest dynamically.

? Collecting the users? active information. During the process of the interaction between the users and the system, user request agent could monitor the users? actions like querying and browsing, analyze the users? purposes, and obtain the related information the users are interested and the degree of their interest, such as the stay time, access times, saving, clicking, editing, linking, printing.

? Providing the means to control and inspect the behavior of the agents in the PPBRS system, such as setting, selecting, inputting, receiving and so on.

B. Learning Agent  Learning agent is in charge of analyzing the users? historical borrowing record and generating the reader-book interest models. Learning agent receives the implicit and explicit feedback recorded by user request agent and improves the users? reader-book interest models with machine learning, which may be the association rule mining or statistical inference.

When the users access the library integrated management system (LIMS) and searching the books information, user request agent implements the information services according to the users? knowledge database. And learning agent updates the database through tracing and studying the actual borrowing actions of the users.

C. Privacy-Preserving Agent  Privacy-preserving agent is in charge of controlling of the user's privacy. It needs to attain the reader's privacy protection requirements by the user request agent and deal with privacy protection requirements in general and individual privacy protection requirements. And the privacy- preserving agent, which is showed in Figure 2, should be made up of interface module, control model, supervise module, evaluation module, PP toolbox, etc. Then it can work very well.

Figure 2. Privacy-Preserving Agent.

Privacy preserving in the context means to prevent information disclosure due to legitimate access to the data.

Thus, privacy preserving is different with conventional data security, access control and encryption technology that tries to prevent information disclosure against illegitimate means (such as hacking, access control violations, query-injection, theft etc.) [6]. In order to prevent the release of the individual privacy, many techniques and algorithms are proposed and are effectively applied to a variety of environments [7]. For an example, data perturbation and data blocking techniques are generally used to the privacy preserving in collaborative association rule mining by transforming and hiding the original data. Here we conclude the advantages and shortcomings of some privacy- preserving methods in Table . According to various     methods privacy-preserving agent will be faced with more difficulty to select the right algorithm/method to protect users? privacy.

TABLE I. PRIVACY-PRESERVING METHODS  Name Applica bility  Advantages Shortcomings  P3P   It can be defined according to need and browser can automatically read  Need for browser support and lack of unified supervision and management  EPAL  It can be described in detail  Complex integration with existing systems  Anonym ous  General Technolo gy  Simple, wide applicability  Difficult to ensure data quality, vulnerable  K- Anonymi ty  General Technolo gy  Effective in preventing linkage attacks  Dealing with complex and large loss of information under the conditions of multi- constrained  Data perturbat ion  Associatio n rule mining  Wide applicability, easy to implement  Greatly impact the accuracy of the mining results  Query restrictin g  Associatio n rule mining  Effectively hide the sensitive information  Need to know sensitive rules first  Data transfor mation  Collaborat ive filtering  Wide applicability and can change the parameters to balance the quality and effectiveness of privacy protection  Limit users may impact on the quality of the results  Cryptogr aphy  Collaborat ive filtering  High performance algorithm  Need all users to join and usually be applied to distributed environments  Privacy concerns can be addressed to some extent by offering users anonymous accounts, and by offering features which permit the user to opt out of recommendation services.

But this is not a good idea and we should apply the privacy- preserving technologies to balance the relation of privacy and services. We adopt k-anonymity [8], a classic privacy protection technique, to process the circulation data of library before sharing by the method of value generalization hierarchies in another work. In one side, this can protect the detailed data during data publishing and sharing. In the other side, this can prevent sensitive data from attackers? access by reasoning, statistic analysis and data mining.

D. Book Recommendation Agent  Book recommendation agent is in charge of recommending the books to the concerned users. Its work process is shown in Figure 3. The agent sends the users? interesting books information to meet their requirements better, by comparing the books information and the users? reader-book interested models, and seeking some books with the biggest similarity. After selecting the books, book recommendation agent directly submits them to the online users by the web user interface (WUI) or stores them into  the users? interests table in the knowledge database for later submission.

Figure 3. The work process of the recommendation agent.

The model of book recommendation agent is made up of recommender module, evaluation module, web user interface, knowledge database and book database [9]. The recommendation algorithms for the different requirements play an important in the agent, thus many aspects of recommendation algorithms are being studied, including the original collaborative filtering algorithms.

E. Information Collection Agent  Information collection agent is in charge of gathering the books information and searching the books associated with the users? interests in the book database. The users could provide some keywords and academic directions for books information collection agent and help information collection agent search/gather the information with the searching engine from the libraries resource and Internet resource. Its work process is shown in Figure 4 [10]. Since the book resource can be found from libraries and Internet, we should make the best of searching/gathering  them by searching Web resources using Web service.

Figure 4. The work process of the information collection agent.



III. THE SYSTEM WORKFLOW  A recommendation system usually includes three steps, which are acquiring preference from users? input data, computing the recommendation using proper techniques, and finally presenting the recommendation results to users.

These works basically are implemented by the multi-agent     and agent mechanism is the basic way for the agents to apperceive and communicate [11].

Thus, the system workflow is that personal information is submitted by user request agent. The original users? interest models are generated by learning agent and stored into the users knowledge database; Meanwhile the query request from user request agent is sent to information collection agent which sends the query to the book database according to the keywords and gathers the concerned information; the query result is filtered and submits to the users by book recommendation agent; the users evaluate the result to improve the users models. After the query processing, on the one hand, the users could get their interested books information and keep their privacy to be released. And on the other hand, the system could study the user?s information interests which provide the basic knowledge of individualization information search and information service [4].

Individualization information search is a process through which the system searches the information in the book database, filters the information based on the user?s interest model, and then submits the result and receives the feedback which could help learn the user?s interests and improve the personalized model. According to the user?s requirements and the configured searching cycle and submission way, this model could independently search the books information in the book database and send the Top-N books recommendation information to the users. It?s a good method to improve efficiency through reducing the searching time by the active information services in the system. Thus, the collaboration of multi-agents could help organize all the functions together as a whole intelligent recommendation system.



IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  The public has become accustomed to the service and usefulness of recommendation systems in e-commerce and in Internet searching and will likely appreciate and benefit from an application of this technology to library services.

Book recommendation functions in the LIMS play an important role in pushing library services forward. As recommendation system itself and the improvement of objective surroundings requests, current recommendation technology is faced with a great many difficulties. The paper introduces a relatively complete system structure to meet the users? more demands, especially the demand for privacy protection. The main parts of the system and the system workflow are described in detail in this paper. A recommendation model with a simple interface is implemented under an experimental environment.

According to the result of search and recommendation, PPBRS could meet the requirements of the users? personalization information with efficient ways. It goes without saying that this model is not good enough. For example, the system structure, the algorithms and implementation should be improved further.

Book recommendation in the digital library context is similar to product recommendation in e-commerce.

Obviously, this model can also be used in other fields, for example, bookstore, information retrieval system, network reference database, etc.

But in order to effectively establish a perfect system, we still have a lot to do in the future.

? How to find a suitable algorithm of learning agent is the major content of next research based on the system, because the algorithm of learning agent has a rather huge influence on recommendation results.

? How to attain the optimal recommendation results without sacrificing their privacy by applying the present privacy preserving algorithms.

? In order to improve the system performance, how to expand system module to distributed system by adding computing nodes to effectively improve recommendation efficiency of system.

