- 147 -

Abstract?Time Related Association rule mining is a kind of sequence pattern mining for sequential databases. In this paper, a Generalized Class Association Rule Mining is proposed using Genetic Network Programming (GNP) in order to find time related sequential rules more efficiently. GNP has been applied to generate the candidates of the time related association rules as a tool. For fully utilizing the potential ability of GNP struc- ture, the mechanism of Generalized GNP with Multi-Branches? Full-Paths mechanism is proposed for class association data mining. The aim of this algorithm is to better handle association rule extraction from the databases with high efficiency in a variety of time-related applications, especially in the traffic volume prediction problems. The algorithm capable of finding the important time related association rules is described and experimental results are presented using a traffic prediction problem.



I. INTRODUCTION  Nowadays, there is an increasing demand for traffic pre- diction systems with the increase of the traffic volumes. This requires accurate prediction of traffic situations, especially, traffic flows.

Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) has been studied  and developed widely. Especially, Advanced Traveler Infor- mation System(ATIS) [1], i.e., the main part of ITS, provides the real-time traffic information to travelers, thus help to find alternative routes, which would reduce the delays caused by both incidents and congestions. A wide variety of techniques for the prediction of traffic volumes based on the framework of ATIS have been proposed aiming at solving the congestion problems.

In particular, Dynamic Traffic Assignment(DTA) [2] has  attracted recent attention, because it is capable of process- ing time-varying properties of the traffic flow. However, the complex formulations of it generally lead to extremely complicated solutions and its another issue is the requirement of time-dependent OD(original and destination) data in the prediction process.

Neural Networks(NN) [3] have also been used to traffic  congestion prediction. NN depends on the self-evolved pa- rameters and the recurrent calculation under the teacher sig- nal is more than the complicated mathematical analysis, thus NNs show better robustness under the noisy environments [4] and show good adaptive ability since the parameters  can be adjusted automatically as the OD changes in the environments.

Unlike those methods, the proposed method applies the  association rule data mining mechanism to find the traffic volume related rules, which are used to predict the future traffic volume. The rule extracting process does not need the pre-knowledge of time-dependent OD pairs like DTA method and has the good adaptive ability to the noises and changes in the environments.

Data mining has become an important field since a huge  amount of data have been collected in various applications.

Data mining aims at extracting implicit, previously unknown information from data sets, which could be useful for many applications. Among data mining methods, association rule mining is one of most important technologies, especially in traffic control systems.

Now, the main objective of association rule mining is  to discover association relations or correlations among at- tributes encoded within a database [5]. The obtained relations between data will be represented by association rules as X ? Y , where X is the antecedent part and Y is the consequent part.

A conventional association rule is like the following: ?If  Section X on the traffic map has high traffic volume, then the Section Y also has high traffic volume.? But in real- time systems, conventional association rules are not enough to predict the future traffic situation, so, we need the time related association rules like: ?If Section X on the traffic map has high traffic volume at time t = ?10 (10 time units before), then Section Y will also has high traffic volume at t = 0 (current time).? Although we have already proposed Generalized Genetic  Network Programming(GNP)-based data mining [6], it uses the random determined node transition path to decide the possible combination of the attributes in the database, where, GNP is a newly developed evolutionary method whose gene is composed of directed graphs [7], [8], [9]. The above method does not use a fully developed paths which might be obtained by GNP individual.

In this paper, a method of time-related association rule  mining using Genetic Network Programming (GNP) with Multi-Branches?Full-Paths has been proposed and applied to  ICROS-SICE International Joint Conference 2009 August 18-21, 2009, Fukuoka International Congress Center, Japan  PR0002/09/0000-0147 ?400 ? 2009 SICE    - 148 -  the traffic prediction system.

The basic features of the proposed mechanism is like the  following:  ? The GNP structure of rule representation is generalized to multiple branches instead of simply ?Yes-side? or ?No-side? transitions. Thus, it could be applied to gen- erate candidate association rules in a more generalized and efficient way.

? Full-Paths searching mechanism is used to find all the potential combinations of the attributes using GNP.

? The database is time-related considering the real-time factor. Thus, the same attribute has different meanings at different time points.

? We aims at extracting rules to predict the traffic vol- umes of all the the sections on the road networks.

So, Extraction Mechanism at Stages(EMS) is applied, where all the sections are considered step by step as the consequent part.

? We can predict not only the traffic jam of a specific section on the road networks, but also can predict the low, middle and high traffic volumes of all of the sections on the road networks, which might be useful in future applications.

This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the basic structure of Genetic Network Programming(GNP) is reviewd. In Section 3, the algorithm of the time related class association rule mining and classification using GNP with Multi-branches?Full-Paths is described. Section 4 shows the simulation environments, conditions and several experimen- tal results. Section 5 is devoted to conclusions.



II. GENETIC NETWORK PROGRAMMING(GNP)  In this section, Genetic Network Programming(GNP) is briefly reviewed [7], [8], [9]. GNP is an evolutionary op- timization mechanism, which uses the directed graph struc- tures as solutions. The graph structure of GNP includes three kinds of nodes: start node, judgment nodes and processing nodes. Judgment nodes are the set of J1,J2,..., which work as if-then type logical decision making functions. On the other hand, processing nodes are the set of P1,P2,..., which work as a certain kind of action/processsing functions. The concrete roles of these nodes are predefined and stored in the library. Once GNP is started up, firstly the execution starts from a start node; consequently the next node to execute is determined according to the connections and if-then type judgment result of the current node. GNP uses the above process to imitate the human like if-then type judgement process.

The basic expression of GNP is shown in Fig.1. It de-  scribes the gene of node i, then the set of these genes represents the genotype of GNP individuals. NTi describe the node type, NTi = 0 means node i is the start node, NTi = 1 represents node i is a judgment node and NTi = 2 represents node i is a processing node. IDi is an identification number, for example, NTi = 1 and IDi = 1 means node i is J1(Judgment node with ID 1). Ci1, Ci2,...,  denote the nodes connected from node i. di and dij are the delay times required to execute the processing of node i and transition from node i to node Cij .

:StartNode :Processing Node:Judgm entNode  NTi ID i di Ci1 di1 Cij dij......

node gene  connection gene  node i  0,0 ,0 1,0Node 0:  2,1,0 2,0Node 1:  1,2,0 3,0 4,0Node 2:  1 ,3 ,0 4,0 1,0Node 3:  2 ,4 ,0 1,0Node 4:  Penotype Start:0      P1  J2  J3  P4  G enotype  Fig. 1. Gene structure of GNP node

III. TIME RELATED CLASS ASSOCIATION RULE MINING USING GNP  A. Outline of the Proposed Method  The whole procedure of the proposed algorithm is shown in Fig.2. The first step is the time related class association rule extraction step based on the training database. The proposed method extracts the class rules of all the consequent attributes with Attribute Accumulation Mechanism [10] se- quentially.

The second step is to use the obtained time related  rules to classify the testing database using the bucket based competition mechanism.

Class type  Traning database  Tim e related database  Classification Testing database  Prediction Result ActualSituation Com pare  Accuracy  Process InputMechanism  Bucket Com petition  Tim e Related Class Association Rule Extraction  Generalized GNP with Multi-  Branches Full-Paths  Fig. 2. Basic process of the proposed algorithm  B. Structure of Database  When processing the real-time systems, the databases are to be designed and developed to satisfy the time related requirements.

- 149 -  TABLE I  DATABASE BEFORE DISCRETIZATION  Time A1 A2 0001 8 3 0002 4 4 0003 8 1 0004 2 9  TABLE II  DATABASE AFTER DISCRETIZATION  Time A1 A2 Low Middle High Low Middle High  0001 0 0 1 1 0 0 0002 0 1 0 0 1 0 0003 0 0 1 1 0 0 0004 1 0 0 0 0 1  Middle threshold=4; High threshold=7;  Here, the time unit represent the conceptional time unit, i.e., it could be one second, one minute or the time for one episode, therefore, the time unit could be flexible enough according to the concrete problem to solve.

According to the range of the continuous values of the  attributes, we divide the continuous values into three cat- egories, i.e., Low, Middle and High. Supposing that the Middle threshold is 4 and High threshold is 7, the attribute A = 9 is ranked as A?High, i.e., (A?Low, A?Middle, A?High)=(0, 0, 1) as shown in Table I and Table II.

C. GNP for Class Association Rules Mining with Time Series  The proposed generalized method extracts important time related association rules using GNP supposing the connec- tions of nodes are represented as association rules. The generalized time-related association rule mining means that there a proper number of branches in the judgement nodes in stead of simply ?Yes-side? or ?No-side? transition in the previous method [11].

The basic structure of the generalized GNP network struc-  ture for class association rule mining is shown in Fig.3.

Each judgement node of GNP is in charge of whether the corresponding attribute - Low, Middle or High is satisfied.

For example, if A1 satisfies the ?High? condition, then, moves to the High-side of the transition, and ?a, b and c? are the counts of the moves to the corresponding judgement result(Low/Middle/High) of attribute A1.

A fixed number of attributes n(user-defined) starting from  the processing node will be used as the possible antecedent parts to generate the candidate rules. It means all the com- bination of n judgement nodes starting form the process- ing node are the possible antecedent parts. Since it is a classification problem, the proposed method is focusing on extracting rules with fixed consequent corresponding to each class of the attributes. In order to do this, all the items of the consequent part are placed in Consequent Table(CT ) shown in Fig.3. This means that GNP individuals are evolved to extract the class association rules for each class of the attributes consequently until a sufficient fixed number(Nf )  of rules for each item in CT are obtained in the proposed method.

The time related database can be examined using a two  dimensional search which will be explained later in more details.

In the previously proposed generalized GNP method, the  transition starting from the processing node is randomly decided to obtained the possible antecedent part, e.g., the transition at A1 will randomly choose the Low, Middle or High connection and these will result in totally different transitions as A1(Low) to A2, A1(Middle) to A6 or A1(High) to A5, while the obtained transition is one of the possible combinations of the attributes, which could be used in the conventional way of GNP-based data mining [10]. How- ever it is not efficient and does not completely utilize the potential reusability of the directed graph structure, thus a more efficient method is proposed here to obtain all the possible combinations of n judgment nodes starting from the processing node using a deep first retrieval method.

The total number of moving to each branch from the pro-  cessing node at each judgment node is calculated for every processing node, which is a starting point for calculating association rules as described above. In Fig.4, N is the total number of the search, and a, b and c are the numbers of search moving to A1(Mid), A2(Low) and A3(Mid) at each judgment node A1, A2 and A3. The measurements are calculated by these numbers.

For example, as represented in Fig.4, if the candidate  combination is from A1 to A3, then the antecedent part of the candidate rules becomes the following, If ?(A1(Mid)(t = 0) = 1) ? (A2(Low)(t = 2) = 1) ? (A3(Mid)(t = 4) = 1)?, then the current item in the Consequent Table(CT ) is ?(Ac(Mid)(t = 6) = 1)? considering the time delay T = 2, which can also be evolved.

We can also pick up the candidate rules like ?(A1(Mid)(t = 0) = 1) ? (Ac(Mid)(t = 2) = 1)?, ?(A1(Mid)(t = 0) = 1) ? (A2(Low)(t = 2) = 1) ? (Ac(Mid)(t = 4) = 1)? in the same transition, which we call Multi-Rules Mechanism(MRM ). Using one transition of the processing nodes, several candidate rules will be generated using MRM.

D. Extraction of Rules  The total number of moving to each side from the pro- cessing node at each judgment node is calculated for every processing node, which is a starting point for calculating association rules. This section introduce how the rules are extracted using the counted information by GNP individual.

The counts provides the basic data for the evaluation of the  candidates rules. Using these counts, chi?squared value can be calculated considering both the antecedent and consequent part of the candidate rules.

Now, we define the important association rules as the ones  which satisfy the minimum chi-squared, support and confi- dence value, i.e., ?2min, supmin and confmin, respectively.

Only the important association rules can be considered as interesting and stored in the rule pool.

- 150 -  A2,M id  :H igh connection  :M iddle connection  T:Tim e D elay  :Prosessing N ode :Judgm ent N ode  :Low connection  C onsequent Table  A1,Low A1,M id A1,H igh A2,Low  A2,H igh ...

...

AN,H igh  Current Consequent  N P1  A1 A2  A3  a  b c  d  T=0  T= u T= vA6A5  A4 T= u  T= u  e f  T= v T= v  j  k l  Fig. 3. Basic structure of class association rule mining using GNP  Tim e Unit  A1 A2 A3 Ac  Low Middlle High Low Middle High Low Middle High Low Middle High  0000 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0  0001 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0  0002 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0  0003 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0  0004 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1  0005 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0  0006 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0  0007 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0  0008 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0  0009 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0  0010 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0  N  P1  T= 0  :Low  :M iddle  :H igh  c A1  CurrentConsequent: Ac,M iddleA2  a b  T= 2 T= 2 T= 2 A3  : tim e step for M R M  Fig. 4. Two dimensional searching method  We also regard the rules containing many different at- tributes as important ones in addition to the conventional interest. Therefore, the fitness function of the GNP individual is defined as:  F = ? r?R  {?2(r) + 10(nante(r) ? 1) + ?new(r) + ?mult(r)}.

The symbols are as follows: R : set of suffixes of important association rules which  satisfy the importance requirements of chi-squared, support and confidence value.

?2(r) : chi-squared value of rule r.

nante(r) : the number of attributes in the antecedent of  rule r.

?new(r) : constant defined by  ?new(r) = ?  ?new, if rule r is new 0, otherwise  ?mult(r): constant defined by  ?mult(r) =  ? ? ?  ?mult, if rule r has many different attributes  0, otherwise  ?2(r), nante(r), ?new(r) and ?mult(r) are concerned with the importance, complexity, novelty and diversity of rule r, respectively. In each generation, GNP individuals are replaced with the new ones by the selection policy and other genetic operations. We used four kinds of genetic operators, i.e., uniform crossover, mutation for functions, mutation for connections and time delays of judgement nodes, respectively.



IV. CLASSIFICATION  Firstly classify the extracted association rules in the pool to consequent attribute classes. Every attribute has three consequent attribute classes, i.e., the attribute Ac is classified into consequent attributes Ac(Low), Ac(Mid), Ac(High).

The ratio of the number of satisfied rules to the total  number of rules in each class is calculated for the testing data, and the testing data is classified to the class whose ratio is the highest. The concrete process is like the following: (1). Calculate Rk: Calculate the set Rk of the suffixes of  the rules whose antecedent items satisfy the testing data and whose consequent class is k.

(2). Calculate the Creditk for class k:  Creditk = ?  r?Rk confidencer, (1)  (3). Calculate the Scorek for class k:  Scorek = Creditk Totalk  , (2)  where, confidencer is the confidence of rule r and Totalk is the total number of rules having class k, that is, the fixed number of Nf for each class of the consequents in this paper.

(4). Compare the Scorek and the class with the highest  value of Scorek becomes the winner for the testing data, e.g., if Ac(Low) has the highest score, then the testing data is classified to Ac(Low).



V. SIMULATIONS  The aim of the proposed data mining is to extract the rules on the time-related association relations among all of the sections on the map, where there are a large number of attributes, e.g., 224 sections.

A. Traffic Simulator  The main task of the simulator is to generate databases to which we apply the proposed method.

Each section between two intersections in the road has  two directions, and we assume each direction of the section represents different literals, i.e., items or attributes. The traffic simulator used in our simulations consists of the road model with 7 ? 7 roads like Fig.5, i.e., each section has the same length, and the shape of the total road is like a grid network. Time shift in road setting of Fig.5 represents the time delay of the traffic lights between neighboring intersections.

- 151 -  h  #N 1 #N 2 #N 3 #N 4 #N 5 #N 6 #N 7  #S1 #S2 #S3 #S4 #S5 #S6 #S7  #W 2  #W 1  #W 3  #W 4  #W 5  #W 6  #W 7  #E2  #E1  #E3  #E4  #E5  #E6  #E7  :representcar #** : representO /D nam e :representsection from intersection W 2N 4 to W 2N 5  :representsection from intersection W 2N 5 to W 2N 4  :representintersection W 3N 3  R oad Setting  M axim um num berof  cars  10 cars per section  C ararrival distribution  exponential distribution  R ed traffic light  10 tim e units  G reen traffic light  7 tim e units  Yellow traffic light  3 tim e units  Tim e shift 10 tim e units  Fig. 5. Road model used in simulations  TABLE III  EXAMPLE OF OD (ORIGIN/DESTINATION)  ????O D  #N1 #N2 #N3 #N4  #N1 . . . 7 1 8 #N2 12 . . . 7 5 #N3 8 0 . . . 6 #N4 2 1 9 . . .

The generation of cars is based on O/D (Origin / Desti- nation) shown in Table III. For example, in Table III, the ? #N1? is the name of a starting/end point, the numerical value of 12 in the table means that the car traveling from the point named ?#N2? to the point named?#N1? has the traffic flow of 12 vehicles per time unit. The car traveling from the starting point to itself is forbidden here. And the parameter setting of the proposed data mining is presented in Table IV.

B. Simulation  In this simulation, the number of rules stored in the rule pool is compared among the proposed Generalized GNP method with Multi-branches?Full-Paths method, the Conventional Generalized GNP method and Normal GNP method. Each round has the same number of generations of 50 and the chosen set size for AAM is 100 [10], [12], [13].

Fig.6 shows the number of rules obtained in the rule pool  versus round number. In the conventional method GNP indi- viduals have only the Yes-side connection, while Generalized GNP individuals have multi-branches like Fig.3. We can see from Fig.6 that the proposed method can extract important class association rules efficiently, when compared with the conventional ones.

Although in some rounds we can obtain more than 500  rules, the average number of rules extracted per round is not high. We can see that there exist some rare cases where the consequent class does not occur so often in the entire database. In these cases, we can not obtain any association  TABLE IV  PARAMETER SETTING FOR EVOLUTION  Items Values Number of judgment nodes 100 Number of processing nodes 10 Number of attributes 224 Number of time units 800 Number of generations per Round 50 * Sub attribute set size 100 *  * : refer to [10]   0 20 40 60 80 100 120  Rounds  N um  be r of as so ci at io n  ru le s e xt ra ct e d  G eneralized GNP with M ulti-Branches?Full-Paths  ConventionalGeneralized GNP  Norm alGNP  Fig. 6. Comparison of number of rules extracted.

rules that satisfy the required criteria, so we gradually decrease the criteria of interesting rules by the proposed method. As a result, it is found that in the proposed method a proper number of the rules are obtained per each round.

Generalized GNP with Multi-Branches?Full-Paths pro-  vided more exploration ability than Conventional General- ized GNP methods, that is Conventional Generalized GNP can generate candidate rules based on the random transi- tion to Low/Middle/High sides, while Generalized GNP with Multi-Branches?Full-Paths can extracts all the possible transitions, thus stress the exploration aspect more than the Conventional Generalized GNP and Normal GNP.

As a result, Generalized GNP with Multi-Branches?Full-  Paths shows better efficiency than other GNP methods.

And we can also see that there are a number of rounds, where no rules are extracted, and in such cases, the self- adaptive mechanism adjusting the criteria of ?2min, supmin and confmin gradually round by round is useful.

C. Simulation of Prediction  In order to check the effectiveness of the extracted rules, we tested the classification accuracy of the proposed method using the classifier with competition.

A 5-fold cross validation was carried out for 5 different  databases, and we obtained the average accuracy shown Fig.7. The accuracy is defined in the following: if the traffic prediction result of the section at time t is ?Low? and the real traffic of this section at time t is exactly ?Low?, then, the accuracy is 100%. The low/middle/high accuracy means the accuracy when the real traffic is low/middle/high, respectively.

The prediction result is shown in the Fig.7    - 152 -    percentage  P re d ic tio n A cc u ra cy  O verall Low M iddle High  Fig. 7. Prediction Accuracy using the proposed method.



VI. CONCLUSION  In this paper, an association rule mining method using Generalized GNP with Multi-Branches?Full-Paths has been proposed. It is clarified from simulations that the proposed method can extract important time-related association rules for each class of the consequent attributes efficiently. What?s more important is that these rules can be used to decide to which class the time-related data belong accurately. From simulations, we have also found that the proposed method can be used in traffic prediction problems. We are now studying further improvements of our method in terms of combining the rule extracting stage and the classification stage within the rule extraction stage and using the prediction accuracy as the fitness function for the evolution.

