2009 ISECS International Colloquium on Computing, Communication, Control, and Management

Abstract?A technical scheme, which can properly arrange IDS and optimally apply the algorithms of detection and data mining to the Honeynet environment, is proposed in the building automation system completed by the author recently.

In this specific environment, the position of IDS is deployed reasonably and the anomaly and misuse detection algorithm of IDS is designed and selected optimally. Meanwhile, the misuse detection rules are updated dynamically with the combination of data-mining association rule algorithm. The design makes the classical and mature algorithms display their technical characteristics and advantages to the largest extent in the project and enable the honeynet to protect the internal control network as expected.

Keywords- detection algorithm; honeynet; association rules ;optimal design

I.  INTRODUCTION The traditional information security technology mainly  concentrated on the levels of prevention and detection against the attack, such as the firewall and IDS (Intrusion Detection System). However, both of these two technologies have limitation: the firewall conducts access control according to fixed strategies and cannot provide protection for the actions beyond the strategies; IDS can only respond at the beginning of the attack or after the attack finished. Based on the above reason, the honeynet comes into being.

The honeynet, on one hand can protect the actual working network to some extent by luring the hackers to attack themselves and on the other can monitor and track the assailants to collect their information and learn the attack tools, strategies and motives, thus playing a role of active defense in the network security. At present, the honeynet is applied to the intranet protection of the building automation system of an Olympics pilot project. With regard to the implementation technique, the system combines the traditional information security technology firework with the deception technologies such as IDS, thus realizing the overall security target of the system. According to the characteristics of the control network and the different function requirements and the deployment position of IDS in the honeynet in this specific environment, designing and selecting the detection algorithm of IDS reasonably in the honeynet is of great significance.



II.  THE DEPLOYMENT OF IDS IN THE HONEYNET The network environment of the building automation  system of an Olympics pilot project is shown in Figure 1 as below. With a vital position in the honeynet, the deployment of IDS plays a decisive role in choosing the detected objects and detection methods of IDS.

Figure1. The network environment of a building automation system  In Figure1, the main function of the external firework is to protect the Web server in DMZ area which provides services for the external network, as the first line of defense for network. This firework can conduct access control according to the rules made by itself. Meanwhile, it interacts with the intrusion detection system IDS deployed inside the network to redirect the intrusion of actual system into the honeynet system. With information control as the main function, the other internal firework arranged in front of the honeynet system is required to be ?easy enter and hard exit?.

In this environment, an IDS is deployed between the front end of the external firework and the router by the system. This IDS is used as state transfer module in the honeynet. An IDS is deployed respectively inside the honeynet and the intranet. The IDS inside the intranet is mainly responsible for the security of the intranet and realizes the detection alarm function of the traditional IDS; the IDS inside the honeynet shall finish the tasks of monitoring and tracking the assailants, collecting their information, learning their attack tools, strategies and motions in specific environment.



III. THE DESIGN OF IDS ALGORITHM  A. The Detection Algorithm of the State Transfer Module In the building automation system network environment,  an IDS is deployed between the front end of the external firework and the router and is directly connected with the     external network through the router, with the main task of assessing the dubiety of the network connections passing through. All the dubious connections are transferred into the honeynet. The IDS is used as state transfer module in the honeynet.

1)The Design of Detection Algorithm of the State Transfer Module  In the realization of state transfer module, anomaly detection algorithm which is mature at present and can be referred directly is selected. There are unique and outstanding advantages to adopt anomaly detection algorithm for the state transfer module in building control system network environment.

(1) Comparatively, there are some laws to follow for the normal behavior of the users in building automation system network environment, which facilitates abstraction and modeling. Since it mainly transfers various control information and parameters of the system through network, the normal behavior of the user is generally related to the control function and the requirements.

(2) Anomaly detection state transfer technology is adopted at the front end of the honeynet to lure all the abnormal behaviors into the honeynet, making it easy to discover new attacks. Since attack is one kind of abnormal behaviors, it is always different from normal behaviors in some aspect.

With regard to the abnormal behaviors of the subject discovered in this way, the dynamic characteristics description of the attack can be obtained through the honeynet. Due to the hysteresis of the feature database, the traditional misuse detection technology cannot show the features of the attack reasonably. Therefore, when the attack shows dynamic complexity in time and space domain and there are comparatively some laws to follow for the normal behaviors of the users, the anomaly detection algorithm is most suitable for solving this kind of problem.

Based on foreign experience in application, this system chooses to model all the bytes of the payload before calculating the deviation degree according to statistics theory.

In this way, the detection effect is greatly improved.

Network payload is a stream of byte. Unlike network data header, there is no standardized format for the payload.

Each byte can appear at any position of the load stream of byte and it is difficult to get useful information from it.

Therefore, the payload needs to be classified with the service type as the standard of classification here. Since each type of service has its own protocol, the load type is different from each other. For example: since the data transferred under FTP commands is encrypted, all the loads shall be distributed uniformly while the data transferred in Telnet service is mainly printable character. According to above analysis, the following characteristics of the payload are used for the system modeling:  Load Type (Service type); Load Length; Load Distribution.

Total Anomaly Score: AS=a?AStype?b?ASlen?c?ASpd(a?b?c=1)               (1)  In formula (1), AStype is the anomaly score of the load type; ASlen is the anomaly score of the load length; ASpd is the anomaly score of the load distribution. Parameters a, b and c are used for the percentages of all anomaly scores in the total anomaly score respectively.

2)The Anomaly Score Determination of the Anomaly Detection Algorithm of State Transfer Module  It can be seen from formula (1) that the total anomaly score is determined by the anomaly score of the load type (AStype), the anomaly score of the load length (ASlen) and the anomaly score of load distribution (ASpd).

(1) Load Type Since common services are widely used for long, they are  very safe. Therefore, attack based on cache overflow or invalid always uses the services seldom used. Therefore, this kind of service request is more likely to contain abnormal behaviors than other requests and thus higher anomaly score shall be arranged. P[type] is defined as the probability of the application of the service type. AStype decreases as P[type] increases. That is to say, the smaller probability of the application of the service type is, the higher the probability of the happening of abnormal behaviors will be. In this paper, the score of the load type is calculated as following: ])[(log 2 typepAS type ?= .

(2) Load Length The load length can successfully identify whether the  request is correct. The request generally contains the protocol information and the input provided by the user. The protocol information is very short and the request input provided by the user is also small in gereral. However, the length of request containing abnormal behavior will increase greatly.

Here, referring to the method of Krugel, taking  )5.2/()1(5.1 ?? ??=lenAS , the average value of the load length u and the standard deviation ? are both calculated in training.

(3) Load Distribution The system conducts modeling with the character in the  payload as object of research. Although the frequency of occurrences of each ASCII is different, however, there is some certain law to follow, which is more obvious after listing the relative frequencies of the 256 characters in descending order.

The relative frequencies of the listed characters are defined as character distribution. The corresponding ASCII values to the character string ?Aaaza? are ?65 97 97 122 97?.

The character distribution is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2   Figure of Character Distribution  As far as normal payload is concerned, the relative frequency in descending order will slowly drop along the X     axis in positive direction. However, in abnormal load such as the attack of acquiring shell by use of cache overflow, since the character which generates the code of shell shall be added, the frequency will drop dramatically or almost doesn?t drop.

The ideal character distribution of the normal payload is defined as Payload Distribution, which is a discrete distribution.

PD(n) is defined as the n largest frequency (n=0 is the largest). In the figure, PD(0)=0.6, PD(1)=0.2 and PD(2)=0.2.

The load distribution is calculated in training and is approximately equal to the average value of all the character distribution. The concrete algorithm is shown in formula (2), formula (3) and formula (4), where in formula (2) denotes the character distribution of each request.

),...,2,1,0()( NinPD i = (2) NPDPDPDPD N /])0(...)0()0([)0( 21 ++=      (3)  NPDPDPDPDPD N /])1(...)1()1()1([)1( 321 ++=                  (4) With regard to each request in the test phase, with the  assumption that each character distribution detected is a sample taken from the load distribution, we can determine the distance between the detected sample and the payload by use of the Statistic X2 of Pearson in Statistics.

Since the longer load has a larger value when the relative distribution is the same, l is adopted as dividend to make ASpd independent of the load length. Adjust the result by multiplying it by the constant 15 to make ASpd belong to the interval [0, 15] and get the calculation formula(7) of ASpd.

(4)The anomaly score AS is determined according to the parameters load type AStype, load length ASlen and load distribution ASpd.

])[(log 2 typepAS type ?=                       ?5? )5.2/()1(5.1 ?? ??=lenAS                           ?6?  lXAS pd /15 2 ?=                         ?7?  pdlentype ASASASAS ?+?+?= 4.03.03.0                  ( 8? The coefficient in formula (8) can be self-regulated  according to concrete network environment to differentiate the importance of the 3 parameters in detection. Compare the calculated anomaly score with the threshold set by the administrator. When it exceeds the threshold, alarm and process shall be conducted.

Test shows that when Snort system (a classical IDS system) which doesn?t contain the relevant detection rules of Code Red II is adopted to detect the test data of MIT Lincoln Lab, Snort can only detect 90 intrusions of the 95 intrusions in all; when embedding the anomaly detection module of this system into Snort detection engine, the other 5 Code Red II intrusion can also be detected. This shows that this system can improve the recognition ability of Snort on unknown intrusion, thus effectively guaranteeing the network security.

B. The Design of the Analysis Algorithm of IDS inside the Honeynet  The analysis algorithm of IDS inside the honeynet is different from that at the front end of the external firewall.

The network connections and data received and processed by IDS inside the honeynet are detected to be dubious by the status transfer module and redirected and brought in by the external firewall. Whether these dubious connections are attacks? What kind of attacks are they? When the existing attack behaviors cannot identify, the system shall make new rules through training and learning, record the new attacking measures of the hackers and update the base. With regard to the above questions, IDS inside the honeynet shall conduct analysis and give the relevant conclusion.

In order to solve the above questions and meet requirements on the IDS function, IDS constructed only by single method corresponding to the traditional mode is far from enough. On the basis of IDS analysis algorithm corresponding to the traditional mode, this system brings association rule algorithm based on the data mining technique into the extraction of the intrusion detection rules, to enable the system to continuously make new rules through training and learning for the adaption to the complex network environment in which new attacks continuously show up. Meanwhile, the protocol analysis method is adopted to reduce the data calculated amount. The association rule algorithm realization diagram based on the data mining is shown in Figure 3 below:   Figure 3  Intrusion Detection System Frame Based on the Data Mining  Technique  In Figure 3, the data pretreatment module is mainly responsible for the pretreatment of the network connection record to form a training dataset; based on data mining technique, association rule algorithm module learns the training data after update with the association rules mining algorithm and extracts the rules for the intrusion detection based on misuse; the intrusion detection module based on misuse conducts the real-time detection on the network data with the association rules as the judging basis of the misuse detection on one hand and on the other sends the detection result to the detection result process module for record, alarm and respond.

Firewall redirection of status transfer module  Network real-time dubious data  Data pretreatment  Training data   Association  rule algorithm  Misuse rules update  Intrusion detection base on  misuse   Detection result process     This article has mainly solved the updating problem of association rules by adding current data into rule database and proposed an incremental updating algorithm based on partial support tree structure??IUPS_Miner. This algorithm has adequately utilized the old association rules and established PS_Tree to mine all the new association rules. Since it is only needed to scan the newly added database once, the algorithm efficiency has been greatly upgraded.

The mining of association rules can be divided into the following two subproblems:  Find out the item set of minimum support designated by the user in the database D. The item set with minimum support is called frequent item set; on the contrary, it is called non-frequent item set.

The frequent item set shall be utilized to produce needed association rules. As for each frequent item set A, all the non-empty subsets a of A shall be found. Once the ratio support (A)/support (a) ? minimum confidence, the following association rule will be produced: a ? (A - a).

This article has aimed at addition of new data with unchanged minimum support into the database and used a highly efficient incremental updating algorithm based on PS_Tree??IUPS_Miner. This algorithm has adequately utilized all the existent information (such as old frequent item set and original PS_Tree) to highly efficiently discover all the new frequent item set. It is only needed to scan the newly added database D+ once.

Algorithm IUPS_Miner is described as follows: Input: PS_TreeD, D+, FD, s Output: FD?, PS_TreeD? Procedure: call  PS_Miner(D+?s?PS_TreeD+?FD+) FD?=CD=CD+=? for all f ? FD if f? FD+ f.sup=f.supD+f.supD+ FD? = FD?  f? else CD= CD  f?  end for CD+= FD+ - FD? for all c ? CD  deeply firstly scan PS_TreeD+ and get the c.supD+  c.supD?= c.supD + c.supD+ if c.sup D? >=|D?| * s FD? = FD?  c?  for all c ? CD+ deeply firstly scan PS_TreeD and get the c.supD  c.supD?= c.supD + c.supD+ if c.sup D? >=|D?| * s FD? = FD?  c?  PS_TreeD=MergePS_Tree(PS_TreeD, PS_TreeD+)  End D is the transactional database. D+ and D-are  transactional data set. s is minimum support . c is item set.

FD, FD+ and FD? refer to the frequent item set of D, D+ and D?.

Based on misuse, the intrusion detection module adopts misused detection algorithm. Different from the anomaly detection algorithm which can hardly conduct quantitative analysis and has uncertainty, misuse detection has the advantage of following the defined working mode, conducting the real-time detection on the network data with the classification rules as the judging basis of the misuse detection. The disadvantage of the misuse detection is that it can only detect known attack. However, based on data mining technique, the association rule algorithm can just make up for this defect.



IV. CONCLUSION Redirection technique based on anomaly detection is  adopted at the front end of the honeynet to redirect all the dubious external connection in the building control system network onto the deception host, realizing the active deception and enabling the honeynet to receive all the connection information beyond the normal network connection. With regard to the known attack in the connections entering the honeynet, the intrusion detection module based on misuse can conduct determination on the nature and process in time; the unknown attack or dubious connections shall be processed by the data mining based the association rule algorithm module, which makes new rules through learning and updates the misused rule base of the intrusion detection module, thus determining the nature of unknown attack or dubious connection.

Through the reasonable deployment of the physical position of IDS and the corresponding algorithm in the honeynet, the building automation network system of an Olympics pilot project makes the classical and mature IDS anomaly detection algorithm, misuse detection algorithm and data mining algorithm display their technical characteristics and advantages to the largest extent in application, enabling the honeynet to protect the internal control network as expected.

