An Algorithm for Mining Association Rules Based on Improved Genetic  Algorithm and its Application

Abstract - Genetic algorithm is an important algorithm of association rule mining. However, there is some issues that genetic algorithm easy to lead prematuring convergence and into the plight of local optimum,or convergence too much time and consume a large amount of time to search..For resolving this issues , the paper improves the algorithm through adopting an adaptive mutation rate and improving the methods of individual choice, and the improved genetic algorithm that applies to the mining association rules. The simulating experiments show that the improved genetic algorithm reduces the cost of computing, and improve the efficiency of association rule mining.

Key words- Data Mining;Genetic Algorithm; AssociationRule; Apriori;PrematureConvergence  INTRODUCTION  Data mining[1-2] is one of research areas of the  international database and decision-making information, of which the main purpose is to develop the relevant methods, theory and tools and to extract useful and interesting knowledge from the large amounts of data.

Association rules mining[3] is an important research area in data mining, which indicates relations among itemsets in database.With the accumulation of the data, association rule mining in large data set attracts more and more attention. Apriori algorithm is a classical algorithm of association rule mining.Lots of algorithms for mining association rules and their mutations are proposed on basis of Apriori algorithm, but apriori algorithm need to traverse the database many times, I/O overhead, and computational complexity, can not meet the requirements of large-scale database mining.

Genetic algorithm[1] is an algorithm which based on the biological theory of evolution and molecular genetics of the global random search, the algorithm has a strong randomness, robust and implicit parallelism, can be quickly and effectively search for global optimization, is an effective way to deal with large-scale data sets. At present, genetic algorithm-based data mining methods have yielded some progress, and based on genetic algorithms classification system has also yielded some results. However, genetic algorithm applies to the extraction of association rules is less. In this paper, using genetic algorithms for mining association rules, hoping to extract association rules in the method, a new attempt.

e-mail:ccyzhou@gliet.edu.cn    THE PRINCIPLE OF GENETIC ALGORITHM   Genetic algorithm is simulated in the natural environment of biological evolution and genetics and the formation of an adaptive search algorithm for global optimization probability. It was the first proposed by university of Michigan Professor Holland J. in 1975[1], the genetic algorithm in solving the large space, multi-peak, non-linear, global optimization problem of high complexity display a unique advantage. The parameters of the problem to be resolved into a binary code or the decimal code (Also into other hexadecimal code) that the gene, a number of genes form a chromosome (individual), a number of chromosomes is similar to natural selection, crossover and mutation matching algorithms, after repeated iteration (that is, hereditary from generation to generation) until the final results of the optimization. The use of genetic algorithms to solve the problem involved the following seven key factors[1,8] encoding ,fitness function ,selection operator ,the crossover operator ,mutation operator ,control parameters .

.THE DEFINITION OF ASSOCIATION RULES  The concept of the association rules was first  proposed by R.Agrawal.It is used to describe the patterns of customers' purchase in the supermarket.The association rules can be formally defined as[3-7] Definition 1: Let I={i1,i2,i3,?.in}be finite itemsets. D is a transactional database. Where ik (k?{1,2,?...m})is an item,and Tid is the exclusive identifier of transaction T in transactional database.

Definition 2: Let X ? I,Y ? I, and X ? Y = ? .The implication of the form X=>Y is called an association rules. Where X ? I, Y ? I are purchases patterns of customer.

Definition 3:Let D is a transactional database.If the percentage of transactions in D that contain X? Y is s%,the rule X=>Y holds in D with Support s.If the percentage of transactions in D containing X that also contain Y is c%,the rule X=>Y has Confidence c.The definitions of probability are,  ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )( ) ( | )  ( ) ( )  Sup x y Sup x y p y T x T Sup x ycon x y p y T x T  p x T Sup x  ? ? ?  ?  ? ? 	 	 ? ?      DOI 10.1109/WGEC.2009.15    DOI 10.1109/WGEC.2009.15     Rules that satisfy both minimum support threshold (minsup)and minimum confidence threshold (minconf) are called strong rules.

Definition 4: If the support of itemsets X is greater than or equal to minimum support threshold, X is called frequent itemsets.If the support of itemsets X is smaller than the minimum support threshold,X is called infrequent  itemsets.

IMPROVED GENETIC ALGORITHM AND ITS APPLICATION[1-8]   The program of premature is a phenomenon that can  not be ignored in genetic algorithm, and A concrete manifestation of it as follows: 1) All of the individual in groups stopped the evolution at the same extreme value; 2) The individual of closing to the optimal solution always be eliminated, not convergent in the process of evolution.

In order to solve these two problems: 1) A method of adaptiving mutation rate to avoid excessive variation causing non-convergence, or into a local optimal solution; 2) A sort of individual-based selection method,it will be applied to the evolution of the latter in genetic algorithm, in order to prevent the high-fitness individuals convergencing early by the rapid growth of the number of individual and differences is too small.

A    Adaptive Mutation Rate In the early stages of  genetic algorithm evolution,  such as the use of a fixed mutation probability Pm, when Pm values is small, mutation operator does not have an impact on the group and conducive to introduce a new genes; when Pm value is great, it could undermine the group's excellent genes, the algorithm does not even slow down the convergence. Here, a method of adaptive mutation rate, in the early stages of evolution and mutation rate are used as follows:  ( 1) ( ) 2 max  ( 1) 0 1  ( ) ( ) 2 max   ( )  ( )  m n m  i n i  m m m n n  i i  f f p p  f f ?  ?  ? ?  ?   ?    ?  ?   n mp is the nth generation mutation rate,  ( 1)n mp ? is the  (n+1)th generation mutation rate.the first  generation  mutation rate is 0mp .

( )m  if  is the fitness of the nth  individual stocks i. ( 1)max nf ?  is the highest fitness of the  (n+1)th individual stocks. ( )nif is the fitness of the nth  individual i.m is the number of individual stocks. ? is the adjustment factor.

This genes will make an excellent over-population variation caused by the destruction of the convergence too long time, and conducive to the introduction of new genes to prevent precocious to be trapped in local optimum, thereby enhancing the performance of the genetic algorithm.

The Method of Improving Individual Choice Used a phase-out method to improve the choice,  applied to the latter part of the genetic algorithm: 1) The size of the fitness of individual choice selection sort; 2) Before the 1/4 copy 2 of the individual, the former 1/4-2/4 part of individual copy 1, enter to the next round of selection; 3)Before the 2/4-3/4 part of the individual reservations, enter to the next round of selection; 4) Before the 3/4-4/4 out part of the individual is no longer into the next round of selection.

Improved Genetic Algorithm for Mining Association Rules  Genetic Algorithm Encoding Encoding is the most basic question in the genetic  algorithm. A good encoding method will make crossover and mutation genetic manipulation easier to achieve.

When we found an association rule such as A1 A2 ?.

An =>B1 B2 ? Bn. In fact, is found such a rule in the database : A1 A2 ?.

An and B1 B2 ? Bn are true at the same time when the percentage of the entire affairs is greater than the support given by users .and B1 B2 ? Bn is true in the conditions A1 A2 ?.

An is true,and the probability of confidence greater than the confidence given by user. (A1, A2, ... An; B1, B2, ... Bn) is a database field in affairs.

In this paper,a method of array is used to encode.The number of elements in the array will corresponds with the number of fields in the database.The value of elements represents of the attribute of element. such as the database shown in table 1.

TABLE 1  THE STRUCTURE OF DATABASE   Field 1 Field 2 ??. Field n Attribute  Attribute  ??.. Attribute 1n  ?? ?? ?? ??..

Attribute n1  Attribute n2  ??. Attribute nn   The array,with a length of n to indicate the individual code in database.A[1] that the field 1,A[2] that the field 2??A[R] that the field R.The value of attribute will be indicated by the value of numeric.such as:MR is the value of attribute will be indicated by the value of numeric MR. This can be used an array A [N] to indicate the elements corresponding to the value of the attribute.

In addition,using the value of 0 indicates that this attribute unrelated with other attributes. Encoding as     shown in table 2:  TABLE 2  THE STRUCTURE OF ENCODING ARRAY  A[1] A[2] ??? A[R] 0-M1 0-M2 ???. 0-M(R)   Array with real coding,coding is not only simple,  easy to implement, but also to facilitate the operation of genetic operators. Such coding, the crossover and mutation operation will into the operation of the array.

The Structure of the Fitness Function The problem of mining association rule is to find the  minimum support and confidence association rules in database. Evaluation of a rule by support and confidence.

Here is the definition of fitness function: fitness (x) = a * Sup (x) + b * Con (x); x is one of the variables for the  . a, b, respectively, for the support and confidence in the evaluation of the share of rules. When individuals can not be interpreted as a legitimate rule, that is useless and fitness = 0 and the value of a,b need to adjust by user.

Evaluation and Extraction of Rules In order to evaluate whether a rule was found to meet  the objectives of the rules through an evaluation function to calculate the individual's support and confidence , and thus determine whether the individual rules you want.

Operating in the algorithm, fitness for any higher than a specified value of the individual, the rule need the evaluation function to evaluate it. If the rules meet the requirements of individual, assuming that support is greater than 0.1 and the confidence is more than 0.8, will be deposited in its rule base. After the end of the algorithm, also need phase out redundant rules in rule base, the last rule remain in the rule base is the final rule.

Description of the Algorithm step 1: the initial population p(0); access to the support S and the confidence C are given by user; step 2: calculating the individual fitness to the current population p(t) ; step 3: on the current population p(t) to improve the choice of the individual to choose the operate; step 4: cross-operation to the current population p(t); step 5: mutation to the current population p(t); step 6: generate a new population p(t+1); step 7: compare to the termination algebra T, if the the conditions of termination to meet, then terminate and output rules, or to Step 2.

. SIMULATION AND ANALYSIS  Discussed above, an example of this algorithm to  verify the feasibility and effectiveness. we have collected a database of student achievement in schools in recent years.we hope that the mining model in this paper can mine the association information on student achievement.

The first step:before the data mining, due to the complexity of the data itself,usually preprocessing the data first, and then mining. The customer information  will be put in a temporary table for pre-encoding through SQL statement. The data in the temporary table will be extracted to the mining base.

The second step: To determine the possible factors that affect students achievement, and then encoding the data. Showing in table 3.

TABLE 3  INFLUENCING FACTORS AND CODING MAP  Influencing factors encoding gender Boy 00  girl 01 The grade of college entrance examination  High 00 common 01 Pass 10  Student cadre Yes 00  no 01 The performance in peacetime  Excellence 00 good 01 Common 10 poor 11  The difficulty of course  Difficulty 00 common 01 easy 10  The nature of course Compulsory00 elective  The teacher of course Professoroo associate professor01 teacher10 assistant 11  The grade of final examination  Excellence 00 good 01 Common 10 poor 11   Note: 5 101 on behalf of factors which have been selected, 6 101 have not been selected.

The third step:parameter settings: the fitness function fitness (x) = a * Sup (x) + b * Con (x) the coefficient is set to a = 0.5, b = 1, the minimum support threshold of 0.1, minimum confidence threshold of  0.7, population 200, crossover probability Pc is 0.9, mutation probability Pm is 0.01. The part of the association rules were obtained after the run.

<110 00 00 00 110 110 110><00> <45%support,79%confidence> < The grade of college entrance examination: hing Student cadre:yes The performance in peacetime: excellence  The grade of final examination: excellence> <110  110 110 01 110 00 110><01> <20%support,85%confidenc> < The performance in peacetime: good  The nature of course:compulsory> <good> <110  110 110 00  00 110 00><01> <12%support,90%confidenc> < The performance in peacetime: excellence  The difficulty of course:difficulty  The teacher of course: professor> <good>  We can see from the above rules that the algorithm based on the support and confidence threshold value of 0.1 and 0.7 closed to the actual situation.

In the figure1, the horizontal axis represents the number of support in database and the vertical axis represents mining time of the same database with the algorithm Apriori and Improved genetic algorithm.The two curves denote different time cost of the algorithm Apriori and improved genetic algorithm with different minsup.

The new algorithm reduces the number of unnecessary operations,streamline the collection of frequent generation and improve the efficiency of the algorithm.

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4  support  tim e   Figure .1. The test results of apriori and the improved  genetic algorithm  . CONCLUSIONS  In this paper, an algorithm for mining association rule  based on the improved genetic algorithm is applied to the extraction of association rules, and gives an improved genetic algorithm for mining association rules for example. The simulation results show the effectiveness and feasibility of algorithms.

