

Abstract: Rough concept lattice (RCL) is a new concept lattice,  which can deal with uncertainty knowledge. It is an effective tool for data analysis and knowledge discovery. But some objects that in upper approximation extent of RCL are so uncertainty that makes the accuracy of association rules reduced. In this case, based on decision context, we construct a L- plumpness concept lattice ( RCLLp ? ), in whose upper approximation extent objects at least satisfy L attributes in order to improve the efficiency of extraction rules. And we get the algorithm for ?Lp Association Rules.

Key words:  Rough concept lattice; ?Lp set; Association rules  1. Introduction   Concept Lattice also called Galois lattice or Formal Concept Analysis[1,2] is an effective tool for data analysis, which is first proposed by Wille R in 1982. Every node of the concept lattice is a formal concept, and is composed by two parts: Intent (the express of the concept) and extent (the objects that covered by the intent).

Concept lattice, as a tool for data analysis, is complete and accurate. In one hand, the intent of a node describes the common attributes exactly which the objects in the extent have, it?s an advantage of concept lattice[3].

In the other hand, it?s hard to reflect the probable objects that are included in extent, so it results a limitation for concept lattice to deal with some specific knowledge. In fact, in many areas, some probable objects included in intent are often used. So to represent the inaccurate and uncertain knowledge is valuable in theory and application.

Nowadays, concept lattice is investigated in many aspects by domestic and foreign scholars. On this background, Rough concept lattice appears[4,5]. It is a new concept for solving the uncertain problems in some extent. Based on decision formal context, it uses the upper and lower approximation in rough set theories to express the extent  which depends on the intent of concept lattice[6,7]. Then for specific intent, in its corresponding extent it can represent probable objects covered by certain attributes.

That means the rough concept lattice has the ability of expressing the uncertain knowledge.

But in the extent of rough concept lattice, some objects probably satisfy only one or a few attributes of intent. In fact, these objects are nonsense, and when using concept lattice for extracting rules, the accuracy and the efficiency are also reduced.  So, in this paper, based on rough concept lattice we propose a new concept lattice, L- plumpness concept lattice, it asks that the objects included in extent at least satisfy L attributes. In that case, it can describe the uncertain knowledge and at same time it improves the efficiency of extraction of  association rulesLp ? . In the end, we give the algorithm of mining association rulesLp ? .

2. Rough concept lattice   Suppose triple ( ), ,Ks O C D R= ? is a decision context, where O  is a finite nonempty objects set, C  is a finite nonempty condition attributes set, D  is a finite nonempty decision attributes set, and C D = ?? , R is the binary relation between O and C D? , then it assigned a unique partially ordered set. And it can form a kind of general concept lattice structure L.

Def1.1 Suppose the decision context ( ), ,Ks O C D R= ? , defines the operators ,f g :  ( ) { }, ,x O f x y y C D xRy? ? = ? ? ? , i.e. f  is the mapping from object to all its attributes.

( ) { }, ,y C D g x x x O xRy? ? ? = ? ? , i.e. g  is the mapping from attribute to all the objects that covered by the attribute.

Def 1.2 Suppose the decision context ( ), ,Ks O C D R= ? , for ,Y C D? ? ?      ( ){ } ( ){ }, , ,M x x O f x Y N x x O f x Y Y= ? ? ? ? = ? ? =? ? , the triple  ( ), ,M N Y form a node of concept lattice L, then L is called Rough Concept Lattice(RCL) induced by the decision context. Y, the description of concept, is called intent; M is called Upper Approximation Extent, expressing the objects set that probably covered by intent;  N is called Lower Approximation Extent, expressing the objects set that satisfy all the attributes;  Def 1.3 Suppose triple ( ), ,M N Y  is a node of RCL,  ( ) /Y N M? =  expresses the approximate accuracy of the objects, which covered by attributes set Y, for the assigned equivalence relation, and ( ) ( )1e Y Y?= ?  is the corresponding roughness.

After analyzing the generation algorithm of concept lattice in [4,5] refs, we found that for every node generated in the algorithm, some objects contained in the upper approximation extent are so uncertain that the approximate accuracy of the objects, which covered by the intent of the node, for the assigned equivalence relation is too low, and that will reduce the effectiveness of the following mining association rules. Consider this question; we propose the concept of the set?Lp  in this paper, and based on it, association rulesLp ?  are formed.

3. Lp Association rules?   3.1. Lp set?   Def 2.1 Suppose ( ), ,Ks O C D R= ? is the decision context, for Y C D? ? ? and Y m= ,  ( ) ( ){ }, , 1, 2, ,lYM x x O f x Y l l m= ? ? ? =?  is called Lp set? , where operator ( )f x  is  ( ) { }, ,f x y x O y C D xRy= ? ? ? ? ? .

Def 2.2 Suppose ( ), ,Ks O C D R= ? ,defines the upper  Approximation and lower Approximation of ( )lYM  as ( )( ) [ ] ( ){ }l lY YRR M x O x M= ? ?  and ( )( ) [ ] ( ){ }l lY YRR M x O x M ?= ? ??  Properties Suppose ( ), ,Ks O C D R= ? is the decision context, for  1 2, ,Y Y Y C D? ? ? and 1 1 2 2, , ,Y m Y m Y m= = =  ? ( ) ( ) ( )1 2 mY Y YM M M? ? ? ? If 1 2 ,Y Y? 1 2 ,Y m= 2 2Y m= , then  ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )1 1 2 1 2 1 2 1  1 1 2 2, , , m mY Y Y Y Y YM M M M M M? ? ? ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1  1 1 1 1, , ,m m m m m mY Y Y Y Y YM M M M M M ? ? ? +? ? ?  ?for Y C D? ? ? , ( )( ) ( ) ( )( )l l lY Y YR M M R M= = , 1, 2, ,l m? = Proof? From ( )( ) [ ] ( ) ( ) ( )( ) ( )l l l l li Y i Y i Y Y YRx R M x M x M R M M? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Fro m ( ) [ ] ( ) ( )( ) ( ) ( )( )l l l l li Y i Y i Y Y YRx M x M x R M M R M? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? So  ( ) ( )( )l lY YM R M= ? Obviously, ( ) ( )( )l lY YM R M? ? And also ( )( ) [ ] ( )l li Y i YRx R M x M ?? ? ? ?? Assume [ ] ( )lj i YRx x M? ? ? , Because ,i jx x  are indiscernibly by R and  ( ) ( )( ) ( )l l li Y Y YY C D x M R M M? ? ? ? ? ? .

So ( ) ( )( )l lY YM R M= .

3.2. Lp rough concept lattice?   Def 2.3  Suppose ( ), ,Ks O C D R= ? is the decision context, forY C D? ? and Y m= , ( ) ( ){ }, , 1, 2, ,lYM x x O f x Y l l m= ? ? ? =? ,then the triple ( ) ( )( ), ,l mY YM M Y  form a node of concept lattice L, is called Lp rough concept lattice? .

Remark: 1) Lp rough concept lattice?  is complete about relation R.

2)Suppose ( ) ( )( )1 11 11 1, ,l mY YH M M Y= , ( ) ( )( )2 22 22 2, ,l mY YH M M Y= are two different nodes of Lp rough concept lattice? , then  1 2 2 1H H Y Y> ? ? Obviously, ( )mYM N= Especially, when L=1, the concept lattice talked above become a general rough concept lattice, that is ( )mYM N= .

Similarly, there is the definition of the approximate accuracy of the Lp rough concept lattice?  like approximate accuracy of the rough concept lattice.

3.3. Lp association rules?   Lp rough concept lattice?  is a generalization of rough concept lattice, and it embody the uniform of intent and its L-upper approximation extent and lower approximation extent. The intent of a node of the Lp rough concept lattice? can extract a classification rule,      and the L-upper approximation extent and lower approximation extent of the node is its support objects set.

Suppose a node ( ) ( )( ), ,L mY YH M M Y extracts a classification rule r, then r is called association rulesLp ?  which is extracted from Lp rough concept lattice? .

By anglicizing theorem in [4] refs, we know in every node of the rough concept lattice, the accuracy of the rule which is extracted from the node is the approximate accuracy of the node itself. For the general rough concept lattice, the lower the accuracy is, the more uncertain the rule is, and when the accuracy is zero, the rule is nonsense.

So there need a accuracy threshold ? , just when the accuracy is greater than or equal to ? , we think the rule as a effective rule. During the progress of mining association rulesLp ? , suppose the accuracy of a rule is ( ) ( )Lr Y? ?= . But as we discussed above,  association rulesLp ? is L-grade accuracy that means this kind of concept lattice has been kept precision in some extent during the formation process. In this case, we need not to give the accuracy threshold in advance.

4. The extraction algorithm of L-plumpness association  rule   Based on CARCL, we get the construct algorithm of L-plumpness rough concept lattice (CALPRCL) and an extraction algorithm of L- plumpness association rule (EALPCR) as follows: CALPRCL:  (1)Input the value L (may let L=m-1); Find all the concept (intent) from the decision context, then get the nodes set P of the concept lattice. In order to make it easy to express and implement the algorithm, suppose every node is a sextuple ( ), , , , ,ML Mm Y Parent Children No , where the initial are none except intent Y; (2)For the intent of a node of P, get m-1 attributes from intent, and traversal all records, then find the objects which at least satisfy the m-1 attributes, and add them into the L-upper approximation extent ML of the corresponding node;(3) For the intent of a node of H, traversal all records, then find the objects which satisfy all the attributes of the intent, and add them into the lower approximation extent Mm of the corresponding node; (4)Structure the Root and Twig, then insert another nodes into the lattice progressively as newly added nodes.

EALPCR?  (1)Input LPRCL, define every node as a sextuple ( ), , , , ,ML Mm Y Parent Children Depth ; (2)For every  sub nodes of the Root H, traversal all its successor nodes to find a bottom node H ?  whose upper approximation extent is same to the node H (If there are several bottom nodes satisfy condition, just choose anyone);(3)Make all the condition attribute of intent of the node H ?  as the left part of the rule, all the decision attribute string as the right part, then we can get a rule r(If can?t find H ? , extract the rule from the intent of H).

5. Conclusion   Lp rough concept lattice?  is also express the certain or uncertain relationship between the objects and characteristics. Also it diminishes the uncertain extent and rejects some objects that have a great uncertainty, which has improved the precision. In this case, the accuracy of the association rulesLp ?  is ensured without setting the accuracy threshold in advance. But that just a preliminary study, there are lots of questions need further investigated, such that how to set L scientifically; how to reduce the intent of Lp rough concept lattice? ; how to portray the links between the concepts. These will be studied in the future.

Acknowledgements  This paper is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Hebei Province (No. F2006000377)  References  [1] Wille R. Restructuring lattice theory: an approach based on hierarchies of concepts. In:Rival I ed.

Ordered sets. Dordrecht: reidel,1982,415-470  [2] Godin R, Missaoui R. An incremental concept formation approach for learning from databases [J].

Theoretical Computer Science, 1994,133(5):387-419.

[3] HU ke-yun, LU yu-chang, SHI chun-yi,  Advances In Concept Lattice and Its Application. Journal of Tsinghua University (Science and Technology), 2000,40(9)?77-81  [4] YANG hai-feng, ZHANG ji-fu, Rough concept lattice and construction arithmetic, Computer Engineering and Applications, 2007, 43(24): 172-  [5] YANG hai-feng. Rough concept lattice and the Study on Approaches of Mining Classification Rules, Taiyuan University of Science and Technology Master Degree Thesis, 2007.4  [6] ZHANG wen-xiu, and WEI zhi-wei, Rough Set      Theory and Method, Beijing: Science Press, 2001.

