A Novel Data Mining Algorithm for Web-based Learning Community

Abstract?Web-based learning community allow educators to study how students learn (descriptive studies) and which learning strategies are most effective (causal/predictive studies).

Since web-based learning community are capable of collecting vast amounts of student profile data, data mining and knowledge discovery techniques can be applied to find interesting relationships between attributes of students, assessments, and the solution strategies adopted by students. In this paper, we propose a new coevolutionary algorithm for the discovery of interesting association rules within a web-based learning community. Three coevolutionary operators are designed and the mining algorithm is realized in this paper.

According to experimentation, the algorithm has been found suitable for association rule mining of the web-based learning community.

Keywords-Data Mining; Coevolutionary Algorithm; Learning Community

I.  INTRODUCTION Presently, the amount of data stored in databases is  increasing at a tremendous speed. This gives rise to a need for new techniques and tools to aid humans in automatically and intelligently analyzing huge data sets to gather useful information. This growing need gives birth to a new research field called Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) or Data Mining, which has attracted attention from researchers in many different fields including database design, statistics, pattern recognition, machine learning, and data visualization.

Our motivation in this paper is gaining the best technique for extracting useful information from large amounts of data in an web-based learning community, in general. The goals for this paper are: to obtain an optimal predictive model for students within such systems, help students use the learning resources better, based on the usage of the resource by other students in their groups, help instructors design their curricula more effectively, and provide the information that can be usefully applied by instructors to increase student learning.

Many data mining methods have been proposed such as association rule mining, sequential pattern mining, calling path pattern mining, text mining, temporal data mining, spatial data mining, etc.

Association rule mining, as originally proposed in with its apriori algorithm (ARMA), has developed into an active research area. Many additional algorithms have been  proposed for association rule mining. Also, the concept of association rule has been extended in many different ways, such as generalized association rules, association rules with item constraints, sequence rules etc. Apart from the earlier analysis of market basket data, these algorithms have been widely used in many other practical applications such as customer profiling, analysis of products and so on.

Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) is one self-adaptive optimization searching algorithm. EA obtains the best solution, or the most satisfactory solution through generations of chromosomes? constant evolution includes the reproduce, crossover and mutation etc. operation, until a certain termination condition is coincident .

Association rules mining Algorithm Based on a Multi- objective Coevolutionary Algorithm (ARMEA) is an optimal algorithm combing EA with ARMA.

The contributions of this paper are: We take advantage of the evolutionary algorithm (EA) designed specifically for discovering association rules. We propose a novel mining algorithm, called ARMEA. The ARMEA algorithm avoids generating impossible candidates, and therefore is more efficient in terms of the execution time.



II. ASSOCIATION RULES Definition 1 confidence  Set up I={i1,i2,im}for items of collection, for item in ij(1?j?m), (1?j?m) for lasting item, D={T1,TN} it is a trade collection, Ti?I (1?i?N) here T is the trade.

Rule r ? q is probability that concentrates on including in the trade.

The association rule here is an implication of the form r ?q where X is the conjunction of conditions, and Y is the type of classification. The rule r?  q has to satisfy specified minimum support and minimum confidence measure .

The support of Rule r ? q is the measure of frequency both r and q in D  S(r) = |r|/|D|                                                   (1) The confidence measure of Rule r ? q is for the premise  that includes r in the bargain descend, in the meantime includes q  C(r ? q) =S(rq) /S(r)                                      (2) Definition 2 Weighting support  Designated ones project to collect I = {i1, i2, im}, each project ij is composed with the value wj of right(0?wj ?1, 1?j  2009 International Symposium on Intelligent Ubiquitous Computing and Education  DOI 10.1109/IUCE.2009.135   2009 International Symposium on Intelligent Ubiquitous Computing and Education  DOI 10.1109/IUCE.2009.135     ?m). If the rule is r ? q, the weighting support is 1( ) ( )w j  i r S r w S r  k ? = ?                          (3)  And, the K is the size of the Set rq of the project. When the right value Wj is the same as ij, we calculating the weighting including rule to have the same support.



III. MULTI-OBJECTIVE EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHM Association rule mining can be considered as a multi-  objective problem, rather than as a single objective one.

Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) is a self-adaptive optimization searching algorithm. EA obtains the best solution, or the most satisfactory solution through generations of chromosomes constant evolution includes reproduction, crossover and mutation etc.

The use of multi-objective optimization recognizes that most practical problems require a number of design criteria to be satisfied simultaneously, i.e.

min ( ) x  F x ??    where x = [ x1 , x 2 , . - . xn]and R define the set off  free variables, x, subject to any number of constraints and F(x) = [ f 1 ( x ) , f 2(x),.. ,fn(x)] are design objectives to be minimized . In most cases, the objective functions are in conflict, so the reduction of one objective function leads to the increase in another. Subsequently, the result of the multi- objective optimization is known as a Pareto-optimal solution.

A Pareto-optimal solution has the property that it is not possible to reduce any of the objective functions without increasing at least one of the other objective functions. Here the concept of the Pareto-optimal set is defined: Definition: Let x0,x1,x2?? a) x1 is said to be dominated by (or inferior to) x2 , if f ( x 1 ) is partially less than f ( x 2 ) , i.e., fi ( x1) ?fi(x2),?i=1,?p, and fi ( x1) >fi(x2),?i=1,?p.

b) x0 is the Pareto-optimal (or non-dominated), if there doesn't exist any x?? such that x dominates x0 .

Here is the general description of this problem:  F(r) =a? S(r) ?+b?C(r) + c ?A(r)                                 (4) a,b,c is constants ,a ?0,b?0, c?0,S(r) is the support ,and  C(r) is the confidence ,A(r) is the mantle.



IV. OUR DATA MINING ALGORITHM  A. Encoding This paper employs natural numbers to encode the  variable Aij. That is, the number of the lines of every range in the matrix A in which the element 1 exists is regarded as a gene. The genes are independent of each other. They are marked by A1, A2,?,Aj,?,An, in which Aj?[1,m], j?[1,n] and An may be a repeatedly equal natural number.

When the distributive method at random is employed to produce the initial population comprised of certain individuals, the population must be in a certain scale in order to achieve the optimal solution on the whole. The best way is  the generated M individuals randomly that the length is n, and then the chromosome bunch encoded by the natural number is calculated as the initial population.

B. Fitness value definition and selection Zitzler?s fitness evaluation value method is adopted to  calculate fitness of individual. This paper proposes method to use an external population to perform elitism. Supposing the number of current population Pt is N, and fitness value calculation method is as follows.

Formula (4) is properly transformed into:  min min  ( ) ( )( ) s c S r C rF r W W S C  = ? + ?               (5)  Here, Wc+Ws=1, Wc ?0, Ws ?0, Smin, is minimum support, and Cmin is minimum confidence.

Step1: defining the Pareto optimal solution set as p(Pt), and calculating the fitness value for random  i p? (Pt) .

Step2: calculating fitness value of Pt| p(Pt).

Individual selection method is as follows.

Step1: selecting i and j from Pt at random.

Step2: if F(i) ? F(j), letting Pt+1?Pt+1+(i), or else  Pt+1?Pt+1+(j).

C. Reproduction Operator Reproduction is the transmission of personal information  from the father generation to the son generation. Each individual in each generation determines the probability that it can reproduce the next generation according to how big or small the fitness value is. Through reproducing, the number of excellent individuals in the population increases constantly, and the whole process of evolution head for the optimal direction. We are adopting roulette selection strategy; each individual reproduction probability is proportion to fitness value.

1) Compute the reproduction probability of all the individuals   ( )( ) ( )  M  i  f iP i f i  =  =  ? (6)  2) Generate a number r randomly, r=random [0, 1] ; 3) If P(0)+ P(1)+?+ P(i-1)<r< P(0)+ P(1)+?+P(i),the individual i is selected into the next generation.

D. Pareto neighborhood crossover operator Supposing(x1,x2,?xn)belongs to Pt, an individual(r1,r2,?rn)  is chosen randomly in St, which is substituted by an individual (z1,z2,?zn) generated according to the following formula.

(0,1) ( ), 1,2,...i i i iz r U r x i n= + ? ? =                     (7) Therein, U(0, 1) represents the random number of 0 or1.

Sign ?+?  expresses logic and operation; Sign ? -? expresses logic or operation.

E.  Combination operator Supposing two parents population pta=(x1a,x2a,?xMa)and  ptb=(x1b,x2b,?xMb), which Pareto optimal solution sets are respectively Sta and Stb, for any individual (x1a,x2a,?xna)of pta , we randomly choose(r1a,r2a,?rna) in Stb , and generate a new individual (z1a,z2a,?zna)according to the formula (8), which will produce offspring population pt+1a.

(0,1) ( ), 1, 2,...a b b ai i i iz r U r x i n= + ? ? =              (8) Similarly, we also generate offspring population pt+1b.

F. Annexing operator Supposing pta=(x1,x2,?xM) ,ptb=(z1,z2,?zN)are two  parents population, their Pareto optimal solution sets are respectively Sta and  Stb , if meeting the following conditions:      ?x?Sta,?z?Sta,z x is shown as   (Stb  Sta ) , then when the population Ptb annexes Pta , it can produce a new population Pt+1b=(L1,L2,?LN+M).Therein, Li=Zi, i=1,2,?,N andLi,i=N,N+1,?N+M is calculated by the formula (9).

(0,1) ( ), 1, 2,...ij j j i Njl r U r x j n?= + ? ? =  (9)  G. Mutation Operator Here is the definition of the mutations operator,  computing the mutation probability Pm   1 2  max   ( )( )    m m m  m  m  p p f fP f f f fP  p f f  ? ? ? ? ? ? ?=?  ? ? ?  (10)  Here, pm1=0.1, pm2=0.001, fmax is the maximum fitness value of the population,  f  is the average fitness value of the population.

H. Termination Condition When the matching condition is not coincident, the  process will naturally stop.



V. EXPERIMENTS To check the research capability of the operator and its  operational efficiency, such a simulation result is given compared with the Apriori Algorithm, The platform of the simulation experiment is a Dell power Edge2600 server (double Intel Xeon 1.8GHz CPU,1G memory , RedHat Linux 9.0).

A. Comparison of time used between our algorithm and Apriori  Algorithm  The result of experiment in figure 3 shows that our algorithm is more efficient than Apriori Algorithm. The time used with the Apriori Algorithm increases sharply with the increase of data amount, otherwise, the other method takes less time. In this experiment, the original support and the original compatibility are both set to 4%.

The results vary with the specific databases                        20                    40                     60                     80 Data (M byte)  Our algorithm                        Apriori algorithm Figure 1. Comparison of time used between two algorithms  B. Experiment  for fetching knowledge With Apriori Algorithm, the amount of knowledge  increases homogeneously when time lasts, and you can exhaust the rules in a predetermined conditions, The amount of knowledge changing with the time is shown in figure 2 with the time lasts, the amount of knowledge will tend to stable.

AA       Time(minute) Figure 2. amount of knowledge increase along with the time

VI. CONCLUSIONS The data mining of Web-based Learning Community is  a young research area and it is necessary more specialized and oriented work educational domain in order to obtain a similar application success level to other areas, such as medical data mining, mining e-commerce data, etc. In this paper, we propose an association rules mining based on a multi-objective coevolutionary algorithm, designed specifically for discovering association rules. We compare the results of our algorithm with the results of ARMA, and, it is better than ARMA. The main problem of Association Rules is its low efficiency with large item sets. To  Tim e (m  inute)  A m  ount of know ledge     optimize the method with multi-objective coevolutionary algorithm, although the precision decreased a little, the efficiency increased a lot. We believe that some future mining tools more easy to use by educators.

