Association Pattern Based Prediction for Moving  Objects

Abstract?This paper addresses the prediction for moving objects when the motions of the objects having some associations. In the real world, the moving objects often have some associations with other objects. Unfortunately, existing techniques for moving objects prediction are designed for single independent object, and ignore the associations between the moving objects. This paper firstly defines an association pattern based prediction model, which uses the association patterns of the moving objects to predict the trajectory of the moving objects, and then presents the Association Pattern based Prediction algorithm (APP algorithm) for moving objects. Theoretical analyses results show that, the APP algorithm has good efficiency for predicting moving objects.

Keywords-moving objects; predictio; association pattern

I. INTRODUCTION Moving objects prediction is important for many emerging  applications including traffic supervision, flight control, mobile computing, etc, and this issue has been studied for a long time(e.g., [1~15]).

Existing related researches of the moving objects prediction focus on the single independent object prediction with various conditions, including with or without the motion patterns, near or distant prediction time etc. However, in the real world, most motions of objects are not independent, and always have some associations with other objects. For example, in observing the activities of wild animals, when a group of deer moves their habitat form one place to another, the nearby wolves often follow. For this case, the motion of the deer group is helpful for the wolves? motion predictions. Unfortunately, existing techniques for moving objects prediction ignore the associations between the moving objects, and can?t use them to improve the efficiency of prediction.

In this paper, we address the prediction for moving objects when the motions of the objects having some associations.

Firstly, we define an association pattern based prediction model, which uses the association patterns of the moving objects to predict the trajectory of the moving objects, and then present the Association Pattern based Prediction algorithm (APP algorithm) for moving objects, finally, we give the theoretical analyses of the APP algorithm, which show that, the our algorithm has good efficiency for predicting moving objects.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II defines the model of association pattern based prediction for moving objects formally. Section III introduces our new Association Pattern based Prediction algorithm (APP algorithm), and give the theoretical analyses of APP algorithm.

Finally, Section IV concludes the paper.



II. ASSOCIATION PATTERN BASED PREDICTION MODEL Pattern based prediction is one of the main methods of  moving objects prediction. Existing pattern based prediction methods use the discrete Markov model [10], spatio-temporal association rules [8, 13, 14, 15], and sequential patterns [12, 14] etc. However, these methods are designed for single independent object prediction, and can?t use the associations between the moving objects to improve the efficiency of prediction.

In this section, we present an association pattern based prediction model, which uses the association rules of the moving objects not only the objects to be predicted but also other association objects to predict the trajectory of the moving objects.

Definition 1. (Moving Object Trajectory). A moving object trajectory sr is the space-time motion sequential of object s : )...(... 21,,, 2211 mtjtjtj tttsss mm <<<??? ><><>< , where  )1(, mis ii tj ??>< denotes that object s  appears in region ij at time it .

Definition 2. (Single Moving Object Trajectory Pattern). A single moving object trajectory pattern p is a special association rule of the form: ><??? nn tj  cs sr , , where sr is a moving object trajectory of object s called the premise of p , >< nn tjs ,  is the consequence of p , confidence  c means that when the premise occurs, the consequence will also occur with probability c .

We use a special region allRegion  to denote all regions. In a single moving object trajectory pattern, if one of  )1(, mis ii tj ??>< has not impact on the consequence, the let alli Regionj ? , which means object s can appears at anywhere at time it .

Definition 3. (Association Trajectory Pattern).

Let },...,,{ 21 ksssS =  is an association object set of the target object )1( kwsw ?? , let ksssS rrrR ...21 ??=  is a moving object trajectory of S , where ,1(...

,2,21,1 kisssr iiis  mtimjtjitji i ?????=  ><><><  )...21 mttt <<< . An association trajectory pattern w sP  is a  special association rule of the form: ><  ??? ntnj  w cS sR  , , which  means that when the premise SR occurs, the consequence of object ws appearing in region nj at time nt  will also occur with probability c .

In Definition 3, the target object ws is an element of the association object set S , which means that, in the association trajectory pattern, we not only take into account the trajectory of the target object, but also other related objects which impact the trajectory  of the target object.

Noted that, in Definition 2 and Definition 3, the consequence only has one item, this is because we always select the highest confidence pattern in the patterns with the same premise. We prove as following that, the patterns with multiple consequence items are needless for prediction.

Theorem 1. For a moving object trajectory SR and a target object ws , if ><><>< ?????? nvtnvjntnjntnj www  cS sssR ,2,21,1  ... , then  )1( ,  nvinsR nitnij  i w  cS ?????? ><  , icc ? .

Proof. For the same premise SR , if ?? ><>< 2,21,1 ntnjntnj  ww ss  >< ?  nvtnvj ws ,... occurred, the >< nitnijws ,  always occurred. Therefore,  the probability of the occurrence of >< nitnij  ws , is not less than the  probability of occurrence of ><><><  ??? nvtnvjntnjntnj  www sss ,2,21,1 ... for  the same premise, which means icc ? .

From Theorem 1, we know that, for the same target object, it is needless taking into account the consequences with multiple items in prediction.

Theorem 2. For a moving object trajectory SR and a target object set },...,{ 21 msss , if ><><>< ?????? ntnmjntnjntnj m  cS sssR ,,2,1  ...21 ,  then )1( ,  misR ntnij  i i  cS ?????? ><  , icc ? .

Proof. For the same premise SR , if ?? ><>< ntnjntnj  ss ,2,1   >< ?  ntnmj ms ,... occurred, the >< ntnijis ,  always occurred. Therefore,  the probability of the occurrence of >< ntnij  is , is not less than the  probability of occurrence of ><><><  ??? ntnmjntnjntnj  msss ,,2,1 ...21 for the  same premise, which means icc ? .

Similar to Theorem 1, in Theorem 2, we know that, for multiple target objects, it is also needless taking into account the consequences with multiple items in prediction.

Corollary 1. For a consequence with multiple items, the probability of occurrence of any item of the consequences is  always not less than the probability of occurrence of the consequences under the same premise.

Proof. It can be easily proven from Theorem 1 and Theorem 2.

From Corollary 1, we know that, we can prune some candidate patterns which have multiple items in the consequence, and the prediction can be greatly simplified when discovering the association trajectory patterns.

To predict the consequences with multiple items, we can calculate the items in the consequences respectively, and multiplied them to be the result of the confidence of the consequences.



III. ASSOCIATION PATTERN BASED PREDICTION ALGORITHM  In this section, we introduce our new Association Pattern based Prediction algorithm (APP algorithm) for moving objects. The basic idea behind APP algorithm is measuring the similarity between the current trajectory of the target object and its association trajectory patterns, and selecting the Pareto optimal results.

A. Overview To predicting moving objects, the APP algorithm is  implemented as three steps:  1. Mining association trajectory patterns:  This step is finding the frequency motion region of the target objects, and discovering their association trajectory patterns.

2. Measuring Premise similarity: This step is measuring the similarity between the current trajectory of the target objects and the premises of their association trajectory patterns.

3. Selecting optimal results: This step is calculating the Pareto optimal results as the final results, which taking into account the confidence of association trajectory patterns and the similarity calculated by step 2.

In step 1, APP algorithm prunes candidate patterns which having consequence with multiple items according to Corollary 1.

Noted that, in step 3 of APP algorithm, we select the Pareto optimal results as the final results. Finding the Pareto optimal results from a dataset is also known as the Skyline Problem [16 ,17].

Definition 4. (The Pareto Optimal Problem). Given set },...,,{ 21 NoooO = of N objects, n score-functions nsss ,...,, 21  with ]1,0[: ?Osi and n sorted lists nSSS ,...,, 21  containing all objects and their respective score values using one of the score function for each list, all lists are sorted descending by score values starting with the highest scores. The Pareto optimal problem is finding the subset Q of all non-dominated objects in O , i.e. ???????? ))()(())()((:|{ 2211 jijiji ososososOoQo    )})()(:},...,2,1{())()((... jqiqjnin ososnqosos <????? .

An important property of the Pareto optimal results is that they are non-dominated by other results, which means that if a prediction is Pareto optimal, then there is not exist other predictions which both are great than the prediction.

The reason of using the Pareto optimal results as the final results is that confidence of association trajectory patterns and the premise similarity often can?t be integrated as one score- function, and users want selecting the best prediction result by themselves.

Additionally, another important property of using the Pareto optimal results as the final results is that APP algorithm can be easy extended to multiple score-functions for selecting prediction result.

The detail of the APP algorithm as follows.

B.  Mining Association Trajectory Patterns In APP algorithm, mining association trajectory patterns is  essentially similar to that of mining association rules.

Therefore, the mining process can be divided into two major components: (1) to detect frequent regions, and (2) to derive association trajectory patterns (i.e. corresponding to association rules) from the frequent regions.

For the first component, the same as [15], we adopt the periodical pattern mining methods [18] which discover objects? patterns that follow the same routes over regular time intervals.

The methods decompose the whole trajectory into Tn / sub- trajectories and group all the locations tG having the same time offset t in each sub-trajectory. They then apply the density- based clustering algorithm DBSCAN [19] to find clusters (frequent regions) for each time offset t .

For the second component, similar to [15], we modify the apriori algorithm [20] to generate association trajectory patterns from the frequent regions discovered. The key idea of the apriori algorithm is to generate candidate item sets of length k from candidate item sets of length 1?k . In this process, according to Corollary 1, we prune candidate patterns which having consequence with multiple items. The main different of our algorithm and the algorithm in [15] in this step is that we mining association trajectory patterns, and the algorithm in [15] only mining the single moving object trajectory patterns.

C. Measuring Premise Similarity When measuring premise similarity, it is clear that more  recent movements potentially have greater effect on future movements.

For each premise ksssS rrrR ...21 ??= , where S  is the association object set },...,,{ 21 ksssS = , and is tjii sr ><= 1,1  )...,1(... 21,2,2 m ii tttkiss  mtimjtji <<<?????  ><>< . The detail of the  measuring premise similarity as follows:  1. Let the premise similarity of SR 0?SRSim .

2. For each object Ssi ? , and each time interval )1( mvtv ?? ,  if is appears in region ivj at time vt , then  let 1?ivl ,  otherwise let 0?ivl .

3. For each time interval )1( mvtv ?? , calculate the  premise similarity of vt : klL k i ivv /)( 1=? , and  calculate the premise similarity of SR : SS RR SimSim ? )(vwLv ?+ .

In the step 3 of calculating the premise similarity, similar to [15], the )(vw can be any weight function such as a linear function )/()( 1==  m v vvvw , quadratic )/()( 1  ==  m v vvvw ,  exponential )2/(2)( 1== m v  vvvw , and factorial )!/(!)( 1== m v vvvw  etc.

D. Selecting Optimal Results As mentioned in Section III.A, in APP algorithm, we select  the Pareto optimal results as the final results.  Finding the Pareto optimal results from a dataset is also known as the Skyline Problem, and there are many related technologies.

However, these technologies are designed for multiple score functions, and need some additional supporting such as indexing [17], slide window [16] etc.

In our algorithm, we only need select the Pareto optimal results according to two score functions: the confidence of association trajectory patterns and the premise similarity.

Therefore, we use a simple nested-loops approach to select the Pareto optimal results:  1. ??Reslut  2. For each association trajectory pattern wsP , let >< WSWS PP cSim , as the prediction result of w  sP ,  which WSPSim  is the premise similarity of w sP , WSPc is  the confidence of wsP .

3. For each association trajectory pattern wsP :  For each pattern of Reslut , if there are patterns which prediction results are dominated by the prediction result of wsP , delete the patterns form Reslut .

If the prediction result of wsP is not dominated by any prediction result of the pattern of Reslut , add  wsP to Reslut .

4. Output Reslut .

E. Selecting Optimal Results The first step of APP algorithm, which is mining  association trajectory patterns, can be seen as an initialization step of APP algorithm. We can run this step periodically to re- construct the association trajectory pattern set. Therefore, the first step has not direct impacts to the executing of APP algorithm.

For the second step of APP algorithm, let the number of association trajectory patterns is n , the number of association objects k , and the longest association trajectory pattern has m time intervals, then, when measuring premise similarity, as described Section III.C, the time complexity of step 1 is )1(O , the max time complexity of step 2 is )( mkO ? , and the max time complexity of step 3 is )(mO . Therefore, the max time complexity of the second step of APP algorithm is  )( 2mknO ?? .

For the third step of APP algorithm, as described Section

III.D, the time complexity of step 1 is )1(O , the max time complexity of step 2 is )(nO , the max time complexity of step 3 is )( 2nO . Therefore, the max time complexity of the third step of APP algorithm is )( 2nO .

Therefore, the max time complexity of APP algorithm is ))(( 2 nmknO +? . In practice applications, the number of association objects k is a constant, and the time intervals of association trajectory patterns are very short for most situations (less than 10 in 90% situations), therefore, the time complexity of APP algorithm is dominated by the number of association trajectory patterns n .

Note that, in Section III.B, we prune the candidate patterns which have multiple items in the consequence by Corollary 1.

According to our experiments, more than 50% of candidate patterns were reduced by the pruning effect, therefore, the APP algorithm has good efficiency for predicting moving objects.



IV. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we firstly defines an association pattern based  prediction model, which uses the association patterns of the moving objects to predict the trajectory of the moving objects, and then presents the APP algorithm for moving objects, and finally, we verify our algorithm by theoretical analyses.

Theoretical analyses results show that, by pruning the candidate patterns which have multiple items in the consequence, the APP algorithm has good efficiency for predicting moving objects. For future work, we are investigating the problem of predicting association moving objects with unknown patterns.

