Genetic Algorithm based on Evolution Strategy and the Application in Data  Mining

Abstract   When traditional genetic algorithm is applied in  mining association rules, it would get into local prematurity and becomes slow-footed in convergence.

The paper brings forward that evolution strategy?s excellence is applied in genetic algorithm?s evolutional process. Then optimized genetic algorithm is used for mining association   rules. In order to test the validity of the arithmetic, this paper presents a example of data mining about finance service. Research result indicates that the arithmetic can enhance search speed and data accuracy. Consequently it can effectively drive farther development of data mining.

1. Introduction   Data mining is one technology which has research value in artificial intelligence domain recently. Data mining makes people obtain and know information which is contained in data by analyzing large numbers of data, and it has forecast capability. So data mining keeps ahead in investigation.

Data mining combines theory and technology of several domains which include artificial intelligence, machine learning, statistics, neural network and so on[2]. And association rules mining is a important content in data mining. It can discover the relations of different attributes by analyzing and disposing data which is in database. Association rules mining has extensive application value in many domains which include decision support, market strategy and optimization attemper and so on.

Genetic algorithm is a method which simulates search of evolutional process. Genetic algorithm can dispose large-scale data gather. It is widely applied in mining association rules. Then data mining application is extended and knowledge discover efficiency is enhanced[1].

But traditional genetic algorithm has many shortcomings in association rules? application [3]. For example, it would come forth local convergence in search process. The paper brings forward that genetic algorithm based on evolution strategy is applied in mining association rules. It not only effectively conquers local prematurity which consists in traditional genetic algorithm, but also greatly enhances search efficiency.

2. Traditional genetic algorithm and the application in mining association rules   2.1. Association rules   T  is set up as affair data, namely  }{ 21 mtttT ??? ???= ,and )1( mktk ?? is data of each affair, these data are called data item. I is gather of all data items in T ?namely },...,,{ 21 niiiI = ?  )1( njij ?? is a data item in T .Every affair have a subclass  of I . Association rules is implication formula[3] which is as BA? ?thereinto, IA ? ?  IB ? ? ?=? BA .

Support-degree denotes universal degree that  BA? appears in T  affair data. It delegates percent that T includes A  and B  affair, nanmely  )()(s BAPBAupport ?=? .Confidence-degree denotes certain degree that BA?  comes into existence in T  affair data. It delegates the percent that T includes B  affair if T  has included A ?nanmely  )|()( ABPBAconfidence =? . If support-degree and confidence-degree exceed each minimum value, then BA?  can be regarded as significant association rules in  T .

2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.192   2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.192   2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.192   2009 First International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science  DOI 10.1109/ETCS.2009.192     2.2. Association rules mining based on traditional genetic algorithm   Traditional genetic algorithm is designed for mining  association rules?it has six steps as follows.

(1) Make certain coding scheme The paper adopts binary coding for denoting  association rules. A right length binary string is denoted for every attribute values. Binary strings of all attributes connect as a individual.

(2) Design fit degree function Fit degree is used for scaling degree that each  individual of colony can achieve the best value in genetic algorithm. This paper synchronously adopts support-degree and confidence-degree for filtering rules. Then correlative degree is confirmed in rules which satisfy minimum support-degree and minimum confidence-degree. After support-degree and confidence-degree are synthetically taken into account, fit degree function is defined as follows.

minmin  )()()( Conf  XConfR Supp  XSuppRXFitness cs ?+?=    (1)  In formula ? ?? )00(1 ??=+ cscs RRRR minmin,ConfSupp a  respectively value of minimum support-degree and minimum confidence-degree. By all appearances?the bigger support-degree and confidence-degree are, the bigger value of fit degree function is.

(3) Design select operation The aim of select is that some excellent individuals  are selected from colony and then are copied to next generation colony.

Rules that values of fit degree function exceed scheduled values would be up to the mustard.

(4) Design cross operation Cross operation is that two individuals are randomly  selected in partnership warehouse according to definite cross probability Pc . Crossed location is randomly confirmed. For every pair of crossed individuals, partial gene values of two individuals are changed for another in crossing. Thereby it can produce two new individuals.

(5) Design mutation operation Partial gene values of individuals are adjusted by  using mutation operation[6]. Thereby it can enhance local search capability of genetic algorithm and keep diversity of colony.

Original colony impossibly has all attribute values, so individual is randomly selected in colony according  to definite mutation probability Pm . After selected, every bit gene of the individual is mutated in turn.

Every bit takes turns to obtain values in allowable value scope. After mutated, every attribute values would exist.

(6) Mine rules Rules, which are selected according to fit degree  function and genetic operation, denote attributes which have relation. Association rules, which satisfy scheduled support-degree and confidence-degree, are obtained by mining rules.

3. Genetic algorithm based on evolution strategy   After shortcoming of traditional genetic algorithm  and strongpoint of evolution strategy are analyzed, strongpoint of evolution strategy is suggested applying in evolutional process of genetic algorithm.

3.1. Shortcoming of traditional genetic algorithm   Traditional genetic algorithm has shortcomings[9]  as follows in evolutional process. Individuals, which are produced by mutation, have high fit degree, but have few in amount. Therefore probability that individuals are washed out is great. A majority of individuals of colony locate in coherent state, so it easily results in local convergence of genetic algorithm. Once immersed in local convergence, individual which is close to the best values is always washed out. Whether it is all-around best value can?t be judged.

3.2. Strongpoint of evolution strategy   Evolution strategy is a search strategy[7] which is  based on evolution mechanism of biology. Compared to genetic algorithm, evolution strategy has own superiority. Individuals of evolution strategy have variable factors[8]. Select operation of evolution strategy is carried through according to certain way.

Certain proportion excellent individuals are selected in colony, and then are saved to next generation colony.

Mutation of genetic algorithm is located in subsidiary place. But it is a important search operation in evolution strategy[9].

3.3. Improved genetic algorithm       Assuming some generations evolution is regarded as a century. After a century having evolved, next century begins to evolve. Genetic algorithm based on evolution strategy has improvement as follows.

Firstly?dissimilar degree of individuals is judged in colony when a century has evolved. Dissimilar degree of two random individuals in colony is as follows.

? ?  =  ?=  ),(  l  j jj babaf                                    (2)  In formula? l is the length of gene chain, ja  is the number j  bit gene in gene chain of individuals a ?  jb  is the number j  bit gene in gene chain of individuals b ?In whole colony, dissimilar degree of colony is as follows.

%100 ),(  0 ,0 ? ??  = ? ?  = ?=  lPP  baf F  P  i  P  ijj ji  (3)  In formula? P is colony size.

From formula it is obvious that, the bigger  dissimilar degree of colony is, the better diversity of colony is. Dissimilar degree of colony is very big in prophase of evolution?whereas dissimilar degree of colony would cut down in anaphase of evolution.

If dissimilar degree of colony is small, then new individuals would be entered. Whereas, colony keeps the same. Thereinto? rule that new individuals are randomly product is as follows?80??120?  of every individuals average in current century is used as value scope in which new individuals are randomly product.

Secondly ? cross probability and mutation probability are set up in dynamic process of evolution.

When a century evolves, if every individuals is comparatively consistent, then cross probability Pc and mutation probability Pm  are increased. Whereas ? cross probability Pc and mutation  probability Pm are properly reduced. Thereinto?rule that cross probability and mutation probability is set up is as follows.

now  last  F FK =                                                       (4)  K is rate that dissimilar degree of colony of last century is compared with current century.

'PcKPc ?=                                               (5) 'PmKPm ?=                                             (6)  In formula(5) and (6)? '' PmPc ? are separately cross probability and mutation probability of last century, PmPc?  are separately cross probability and mutation probability of current century.

In this way?evolution of current century is based on last century. Original  colony contains excellent individuals of last century. Otherwise partial new individuals are randomly product, and cross probability and mutation probability are newly set up. It can enhance the diversity of colony.

4. Application effect and contrast   The improved genetic algorithm is introduced in  data mining of finance service. Mining association rules that finance product type and times of purchasing product get along with sex of client, age, month income and education, is the aim.

4.1. Experiment result   2050 groups data of finance service in certain city  are regarded as experiment example, detailed data is as Table 1.

Table 1.  Statistical data  client sex age month income  education finance product times of purchasing  product 0001 male 26 3500 senior car loan 1 0002 male 39 6500 graduate student fund 2 0003 female 32 3200 undergraduate insurance 2 0004 male 46 2500 junior card consumption 6  ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

2050 male 31 1500 senior bank operation 4       Data in datasheet would be disposed with coding. It is switched to binary string which is easily disposed by  genetic algorithm. Rules that attribute value is coded are as Table 2.

Table 2.  Coding attribute value of finance service  factor value scope and coding sex male           0 female        1 age below 20  {21,39}  {40,54}  Above 55  month income {0,999}  {1000,2999}  {3000,5999}  Above 6000  education graduate student  undergraduate  senior  junior  finance product  car loan  card consumption   fund  Insurance  foreign exchange   bank operation  times of purchasing  product  {1,2}  {3,5}  {6,9}  Above 10   Order of individuals gene is defined as sex, age,  month income, education, finance product type and times of purchasing product. Therefore binary string ?001100100101? means that ?client: sex male?age between 21 and 39?month income between 3000 and 5999 dollar?education undergraduate? times of card consumption is between 3 and 5 ?.

Function parameters of genetic algorithm are set up as follows. Original colony has 100 individuals?cross probability is 0.85?mutation probability is 0.02?  minimum support-degree is 0.3 ? minimum confidence-degree is 0.6?evolution that it comes by 50 generations is regarded as a century.

After 252 generations come by, partial association rules are obtained as table 3.

Table 3.  Partial association rules  rule premise of rule result of rule support- degree  confidence- degree  1 client: education undergraduate, sex female times of insurance is between 3 and 5  0.425 0.605  2 client: month income between 3000 and 5999 dollar  times of card consumption is between 6 and 9  0.321 0.752  3 client: age between 40 and 54 times of fund is between 3 and 5 0.523 0.688 4 client: age between 21 and 39, month  income above 6000 dollar, sex male times of foreign exchange is  above 10 0.386 0.852  5 client: education graduate student, month income between 3000 and 5999 dollar, sex  female  times of bank operation is above  0.429 0.625     After rule gather is analyzed, we can know that genetic algorithm which is based on evolution strategy is applied in data mining. Consequently, it can easily mine association rules that sex of client, age, month income and education get along with finance product type and times of purchasing product.

4.2. Compare with traditional genetic algorithm   Traditional genetic algorithm is used for operating same data, and every original conditions is the same as above setup. After 850 generations, result of association rules which are in table 3 is obtained.

Partial individuals begin to get in state of local convergence after 200 generations.

Genetic algorithm which is based on evolution strategy can not only conquer getting in state of local convergence, but also accelerate search speed.

5. Conclusion.

Association rules mining, which is integrated with genetic algorithm based on evolution strategy, is applied in the operation of finance service. Fact indicates that the application can achieve the important aim. The aim is that finance service products are nominated to right people, also it can obtain higher success rate of distribution and satisfaction degree of client. The arithmetic can greatly enhance search speed in process of data mining. Thereby it can preferably resolve shortcoming which is exposed in traditional genetic algorithm. Genetic algorithm based on evolution strategy also can be applied in other domains, so it has great research value and application value.

Acknowledgements.

The authors are grateful to National Natural Science Foundation of China (60272089) and Guangdong Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (980406)for decisive support.

