1 INTRODUCTION  Today, no one will deny the importance of quality.

Abstract: Today, enterprises are facing more pressure than ever for continuous improvement and adaptation.

Therefore, how to capture the flashing by opportunity to improve quality with low cost and high efficiency becomes an imperative task for any enterprise. Inspired by the natural immune system principles and biological evolution mechanism, a data driven system evolution method for continuous quality improvement based on information technology is proposed. First the variation phenomenon in biological system and manufacturing system is compared. Then based on analyse of the similarity and difference between the two systems, the general model for continuous quality improvement is established by utilizing existing data analysis tools and methods. Finally the method is illustrated by a case study which uses association rule mining method as the tool to capture the opportunity to improve system quality. This immune inspired model has the potential to improve the system quality with little additional cost.

Key Words: Quality, Quality improvement, Immune system, General model, Manufacturing system        variation. The reason that the biology system can develop from simple-low-level to complex-high-level, the most important reason is because of the biological variation.

Table1 is a list of the difference and similarity of variation phenomenon in biological system and in the process quality control system that we are interested. Similar with enterprise's quality system, the living system has the protection organism immune system, and their function is also very similar. The basic function of immune system is the immune defense, the immune stability and the immune surveillance, but the immunity system sill can?t work without variation. It is precisely the high frequency ?variation - selection? mechanism of somatic cell, that endows the biology immune system the ability to distinguish and eliminate the various kinds of pathogen.

Similarly, the variation can also become the power of process system evolution. If the process is completely under control, the process output would be constant, and then the system will lose the power to evolve.

Table1. Comparison of Variation Phenomenon in Biological System and in Process Quality Control System  Item Biological system Process control system Variation Item Gene Process  Goal Determined by environment Determined by  parameter setting  Mechanism superiority wins, inferiority loses Parameter  control  Result The fittest survive,  and adapt to changes of environment  System retrogress, hard  to adapt to changes   The process fluctuation objectively exists. Therefore the monitoring data inevitably contains the PVI. Although process variation is nondirective, but just like the natural selection can retain the variation beneficial to the population, the quality control system can obtain from the process monitoring data the variation information that is beneficial to the system evolution.

3 MODEL FOR CONTINUOUS QUALITY IMPROVEMENT BY IMMUNE SYSTEM INSPIRED DATA DRIVEN EVALUATION  Traditional quality control use SPC to evaluate the quality condition of process. In Fig. 1,  Constitutes the typical quality control system [6],  chose and determine control variables;  monitor state of equipments and quality features of product, analyze fluctuation in process; if abnormal is discovered then  is informed to carries on the process diagnosis and the maintenance, thus process fluctuation is controlled.

By effective use of the information obtained in , we expect to make ?variation ? evolution? effect of biological system happen in production system. The purpose is to realize the process optimization. As shown in Fig. 1, the process variation data mining module -  is added to the common quality control system. The module separates process variation data, and then carries on the data mining  Process stability oriented control  Process optimization  oriented  Select control parameter  Historical data analysis , DOE, Key quality characteristics and influence factors  Data mining of process variation  Obtain positive variation to facilitate process optimization  Process quality monitoring  Trend analysis of abnormal status  Process diagnosis and maintenance  Process adjustment , error analysis, process  diagnosis and maintenance according to feedback  Network Process system  SPC, Equipment status analysis   Fig 1. Relationship Between Process Stability Oriented Control and Adaptable Optimization  to the variation process to obtain variation information beneficial to the system optimization and the improvement.

In fact this is the reuse of PVI. With data driven method, function of quality system is further developed from stability focused quality-control to ?stability-evolution? combined adaptable system. Fig. 2 is the model for (Immune System Inspired Data Driven Evaluation, ISI-DDE) method.

Manufacturing System  Monitoring Data  In Statistical Control  Random Rules  Variation  Data Seperation Data Mining Tools  Searching Variation Rules  Reduction of Variation Rules Rough Theory  Guided DOE  Virtual Quality  Evolution System  New Quality Parameters  Disturbance  Condition Change  Physical Quality  Evolution System  PMQCS  Data   Fig 2. Model for Continuous Quality Improvement by Immune System Inspired Data Driven Evaluation  As illustrated in Fig. 2, ISI-DDE system consisted of the following parts: the first part is PMQCS (Product Manufacturing & Quality Control System) that connects processing equipments and the sensors. It constitutes the hardware of the system. The second part is VQES (Virtual Quality Evolution System) for data separation, searching of variation rules, and reduction of variation rules. The process is much like generation of a high affinity antibody in immune system. Because VQES is a data driven method to locate useful variation rules, therefore the method utilized the immune principle without additional cost, which is very attractive to the enterprises which have large volume of historical monitoring data.  The third part is  5542 2009 Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC 2009)      PQES (Physical Quality Evolution System) that conducts the physical quality experiment under the guidance of beneficial variation rules to accelerate the process of quality improvement.

4 A CASE STUDY ON ESTABLISHMENT OF ISI-DDE SYSTEM  In this section the ISI-DDE method is illustrated by a simple case study which uses association rule mining method as the tool to capture the opportunity to improve system quality. Fig. 3 is the framework for continuous quality improvement based on Association Rules Mining of process variation.

ARMPV (Association Rules Mining of Processes Variation) system is for data pretreatment, mining of variation information and explanation of variation rules.

The input of ARMPV is the historical process status data; SVFPI (Selection of Variation For Process Improvement) system evaluates the variation rules and takes different measures according to the type of variation. SVFPI also determines the optimized new generation of parameter.

Usually before evaluation, reduction of the rules is conducted to reduce the time need. Limited by the length of the article, rules reduction process will not be discussed in this paper.

ARM (Association Rules Mining, ARM) is an important data mining technology, mainly uses in obtaining the relations in large volume of data [7] [8]. The ISI-DDE  method uses ARM technology to excavate the hidden relation between process parameters and quality features from the monitoring data.

4.1 Representation of Process System  The actual production system is usually MMP (Multi-process Multi-variable System,). Supposes the MMP contains process 1 2{ , , , , , }i nP P P P P= ? ? , 1, 2, ,i n= ?  n is the number of processes. Any process jiP is influenced by ei factors ( 1, 2, ,j ei= ? ); m quality features  1 2{ , , , }mY Y Y Y= ?  of the final product are influenced by status of jiP .

The data for excavation should not only contain various process parameter, but also indicate the status of the discrete parameters, such as the boolean-type data ?good or bad?, discrete data ?high, middle and low?, the switch-type data ?open or close? and so on. The value of the consecutive parameters, like temperature, pressure, power should also be expressed in the system. ARM is a data mining technology for discrete data, while in the actual industrial application, the variable space is usually composed of hybrid of consecutive and discrete data, so consecutive data must be transformed into discrete data first to conduct ARM.

Input ...

Equipment 1 Equipment 2 Equipment n  ...Node Node   Node NodeNode ...

Equipment, sensors, network etc.

Process variation  data  Process monitoring system  Online dataHistorical database  Data mining of process variation  UI  Explanation of association rules  ...

Data pretreament  ...

Data conversion  Discretization  DOE  Elimination  tolerance design  Obser vat i on  I nd  i vi  d ua  l V  a lu  e   1. 5  1. 0  0. 5  0. 0  - 0. 5  _ X=0. 514  UCL=1. 439  LCL=- 0. 410  I Chart  of  C6  ARMPV system  New generation of parameters  Obser vat i on  In d  iv i  du a  l Va  l ue   2. 0  1. 5  1. 0  0. 5  0. 0  - 0. 5  _ X=0. 577  UCL=1. 657  LCL=- 0. 503   I  Chart  of  C6  SVFPI system  1P  1P  1P  ei iP n  e nP  PObs er vat i on  In d  iv id  ua l  V a  l ue   1. 5  1. 0  0. 5  0. 0  - 0. 5  _ X=0. 514  UCL=1. 439  L CL=- 0 . 410  I  Char t  of  C6  Process diagnosis and maintenance  Observat i on  I nd  i vi  d ua  l V  a lu  e   1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2  0.0  - 0.2  - 0.4  _ X=0.383  UCL=1. 004  LCL=- 0.239  I Chart  of  C8  Output  Y  PPV  EPV  NPV  Evaluation  Pr od  uc t M  an uf  ac tu  ri ng  &   Q ua  lit y  C on  tr ol  S ys  te m  Association rules  Physical Quality Evolution SystemVirtual Quality Evolution System    Fig3.  Framework for Continuous Quality Improvement Based on Association Rules Mining of Process Variation  2009 Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC 2009) 5543      4.2 Mining of Process Variation Data  As illustrated in ARMPV module in Fig. 3, pretreatment work such as parameter selection, data conversion is necessary before conduct data mining is conducted.

Supposes D  is the transaction database contains the process variation data selected from SPC monitoring data.

{ }1 2, , ,l zI t t t t= ? ? is itemset of which lt  is a item, such as a process parameter or the quality feature level,  1, 2, ,l z= ? 1 1  n ei iji j  z S m = =  = +? ? , where ijS  is the number of the parameter's discrete value; m  is the number of quality features; n  is the number of processes; ei  is the number of factors that influence the thi process. Each transaction lT  is an itemset, lT I? .

An association rule is an implication of the form A B? , where A, B I, I is itemset, ,A B ? ?  and A B = ?? are sets of items called itemsets.

Support and Confidence are two thresholds required to measure an association rule. Support represents the frequency that items occur or co-occur in D. A support threshold minsupp is inputted by users to measure whither items are frequent enough or not. If a set of items S called an itemset, where S ? A, and ?ai ? S co-occur in T over minsupp times, we say S is a frequent itemset. Support of A B? is calculated as ( )P A B? . Confidence represents  the degree to describe how strong an itemset A implies another itemset B. where A, B? I and ,A B ? ? .

Confidence of A B? is calculated as ( | )P B A .

An association rule is valid when both supports for A and B  exceed minsupp, and the confidence of this rule exceeds minconf. The purpose of ARM for process variation is to find out the association rules between process variation and quality features from the process control history data.

4.3 Selection of Variation Rules and Parameter Optimization  Association rules for process variation are divided in 3 types, namely PPV (Positive Process Variation, PPV), EPV (Even Process Variation, EPV) and NPV (Negative Process Variation, NPV).

Obviously PPV refers to as a result of the parameter variation, which leads to improved features; EPV refers to process variation that doesn?t lead to significant quality feature change; NPV refers to the parameter variation that negatively influences quality features. NPV is usually eliminated directly. PPV and EPV needs further evaluation.

Economic index and efficiency index are set for evaluation of variation rules, denoted as eF  and tF . eF  is measured by relative change of process cost. tF  is measure by relative process cycle. The two indexes are balanced according to application by setting different weight coefficient. jicP  is the discrete value of thj  process, jivP  is the discrete value of thj  process after process variation, jicCP?  is the cost  for change j jic ivP P? , similarly j  itTP?  is the time change for j jic ivP P? . Then the index F  is calculated by:  e e t tF w F w F= +                            (1)  1 1 ( )n ei je iei jF C CP C= == + ?? ?               (2)  1 1 ( ) /n ei jt iti jF T TP T= == + ?? ?                 (3)  C is the process system total cost; T  is process system time cycle; ew  is the weight for eF ; tw  is the weight for  tF , ( ) 1e tw w+ = .

To PPV rules, 1F <  means that process variation leads to improvement of quality features as well as process cost and efficiency. It is the smaller the better for F .  PPV rules are used directly for parameter adjustment. Also, PPV rules provide a clue for larger scale parameter variation experiment by DOE for further process optimization.

To EPV rules, 1F <  means that process variation leads to improvement of process cost and efficiency without sacrifice of quality features. It is the smaller the better for F . EPV rules are used for adjust parameter directly. The EPV rules indicate that the quality features is not sensitive to process parameters. Further quality improvement may focus on cost and efficiency.

5 CONCLUSION The process monitoring information contains the valuable process variation information. An immune system inspired data driven evolution method, ISI-DDE method, proposed in this study borrowed ?variation ? evolution? principle from biological immune system for reuse of monitoring data. Useful variation rules are excavated by DM technology and then evaluated and selected for process optimization and continuous improvement. The case study illustrated how to realize continuous quality improvement based on ARM technology.

