and Intelligent Services, November 10-12, 2009, Nanjing, China

Abstract?To extract the reusable process knowledge of body in white (BIW) from process data, the association rule is employed to capture typical welding type. An association rule model for typical welding type acquisition is established. The attributes related to welding type are classified and quantitative attributes are partitioned into several intervals. Apriori algorithm is applied to extract the frequent itemsets. The strong rules are generated according to the threshold of confidence.

Finally, a computational example mining typical welding process is analyzed. The result indicates that the approach can capture typical welding type effectively.



I. INTRODUCTION OMPUTING aided process planning (CAPP) is the bridge between design and manufacturing. With the  in-depth applications of computer aided process planning in enterprises, manufacturing enterprises have accumulated a large amount of process data. When these enterprises begin new process planning, generally, they would refer to the original process knowledge. The urgent needs for enterprise are to acquire useful process knowledge from large volume of process data, but knowledge acquisition and knowledge representation which is easily understandable are the main bottlenecks of Expert System Development [1]-[3].

Discovering knowledge by hand not only costs a lot of manpower, material, money and time, but also it is difficult to update and expand knowledge, and seriously affects the reuse of knowledge[4][5]. The early knowledge acquisition primarily depended on the direct dialogues between knowledge engineers and experts in the field. This method was time-consuming and laborious. In recent years, data mining technology has improved quickly has been widely used in automatic knowledge acquisition in CAPP. Cluster analysis was applied in document [6] to discover typical process route. Gray theory was proposed in document [7] to retrieve similar process examples of sheet metals. Sequence   Manuscript received May 9, 2009. This project is supported by the National High-Tech. R&D Program for CIMS, China (Grant No.

2008AA04Z105).

CHAO Yongsheng is with the College of Mechanical Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China, 201804, Tel: 86-21-69583940/15800980205; e-mail: cys21st@yahoo.com.cn.

LIU Haijiang is with the College of Mechanical Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China, 201804, Tel: 86-21-69583940; e-mail: lhj@tongji.edu.cn.

LI Yun is with the College of Mechanical Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China, 201804, Tel: 86-21-69583940; e-mail: yunqiong-2006@163.com.

LIU Na is with the College of Mechanical Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China, 201804, Tel: 86-21-68593940; e-mail: na_ll@126.com.

pattern was proposed in document [8] to extract manufacturing process sequences. These methods are mainly employed to discover typical process sequence in the database, but there is no concrete process decision-making. In process planning, there are many factors affecting the decision-making of process, so the different processes are used under different conditions. There are associations between these factors. Therefore, association rule mining technology is used in body in white (BIW) process planning to obtain a typical welding type.



II. THOUGHT ON TYPICAL WELDING TYPE ACQUISITION BASED ON ASSOCIATION RULES  Car is an important tool of transport and one of the signs of science and technology development level. BIW is an important component of the car, usually is composed of 300~500 complex sheet metal parts, and is welded at 55~ 75 stops in assembly line. There are 1700 ~ 2500 clamping positions and 4000 ~ 5000 welding points in BIW. The process planning involves massive size of information. Auto enterprise has accumulated large volume used process knowledge which is a summary of the experiences and valuable assets in new process planning. The discovery of process knowledge we need becomes more and more important to ensure the quality and efficiency of process planning [9]. Association rule mining is the most active research area and is used to analyze interdependence and relevance of different attributes of data [10][11]. Association refers to links between two or more attributes. If there is a certain degree of correlation between two or more attributes, then an attribute value can be predicted by values of other attributes. In process planning for BIW, attributes related to welding type are looked as itemset which includes welding materials, material thickness, tightness requirements of welding seam, and so on. Relative to other attributes, the welding type is a key attribute. Association rules can be used to find the relationship between welding type and other attributes with high support and high confidence. If the values of the welding thickness, welding material and tightness requirements of welding seam are assigned, the welding type can be predicted. Therefore, to obtain the typical welding type in essence is to discover the itemsets with high support and high confidence.

The Extraction of Welding Type for Body in White Based on Association Rules  CHAO Yongsheng, LIU Haijiang, LI Yun, LIU Na  C

III. ASSOCIATION RULES AND APRIORI ALGORITHM  A. Association Rules Model of Typical Welding Type Acquisition  Association rules are used to mine potential, implicit links between attributes in the database [7]. Let itemset  },,,{ 21 miiiI  be the collection of all items. If an itemset contains k items, it is called a k-itemset. D is a transaction database. Transaction T is a set from I, i.e. T I. For itemset X I, if X T, then transaction T supports X.

Definition 1. If transaction T includes all items of X, then call T support X. the support of itemset Supp(X) means the percentage of X in D.

Definition 2. An association rule is an implication expression of the form R X Y. where X and Y are disjoint itemsets, i.e., X Y=  and X, Y I.

Definition 3. The confidence c of the rule R determines how frequently items in Y  appear in transactions that contain X.

The definition of conditional probability is as follows:  )( )(  )( )(  XSupp YXSupp  TXp TXTYp  (1)  Definition 4. The support s of the rule R means that s% transactions in D include X Y.

Definition 5. For given the threshold of minimal support minsup and the threshold of minimal confidence minconf, if Supp R minsup and Conf R minconf, then R is called strong rule.

Definition 6. For given minimal support minsup, if Supp X >minsup, then X is called frequent itemset.

The data related to welding process for BIW involve many  attributes. Attributes can be divided into Boolean type and multi-valued type according to the value of the attribute, while multi-valued attribute includes quantitative attribute (e.g.

material thickness, material size, etc) and categorical attribute (e.g. welding type, material category, etc). Firstly, quantitative attribute is split into several numerical intervals, and one interval represents an item. Suppose continuous attribute A. If attribute space [ui, vi] is split into n intervals [ui1, vi1], [ui2, vi2], ?, [uin, vin], attribute Ai is split into n items <Ai, ui1, vi1>, <Ai, ui2, vi2>, ?, <Ai, uin, vin>. All of quantitative attributes and categorical attributes make up itemset I. All attribute values of one part make up a transaction T.

The task of association rules is to mine strong rules in  database D. Association rule mining can be divided into two  subtasks: find frequent itemsets in database D according to the minimal support; generate rules according to minimal confidence and frequent itemsets. The model for association rule mining is illustrated in fig. 1.

B. Apriori Algorithm Association rule mining is indirect, unsupervised data  mining from a large variety of data, but it produces clear and understandable results. Many algorithms have been proposed to discover the frequent itemsets. Among them Apriori algorithm proposed by R.Agrawal and R.Srikant is the most influential and most commonly used algorithm [12].

Therefore, Apriori algorithm is used in mining typical welding type for BIW. The algorithm need scan database many times.

Its core is to construct large itemsets by iteration. For instance, all large k-itemsets are generated at the kth iteration. In the next iteration, candidate sets of large (k+1)-itemsets are generated. Association rule mining is only interested in frequent itemsets in the database.

Itemset has several properties which are the basis of Apriori algorithm. The non-null subsets of frequent itemset are also frequent itemsets; The supersets of infrequent itemset are also infrequent itemsets; Consider itemset A, B. If A B, then )()( BSuppASupp .

A brute-force approach for mining association rules is to compute the support and confidence for every possible rule.

This approach is prohibitively expensive because there are exponentially many rules that can be extracted from a data set.

Reducing candidate k-itemsets Ck (potential frequent k-itemsets Lk generated from frequent itemsets Lk-1) number is very necessary. The concrete method is to reduce the number of candidate itemsets and computational complexity of eliminating some of the itemsets in Ck. It can improve the efficiency of the algorithm greatly.

In order to reduce search space, the procedure of association rules based on Apriori algorithm is as follows.

(1) Attribute classification For Boolean attribute and categorical attribute, each value  of attributes represents an item in itemset I. For quantitative attribute, attribute?s value is partitioned into several attribute intervals and every interval represents an item in itemset I. All different items make up itemset I.

(2) Frequent itemsets L1 Generation Support count of the 1-itemset is calculated through  scanning transaction database D. Items whose support is greater than minimal support form frequent itemsets L1.

(3) Connecting step??generating candidate itemsets Ck In order to generate frequent k-itemsets Lk, candidate  itemsets Ck must be produced first. Pairs of frequent (k-1)-itemsets Lk-1 whose first (k-2) items are the same and last items are different merge a new candidate k-itemset. In order to avoid repeats, the last item of second joined itemset should be greater than the corresponding item of first joined itemset.

(4) Pruning step??reducing itemsets of Ck   Fig. 1.  Model for association rule mining.

Ck is the super itemsets of Lk, so Ck is large itemsets. A brute-force approach for finding Lk needs large amount computational cost. Apriori algorithm complies with the property that any infrequent (k-1)-itemset isn?t the subset of frequent k-itemset. If a (k-1)-subset of k-itemset isn?t the member of Lk-1, then it isn?t the member of Lk and can be deleted from Ck. This approach can avoid generating too many unnecessary candidates. This is Apriori pruning thought.

(5) Calculating the support of all itemsets The support of itemset in Ck is counted through traversing  the transaction database D. In order to reduce the number of candidate itemsets, the transactions which don?t include itemsets in the Ck are marked. They would not be counted in next scan [1]. In this method, record number counted is much less than that in transaction database D.

(6) Generating frequent itemsets The itemset whose support is less than minimal support is  deleted in Ck. The remaining itemsets are composed of Lk.

Step (2)~(5) are repeated until there is no frequent itemset.

(7) Generating rules Rules are generated from frequent itemsets. For every  frequent itemset l and non-empty subset a of l, if supp(l) /supp(a)>minsup, then R:(l-a a. This rule means that a subset of frequent itemset is set as the conclusion of rule, and the rest of the itemset is set as premise. According to the property that the subset of frequent itemset is frequent itemset, (l-a) and a are all frequent itemsets. The support of the rule is calculated according to definition 4. Whether or not the rule is the strong rule is determined by definition 5. Welding type is defined as the rule conclusion a. The remaining attributes are defined as the rule premise (l-a). If the rule is a strong rule, the conclusion a is acquired typical welding type.



IV. ACQUISITION EXAMPLE OF TYPICAL WELDING TYPE After mining preparation, an example is given to show how  to discover the relationships between the welding type and other attributes which are related to welding type. Ten welding parts are showed in table 1. This means 10 transactions.

There are many welding types in practical operation.

Although some welding type is used rarely, it may be the most  suitable to some part. Therefore, in order to extract this welding type, relatively low support and high confidence are assigned. Let minimal support count equal 2 and minimal confidence equal 70%. Concrete steps are as follows:  (1) There are five attributes in all. Welding type is a multi-valued attribute including spot welding, CO2 protecting welding, seam welding, and laser welding. Welding material is also a multi-valued attribute including 3 items. Tightness is a Boolean attribute including 2 items. Thickness is a quantitative attribute, which is divided into 2 items, thickness (0.6-1.2), thickness (1.2-3.0). So itemset I includes 13 items in all.

(2) S in fig. 2 represents support count. Every item is the member of C1 in the first pass over the transaction T. Fig. 2(a) shows that every item is numbered and its support is counted.

Items whose support count is less than 2 are deleted. The remaining items form L1 showed in figure 2(b).

(3) The next step is to generate C2 by taking a pair of items from L1. Of course, there is no point in generating a set containing two different values from the same attribute (e.g., common medium carbon steel and aluminum alloy) because that cannot occur in any actual instance. Items from two different attributes are joined to form the C2. We discard the items whose support count is less than 2. The remaining items form L2 showed in fig. 2(c).

(4) L3, L4, L5 are generated in order according to step (3) and are showed in figure 2(d), fig. 2(e), fig. 2(f) respectively.

Itemset in L5 includes all attributes, so C6 is null set and calculation is over.

(5) Generating rules Since the conclusion of rules is welding type, the premise of  the rules is other attributes. the confidences of the rules generated from L3 are as follows:  {common medium carbon steel, tightness(no)} {spot welding}, Conf(R1)=80%.

{common medium carbon steel, economy(yes)} {spot welding}, Conf(R2)=66.7%.

{common medium carbon steel, thickness(0.6-1.2)} {spot welding}, Conf(R3)=75%.

{tightness(no), economy(yes)} {spot welding},  Conf(R4)=83.3%.

{tightness(no), thickness(0.6-1.2)} {spot welding},  TABLE I WELDING ATTRIBUTES VALUES OF 10 PARTS IN CAR  Part name Welding type Material TG E T(mm) front door outer panel  spot welding common medium carbon steel N Y 1.4 car roof seam welding common medium carbon steel Y Y 0.8 cross rail CO2 protecting welding common medium carbon steel N  Y 3.0 floor board laser welding  aluminum alloy Y  N 1.5 front door inner panel  laser welding high strength steel N  N 1.0 engine hood spot welding  aluminum alloy N  Y 1.0 rear floor pan spot welding  common medium carbon steel N  Y 0.8 floor crossing spot welding  common medium carbon steel N  Y 0.8 window frame laser welding  aluminum alloy Y  N 1.0 trunk laser welding common medium carbon steel N  Y 0.8  TG = tightness, E= economy, and T= thickness           Conf(R5)=80%.

{economy(yes), thickness(0.6-1.2)} {spot welding},  Conf(R6)=80%.

The confidence of rule R2 is less than minimal confidence.

Others are greater than minimal confidence, so rules R1, R3, R4,  R5,  R6  are strong rules.

The confidences for L4 and L5 are shown below: {common medium carbon steel, tightness (no), economy  (yes)} {spot welding}, Conf (R7)=80%.

{common medium carbon steel, tightness(no), thickness  (0.6-1.2) {spot welding}, Conf (R8)=100%.

{aluminum alloy, tightness (yes), economy (yes)} {laser  welding}, Conf (R9)=100%.

{common medium carbon steel, tightness (no), economy  (yes), thickness (0.6-1.2) {spot welding}, Conf (R10)=100%.

All of the above rules satisfy the threshold of confidence, so they are strong rules.

The strong rules extracted from database are stored in the knowledge base. The rules are represented into ?model-action? knowledge by production rule, such as if ( p1, p2, ?, pm ) then (q), where p1, p2, ?, pm represent condition attributes. Welding type represents decision-making attribute.

Other attributes represent condition attributes. For example, R7 can be expressed as: if material=?common medium carbon? and tightness=?no? and economy=?yes? then welding type=?spot welding? with support=40% and confidence=80%.

When we input the values of material, thickness, tightness, economy, the system would search for corresponding rules and tip the process planners possible welding type with corresponding support and confidence. When we don?t know all attributes? values, we may input a few values among them and the system would find rules in the corresponding itemsets (like L3, L4).



V. CONCLUSION In the paper, aiming at the correlations between the welding  type and material attributes, process requirements, association rules in Apriori algorithm are employed to discover typical welding type. The efficiency of Apriori algorithm is improved through reducing the record number in the transaction database D. A computational example is used to prove that association rules are effective to discover the typical welding type.

Process acquisition based on association rules can improve the reuse of process knowledge, aid the process planner in completing the planning task, lower requirements for process planner, and shorten the time of process planning. At the same time, extracted process from process database is suitable for local equipments and is proved feasible process. Therefore, association rules can be applied in the process decision-making widely.

