Study of Integrated Parameter Acquisition and Fusion for High-pressure Water  Pump Based on Virtual Instrument

Abstract ? Study of integrated parameter acquisition and fusion for high-pressure water pump based on virtual instrument was carried out on software platform of LabVIEW.

Multi-sensor?s parameters are accessed through PCI local bus and RS-232 technology, and then information fusion is realized by three steps: multi-parameter error handling which enables accurate parameters to be acquired, applying multi-sensor data association rules which are defined by water pump?s theory and performance curves fitting which forms reasonable results. Field testing indicates that results of our system agree well with the measurements provided by manufacturer and that the system is correct and effective, meeting practical requirements.

Key words ? data fusion, serial communication, PCI data acquisition board, multi-parameter acquisition, polynomial fitting.



I.INTRODUCTION  Water pump performance curves are the relationship among flow, pump head, shaft power and efficiency which run at rated speed; they are also a movement of the external manifestation of liquid for water pump.

With speeding up urbanization and new technology, there is gradually increasing the demand for high-pressure water pump which is used in high construction and fire water supplying system. At the same time, some scientific research units such as the fluid research center of Jiangsu University have carried out parameters acquisition and data processing for water pump [1], but they focus on water pump performance curves which are formed from universal, economic point of view. For this paper it integrates virtual instrument, high-pressure water pump, industrial test site, integrated parameters acquisition from multi-sensors and information fusion in multi-perspective.

It can attain reasonable and accurate output of performance curves for high-pressure water pump through integrated parameters acquisition of multi-sensors and information fusions of multi-parameters. Various Physical parameters at scene such as of inlet pressure, outlet pressure, flow, water temperature, motor speed and electrical parameters were collected by corresponding sensors when experiment was carried out [2]; at the same time, the date which were collected by corresponding sensors were fused in some rules and outputted in the form of       performance curves. As its schematic diagram shown in Figure 1, hardware and software consists of the experimental system. The function of hardware is access to scene physical data; the purpose of software is to form the desired performance curves of the high-pressure water pump through parameters acquisition and information fusions.

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of high-pressure water pump

II.HARDWARE STRUCTURE OF HGH-PRESSURE WATER PUMP TESTING SYSTEM  The hardware part of the high-pressure water pump testing system is responsible for acquisition parameters from multi-sensors and transmission them to the computer on the testing site. For the limitation of industrial test site and the high-pressure of water pump, the hardware part of testing system was designed as below to measure all kinds of parameters in real-time:  1: PCI serial port: the ALTAI PCI-2300 data acquisition card will receive the outputs of each sensor and then communicate with the computer in real-time.

As its hardware structure block diagram of high-pressure water pump testing system in Figure 2, inlet pressure, outlet pressure, flow, water temperature and motor speed communicate with the computer through this interface.

2: RS-232 [4] serial port: the three-phase electrical parameters meter will measure the power which transmitted by the current transformer and send digital signals to the computer through RS-232 serial port. Also as its hardware structure block diagram of high-pressure water pump testing system in Figure 2, the computer can access voltage, current, total power, power factor and power frequency through this interface.

For the limitation of the industrial test site, the parameters acquisition and signals transmission are inevitably interference by electromagnetic and vibration.

Therefore, effective and scientific method of information fusions is necessary to take after getting the valuable data, and through these steps can obtain performance curves of the high-pressure water pump.

1-1017  _____________________________        Fig. 2. Hardware structure block diagram of the high-pressure water pump testing system

III.DATA ACQUISITION DESIGN  A. PCI serial port acquisition design  At the process of field testing characteristic parameters of high-pressure water pump system are measured by various sensors on the LabVIEW8.5 software platform. Thus the acquisition program should be designed in accordance with the relationship between the range of sensor and the value of field testing. The function of the value of voltage which was collected, the range of sensor and the actual value of physical site are as follow:  Suppose the range of sensor is Mmax ~ Mmin and the ratio of factor for the data conversion is k, the relationship between the k and the range of sensor is as the formula below [4]:  max min  max min  M M k  V V  ? ?  ?  Where, Vmax is the maximum output voltage of sensor; Vmin is the minimum output voltage of sensor.

The actual display values of D which are collected and preserved on the computer are as follow:   min max min  min min min  max min  ( ) ( ) ( ) ce  ce  V V M M D V V k M M  V V  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  Where, D is the actual display values of a certain testing field; Vce is the voltage value which the sensor transmits.

Figure 3 is the interface of analog acquisition of the     high-pressure water pump system based on virtual instrument. The values of actual testing field which displayed on the testing platform are the input pressure, the outlet pressure, the flow, the water temperature and the motor speed. Figure 4 is the PCI serial port acquisition program of the high-pressure water pump system based on virtual instrument. When the program executed, the CreateDevice code is responsible for creating virtual hardware devices on the software system; the ReadDevOneAD code is responsible for reading the discrete data from the created virtual hardware device; the discrete data were processed by the formula (2) with special codes on the testing platform; and then the display code shows the data on the system of interface and the saving code preserves in the form of electronic documents which will facilitate timely analysis. When click the stop, the ReleaseDevice code is responsible for releasing data which was read before.

Fig. 3. PCI interface of analog signal acquisition  1-1018      Fig. 4. PCI serial port acquisition program  B.RS-232 serial port design collection  Electrical parameters which will be measured by the three-phase electricity meter communicate with the computer through the RS-232 serial port [5]. These parameters contain voltage, current, power factor, total power and frequency. The acquisition interface of the electrical parameters is in the Figure 5 as below; and on the interface it shows the testing values of voltage, current, power, power factor and frequency. Figure 6 is the RS-232 serial port acquisition program of the high-pressure water pump system based on virtual instrument. When the program running, the VISA serial code is responsible for creating and setting communication protocol which meet the three-phase electricity meter; the WriteVISA code is responsible for sending commands to the equipment; the ReadVISA code is responsible for reading the output string parameters and after these string parameters were transferred by some array codes and numerical codes; and then the display code shows the testing data on the interface and the saving code preserves the testing data in the form of electronic documents on the LabVIEW8.5 platform.

Fig. 5. RS-232 serial interface of electrical parameters acquisition   Fig. 6. RS-232 serial port acquisition program

IV.INFORMATION FUSION  Information fusion contains three main components for the high-pressure water pump: the multi-parameter error handling, applying multi-sensor data association rules and the performance curve fitting.

4.1 The multi-parameter error handling  When the high-pressure water pump was operation, electromagnetic and vibration have the negative effects to the testing parameters. For reducing systematic errors and improving accuracy it removes certain parts of multi-parameters and then gets the arithmetic mean of the remaining data on the software platform based on virtual instrument technology. Assuming sampling points have continuous data N + x which was collected by the LabVIEW8.5 software platform. It will remove the largest dada x / 2 and the smallest data x / 2, and then get the arithmetic mean of the remaining data N which is the value of Y [6]:    1 N iY XN  ? ?                       3 Where, N is the remaining number of sampling points after removing; Xi is the value of the sampling i.

4.2 The multi-sensor data association rules  On high-pressure water pump testing system, the multi-sensor data association rules which based on the working principle of water pump described as follows:   Fig. 7. The multi-sensor data association rules of high-pressure water  pump  The field testing multi-parameters are on the left and the performance parameters are on the right in the Figure 7. For this special process for water pump is called the multi-sensor data association rules which can get the performance parameters such as the pump head, the shaft power and the efficiency. The algorithm formula of the association rules is as follow:  The calculation formula of head H [7]: 2 2  2 2 1 1  2 2cha p u p u  H Z g g g g? ?  ? ? ? ? ?         4  The calculation formula of shaft power N: 2 2 2 2  1 0 0( ) /( )e eN P I I I I? ? ?           5  The calculation formula of efficiency?:  2 2 2 2  1 0 0( ) /( )e e  QH g QH g  N P I I I I  ? ? ? ? ?  ? ?  Where,?is the density of water; Zcha is the height  1-1019     difference of inlet pressure and outlet pressure; g is the acceleration of gravity; u1 is the average water velocity before the gate of water pump; u2 is the average water velocity after the gate of water pump; P1 is the input pressure; P2 is the output pressure; Q is the flow; I1 is the average current; I0 is the no-load current of motor; Ie is the rated current; Pe is the rated power.

4.3 The performance curve fitting and analysis  The output result of information fusions were shown in the Figure 8 after the performance curve fitting on the software platform based on virtual instrument technology. The program of the performance curve fitting which was designed mainly contains the generalized polynomial fitting code and the graphic display code on the LabVIEW8.5 platform [8]. The order of the generalized polynomial code is 6 and the decimal point of the formula code is 3 which were set for getting the perfect curves. As performance curve fitting in Figure 8 bellow, when the four performance parameters entered the generalized polynomial fitting code, the results of performance curve was drawn. That means the performance curve fitting of the high-pressure water pump was formed after the multi-parameter error handling and the multi-sensor data association rules based on the information fusions.

As the high-pressure water pump performance curve after fitting in Figure 9 bellow, the curve A which expressed the relationship between head and flow after polynomial fitting; the curve B which expressed the relationship between efficiency and flow after polynomial fitting; the curve C which expressed the relationship between the shaft power and the flow after polynomial fitting.

Fig. 8. Performance curve fitting program   Fig. 9. The high-pressure water pump performance curve after fitting  From the figure 9 about the high-pressure water pump performance curves we knows that: the head performance curve is downward as the flow increasing for the high-pressure water pump; the shaft power curve is increasing as the flow increasing for the high-pressure water pump; as for the efficiency curve it is obviously that the high-pressure water pump runs at its the best operating conditions where the head is about 135 meters and the shaft power is about 30 kilowatts when the range of flow is at 90m3/h-120m3/h. From the above conclusions we also know that the high-pressure water pump meets the original design and the integrated parameters acquisition and fusion based on virtual instrument is reasonable and right.



V.CONCLUSIONS  (1) Study of integrated parameters acquisition and fusion for high-pressure water pump based on virtual instrument was carried out on the LabVIEW8.5 software platform. The multi-sensor?s parameters are accessed by the PCI bus technology and serial communication technology; the information fusion is realized through three steps: the multi-parameter error handling which enables accurate parameters to be acquired, applying multi-sensor data association rules which defined by water pump?s theory and the performance curve fitting which formed reasonable curves.

(2) The high-pressure water pump testing platform can be an effective and real-time that benefits for showing and analyzing at the testing field. Reference to the high-pressure water pump performance curves can be a clear understanding the operating conditions for the high-pressure water pump and also can provide the guide for designing perfect water pump for special use.

(3) Compared to traditional programming platform such as VB and VC, the LabVIEW8.5 software platform has many merits as follows: the design cycle of the software is short for modular code; the man-machine interface is flexible and beautiful as the above pictures; the hardware is easy to expand which needs a little revision for the software system.

