Discovering Associations among Semantic Links

Abstract?Semantic link network is a semantic data model to manage Web resources and semantic relations among them.

Its nodes represent Web resources, and its semantic links between the nodes represent the semantic relations between the resources. This paper studies two kinds of associations between semantic link types (relationships): reasoning associations and statistical associations. We propose the approaches to calculat- ing the two kinds of association degrees respectively. Besides, algorithms are developed to discover the statistical association rules. Association between semantic link types are useful in relational query in semantic link networks.

Keywords-semantic links; reasoning rule; association; rela- tionship;

I. INTRODUCTION  The current Web has achieved a great success for its easy-to-build and easy-to-use features. However, the inherent limitation that hyperlinks lack of semantics has hindered the efficiency and effect of information retrieval on the current Web. Semantic Web aims at extending the current Web by adding semantics and reasoning mechanisms to support intelligent applications [3].

Relationships among web resources are the primary el- ements of the Semantic Web [9]. Intelligent applications can retrieve more useful information from semantic relation- ships. Just like document ranking is an important component of traditional search engines, relationship ranking will play an important role in the semantic search engines for the Semantic Web.

Among the possible models for the Semantic Web, Se- mantic Link Network (SLN) is a semantic data model to manage Web resources and semantic relations between resources. Its nodes represent Web resources and its seman- tic links represent semantic relationships. SLN model can support relational reasoning by using a set of reasoning rules [14]. New semantic links can be derived according to the reasoning rules.

Many researches have concentrated on the theories and applications of SLN model in recent years. A distributed construction and sharing mechanism was proposed and implemented for building SLN in collaboration [12]. An algebra model for SLN was proposed for the algebraic calculus between semantic links [11]. Zhuge suggested an  autonomous SLN model integrating logic reasoning, induc- tive reasoning and analogy reasoning in [10]. An automatic discovery approach of semantic links among documents has been developed in [13]. The associated relations between documents was discussed on the keyword level [6], while associations between topics was used to support the intelli- gent browsing [7].

The associations also exist among the semantic link types, i.e., the relationships among resources. There are two primary kinds of relational associations among semantic link types: reasoning association and statistical association. The reasoning association is implied by reasoning rules, and the statistical association can be found according to the distribution of the semantic links in an SLN.

Associations between semantic link types can help find or predict new semantic links in the SLN. It is an important issue to automatically discover new semantic links in an SLN. Reasoning and prediction are two main approaches for the automatic discovery of semantic links. New semantic links are derived by reasoning rules assigned by experts, and semantic link association rules could help predict semantic links based on the probabilistic and statistical characteristics of semantic links in a given SLN. If the semantic links and reasoning rules are true, then the derived semantic links are also true. While semantic links predicted by the statistical associations among the semantic link types may be not sure, and the uncertainty can be described by probability [13].

Measures of the associations between semantic link types are necessary for choose proper semantic links to support the relationship based applications such as ranking the semantic link paths during the relational query in the SLN and resource recommendation according to the associations between resources.

In this paper, we study the reasoning association and statistical association between semantic link types, and propose the approaches to calculation association degrees.

Discovering associations between semantic link types and calculating association degrees can further support the ad- vanced applications base on the SLN.

DOI 10.1109/WISM.2009.49

II. REASONING ASSOCIATION AMONG RELATIONSHIPS  A. Finding Reasoning Associations  An SLN contains two kinds of elements: semantic nodes and semantic links. A semantic node can be an abstract concept, a concrete resource instance and even another SLN.

A Semantic link is a directed edge attached a semantic relation type (semantic link type) between two semantic nodes. A set of reasoning rules can reflect the reasoning associations between semantic link types.

Suppose N1, N2 and N3 are semantic nodes; N1 ??? N2,  N2 ??? N3 and N1  ??? N3 are semantic links. If N1 ???  N2, N2 ??? N3 ? E1  ??? N3, where ? means ?imply?, denoted by ? ? ? ? ? for simplicity.

Definition 2.1 (Reasoning Association): Let ?, ? and ? be semantic link types in an SLN S, we call ? reasoning associates with ? and ?, denoted as ? D ? (? D ?), if there is a reasoning rule ? ? ? ? ?.

Definition 2.2 (Reasoning Relevance): Let ? and ? be semantic link types in a reasoning association graph of S.

? is reasoning relevant to ?, denoted as ? B ?, if there is a directed path from ? to ?.

Reasoning relevance is transitive, i.e., ? B ? and ? B ? imply ? B ?. A semantic link type ? and its reasoning rel- evant types formulate a reasoning relevant closure, denoted by C(?).

B. Calculating Reasoning Association Degree  The reasoning associations between semantic link types in an SLN formulate a graph, called reasoning association graph. The directed edges in the reasoning association graph is from the preconditions to consequents. The reasoning association graph of semantic link types are decided by the semantic link reasoning rules. In a reasoning association graph of semantic link types, each triangle is corresponding to a semantic link reasoning rule, dashed arrows show the order of reasoning preconditions, and solid arrows show the reasoning associations between semantic links.

Example: An example for calculating reasoning associa- tions between semantic links according to a set of reasoning rules, shown in Table I, for an SLN S.

Table I SEMANTIC LINK REASONING RULES OF SLN S  No. Reasoning rule  1 ?1 ? ?2 ? ?0 2 ?1 ? ?3 ? ?0 3 ?4 ? ?5 ? ?3 4 ?5 ? ?6 ? ?1  Fig. 1 shows the reasoning association graph of SLN S according to the reasoning rules in Table I.

Reasoning association degree between semantic links can be calculated according to the reasoning association  ?4 ?5 ?6  ?3 ?1 ?2  ?0  Figure 1. Reasoning association graph of SLN S  graph. In a association graph, an arrow means a causal relationship between semantic link types. The reasoning association graph can be transformed to a Bayesian network by eliminating the cycles and loops. Bayesian networks are a specific type of graphical model [4] which is a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) representing a set of variables and probabilistic dependencies. All the semantic link types hav- ing arrows to a semantic link type act as its parameters.

According to rule 1-2 in Table I, semantic link types ?1, ?2 and ?3 are reasoning preconditions of ?0, and the true value table of them can be constructed. Table II shows the truth table of semantic link type ?0. The semantic link reasoning is related with the orders of semantic link.

Table II TRUTH VALUE TABLE OF SEMANTIC LINK TYPE ?0  ?0 ?1 ?2 ?3  T T T F T T F T T T T T F T F F F F T F F F F T F F T T F F F F  Conditional probabilistic rules between semantic links can be calculated by the truth table of semantic link types. Table III shows the conditional probability table of semantic link type ?0.

Table III CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY OF SEMANTIC LINK TYPE ?0  One parameter Two parameter Three parameter  P (?0|?1) = 3/4 P (?0|?1, ?2) = 1 P (?0|?1, ?2, ?3) = 1 P (?0|?2) = 1/2 P (?0|?1, ?3) = 1 P (?0|?3) = 1/2 P (?0|?2, ?3) = 1/2  Each semantic link type and its direct reasoning dependant semantic link types formulate a conditional probability table (CPT). With the CPT of a given semantic link, semantic links     between two given semantic nodes can be predicted. Fig. 2 shows the Bayesian network of semantic link type ?.

?1 ?2 ?3  ?0  p(?1) p(?2) p(?3)  p(?0|?1) = 3/4  p(?0|?2) = 1/2  p(?0|?3) = 1/2  p(?0|?1, ?2) = 1  p(?0|?1, ?3) = 1  p(?0|?1, ?2, ?3) = 1  Figure 2. Bayesian network for semantic link type ?  The Bayesian network of semantic link types can be extracted from the reasoning association graph of semantic link types. It is necessary to build the Bayesian network for each semantic link type with the loops and cycles ignored. If two semantic link types have no reasoning dependency, their Bayesian networks of reasoning dependency can be merged into a larger network as shown in Fig. 3.

?1 ?2 ?3  ?0  p(?0|?1) = 3/4  p(?0|?2) = 1/2  p(?0|?3) = 1/2  p(?0|?1, ?2) = 1  p(?0|?1, ?3) = 1  p(?0|?1, ?2, ?3) = 1  ?5 ?6  ?1  p(?1|?5) = 1/2  p(?1|?6) = 1/2  ?5 ?6  ?1  p(?1|?5) = 1/2  p(?1|?6) = 1/2  ?1 ?2  ?0  p(?0|?1) = 3/4  p(?0|?2) = 1/2  p(?0|?3) = 1/2  p(?0|?1, ?2) = 1  p(?0|?1, ?3) = 1  p(?0|?1, ?2, ?3) = 1  ?4 ?5  ?3  p(?3|?4) = 1/2  p(?3|?5) = 1/2  ?4 ?5  ?3  p(?3|?4) = 1/2  p(?3|?5) = 1/2  Figure 3. Bayesian network for semantic link types in S  Each semantic link type ? and its reasoning precondi- tioned semantic link types formulate a reasoning association tree with the root ?. In the reasoning dependency graph, if two semantic link types are reachable but not strong connected, their reasoning association trees can be merged into a large Bayesian network like Fig. 3. If two semantic  link types depend on each other, that is, there is a cycle between them in the reasoning dependency graph, their Bayesian networks can be merged. So a SLN may have one or more Bayesian networks of semantic link types, and all the connected components together formulate a digraph and show the reasoning dependencies between semantic link types.

Given a Bayesian network of a semantic link type, rea- soning associations between other semantic link types and the given semantic link type can be calculated according to the truth tables.



III. STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION AMONG RELATIONSHIPS  Frequent itemset discovery algorithms have been used to solve various problems. A computationally efficient al- gorithm for finding all frequent subgraphs in large graph databases was proposed in [5]. Frequent free tree discovery was discussed [8]. Association rules are discovered from the frequent item sets. Apriori algorithm is to mine as- sociation rules between sets of items in large databases.

Generalized association rules can be found in [2]. There are two indicators for evaluating a semantic link: frequency and interesting degree. The frequency of a semantic link reflects its importance, while the interesting degree of a semantic link indicates its novelty. Usually, the higher the frequency is, the more important it is. However, the interesting degree reduces with the increase of the frequency. Semantic links can be counted first, then the frequency of each semantic link can be calculated.

Associations exist between semantic link pairs which have at least one common semantic node. For each semantic node, the in-links and out-links formulate a semantic link set. Based on these semantic link sets, associations between semantic links can be found by algorithms such as APriori [1].

Frequent patterns such as semantic link type triangles may imply some implicit semantic link reasoning rules.

To discover the statistical associations among semantic link types, the SLN should be completely reasoned first, then frequencies of semantic link type patterns can be calculated.

Frequent semantic link type patterns imply the associations between semantic links.

Suppose a SLN S contains semantic nodes Ni(1 ? i ? n) and semantic link types ?j(1 ? j ? m). The association matrix between semantic nodes and semantic links can be constructed.

linkMatrix =  ???? ?1 ?2 ? ? ? ?m  N1 1 0 ? ? ? 1 N2 0 0 ? ? ? 0 ...

...

...

. . .

...

Nn 0 1 ? ? ? 1  ???? where linkMatrix(i, j) = 1 means that l?j is from or to i; and linkMatrix(i, j) = 0 means that ?j have no     association with i.

Based on the linkMatrix, frequent semantic link patterns  can be discovered by APriori algorithm. Frequent semantic link pairs imply statistic associations between semantic link types which can help predict semantic links around the existed semantic links. Frequent semantic link triangles may imply semantic link reasoning rules which can help discover reasoning rules.

Suppose a semantic link network S contains x semantic link types r1, . . . , rx(x ? 1), a x ? x matrix records the numbers of co-occurrence of semantic link type pairs, denoted by M. M(i, j) equals the number of co-occurrence of semantic link types ri and rj , here i ? 1, j ? x. Ignoring the directions of semantic link type, M(i, j) = M(j, i).

Algorithm 1 shows the construction process of co- occurrence of semantic link types. The time complexity is O(nk2), where n is the number of nodes and k is the average number of adjacent semantic links of each semantic node.

Algorithm 1: Co-occurrence matrix of semantic link types  Input : a SLN S; Output: Co-occurrence matrix M of S.

for (i = 1 to x) do1.1  M[ri, rj ] = 0 ;1.2 foreach (node in S) do1.3  adjacent semantic links of node is1.4 ?1, . . . , ?y(y ? 1) ; for ( i = 1 to y) do1.5  for (j = i+1 to y) do1.6 M[type(?i), type(?j)] + + ;1.7 M[type(?j), type(?i)] + + ;1.8  return M ;1.9  According to the co-occurrence matrix M, the frequency of semantic link type pair (p, q) can be calculated, and then frequent semantic link type pairs can be found.

freq(p, q) = M(p, q) + M(q, p)?x  i=1  ?x j=1 M(i, j)  = 2M(p, q)?x  i=1  ?x j=1 M(i, j)  .

(1) Association rules between semantic link types p and q can  be calculated as follows.

P (q|p) = M(q, p)?x i=1 M(i, p)  = M(p, q)?x i=1 M(i, p)  (2a)  P (p|q) = M(p, q)?x i=1 M(i, q)  = M(y, x)?x i=1 M(i, q)  (2b)  Eq. (1) shows the frequency of semantic link type pairs in a SLN, and it helps find most possible semantic links  in a SLN. While Eq. (2) shows the conditional probability between two semantic link types, and they can be used to predict most possible semantic link types around a given semantic link.

Algorithm 2 shows the counting process of triangles in a completely reasoned SLN.

Algorithm 2: Count triangles in a completely rea- soned SLN  Input : a completely reasoned SLN S with n nodes and x semantic link types;  Output: counting of triangles in S.

for (i = 1 to x) do2.1  for (j =1 to x) do2.2 for (k = 1 to x) do2.3  #{?i, ?j , ?k} = 0;2.4  for (i = 1 to n) do2.5 for (j =1 to n) do2.6  for (k = 1 to n) do2.7 if ( (i 6= j) and (i 6= k) and (j 6= k) and2.8 ({triangle(i, j, k)} 6= ?) ) then  foreach (triangle2.9 ? ? {triangle(i, j, k)}) do  #linktypes(?) + +;2.10  Time complexity of algorithm 2. The vertex sets of trian- gles have  ( n  ) kinds, and for each vertex set there are k3  possible kinds of triangles, here k is the average degree of a semantic node. So the time complexity is O(n3k3).

Suppose ?, ? and ? are three semantic link types in {linktypei|1 ? i ? m}, and they formulate a triangle, denoted by ?(?, ?, ?). The frequency of ?(?, ?, ?) can be calculated.

freq(?(?, ?, ?)) = #?(?, ?, ?)?  1?i?m 1?j?m 1?k?m  #?(?i, ?j , ?k) (3)  The frequency of each triangle of semantic link types can be calculated by Eq. 3, and the frequent triangles can be chosen by setting threshold. If a triangle ?(?, ?, ?) has a corresponding semantic link reasoning rule, then the reason- ing rules is also frequent; else, it is possible that ?(?, ?, ?) implies a new reasoning rule. Frequency of triangles of semantic link types can help find frequent reasoning rules and predict possible reasoning rules.

Frequent patterns with more than three semantic links can be found by association rule discovery algorithm. However, the real explanation of these frequent patterns are related to the specific domain and not generous. Since the subsets of frequent patters must be frequent patterns, frequent patterns     with more than three semantic links can be reflexed by frequent patterns with two or three semantic links.



IV. DISCUSSION The SLN model is a digraph with semantic annotations  on the edges. Reasoning associations is implied by the reasoning rules which are often assigned by the experts, while statistical associations is based on the distributions of the semantic links in the SLN. So the reasoning association can be regarded as the reflection of knowledge in the human brains, while the statistical association is empirical and induced from the statistical data.

Reasoning associations and statistical associations also have close connections. Reasoning associations surely lead to the frequent patterns such as relationship pairs and the triangles of relationships. At the same time, there are some potential semantic link reasoning rules are implied by the frequent patterns in the SLN.

The calculation of reasoning associations are closely related to the reasoning rule set. The reasoning association degrees will further have influence on the efficiency and effect of SLN-based applications.

The discovery of statistical association rules are relevant to the association rule discovery and frequent pattern dis- covery in graphs. So the discovery process of statistical associations should learn from the graph mining, which is the hot research topic in recent years.



V. CONCLUSION The semantic link network is a semantic data model to  manage Web resources and their relationships. The reasoning rules imply the reasoning dependencies between semantic link types. Moreover, statistical associations are implied in the distribution of the semantic link types. This paper study the reasoning association and statistical association between semantic link types. We propose an approaches to calcu- lating the reasoning associations and statistical associations and two algorithms to discover the association rules. The associations between semantic link types help predict new semantic links and expend the query result in the semantic link network.

