Mining Higher-Order Association Rules from Distributed Named Entity Databases

Abstract - The burgeoning amount of textual data in popular. ARM generates rules based on item co-occurrence distributed sources combined with the obstacles involved statistics. Co-occurrence, also called ISt-order association, in creating and maintaining central repositories motivates captures the fact that two or more items appear in the same the need for effective distributed information extraction context. Orders of association higher than -St-order are termed and mining techniques. Recently, as the need to mine higher-order associations. Higher-order association refers to patterns across distributed databases has grown, association among items that come from different contexts.

Distributed Association Rule Mining (D-ARM) algorithms The higher-order associations are formed by linking different have been developed. These algorithms, however, Te through common ite form example, ifassume that the databases are either horizontally or contexts through common item(s). For example, if one vertically distributed. In the special case of databases customer buys {milk, eggs}, and another buys {bread, eggs}, populated from information extracted from textual data, then {milk, breadl is a higher-order association linked existing D-ARM algorithms cannot discover rules based through "eggs".

on higher-order associations between items in distributed Higher-order associations are employed in a number of textual documents that are neither vertically nor real world applications including law enforcement and horizontally distributed, but rather a hybrid of the two. In homeland defense. For example, methamphetamine use is the this article we present D-HOTM, a framework for number one drug problem in 60% of US counties and children Distributed Higher Order Text Mining. Unlike existing are often the victims due to the social nature of the use of this algorithms, D-HOTM requires neither full knowledge of drug - parents often are both abusers, which endangers the the global schema nor that the distribution of data be health of the entire family [34]. The United States Drug horizontal or vertical. D-HOTM discovers rules based on higher-order associations between distributed database Enforcement Administration (DEA) has conducted several records containing the extracted entities. In this paper, operations to investigate the entire methamphetamine two approaches to the definition and discovery of higher trafficking process. In 2003, the DEA and the Royal Canadian order itemsets are presented. The implementation of D- Mounted Police announced the arrests of over 65 individuals HOTM is based on the TMI [20] and tested on a cluster at in ten cities throughout the United States and Canada in an the National Center for Supercomputing Applications international methamphetamine investigation [27]. The arrests (NCSA). Results on a real-world dataset from the were the result of an 18-month international investigation Richmond, VA police department demonstrate the using manual higher-order association techniques that linked performance and relevance of D-HOTM in law distributed documents through addresses, phone numbers, etc.

enforcement and homeland defense. Figure 1 depicts an example of the discovery of higher-  order associations in methamphetamine trafficking. The three KigheywOrds-Higher Orderg. Association,Distribu records are distributed in different databases. The underscoredHigher Order Text Mining.

named entity in record 1 on site 1 reveals the address of a

I. Introduction broker involved in selling precursor chemicals to a meth lab inLA. This same address is extracted from record 2 on site 2,  XXfith the spread of information technology and linking to a second named entity - the phone number - of a v subsequent accumulation of data, data mining is suspect broker named Jason Carton. This same phone number  becoming a necessary data analysis tool with a variety is extracted from record 3 on site 3, revealing the link to a ofIapplications.Amonghediferentapprochestda Canadian chemical company that produces pseudoephedrine,  .. .. .. . ~~~~~~~~~aprecursor chemical used in meth production. Using theminig, association rule minig (ARM), iS one of the most  1-4244-1330-3/07/$25.00O 02007 IEEE. 23B    Record 1 Record 2 Record 3 The paper is organized as follows: in section 2 we discuss The meth lab Jason Carton, Reu Robots, background and related work. In section 3 we present two  found in LA, drug deal CEO of Frega, Inc, approaches to discover higher order itemsets based on ,CA The ,,245 4 St Chicago,, ,achemical different definitions. The D-HOTM framework design and precursor chemicals: L !i company 'came from 245 4th t ... Calls on his cell, pseudoephedrine implementation is discussed in section 4. We present results in St, Chicago, (905)231-9000, section 5, and close with conclusions and future work in :IL 905)231- section 6.

s co -II. Related Work Sitel Site2 Site3 Figure 1. An Example of Higher-Order Association As noted in the Introduction, traditional ARM algorithms  address and phone number, Reu Robots, the supplier of only identify ISt-order associations, i.e., co-occurrence in the pseudoephedrine, can be linked to Jason Carton, a chemical same context. On the other hand, higher-order association broker, who in turn is linked to the producer in LA. Linking occurs between different contexts, linking contexts through the three records through the address and the phone number items such as the value of an attribute in a database. There are results in the rule "meth lab => Reu Robots" based on the two types of ARM algorithms that identify certain higher- higher-order association { meth lab, Jason Carton, Reu order associations: sequential pattern mining and multi- Robots}. This is precisely the kind of information that relational ARM. Sequential pattern mining is a data mining investigators need. No existing ARM algorithms are capable approach that discovers frequent subsequences as patterns in a of producing rules of this nature in a distributed environment. sequence database. The sequential pattern mining algorithm  To identify rules based on higher-order associations in a was introduced by Agrawal and others in [1] and [4]. In later distributed environment, another challenge must be work Mannila et al. introduce an efficient solution to the considered also - data fragmentation. As was made strikingly discovery of frequent patterns in a sequence database [26].

clear in the aftermath of the terrorist attack on September 11, Chan et al. [10] study the use of wavelets in time-series different kinds of records on a given individual may exist in matching and Faloutsos et al. [16] and Keogh et al. [21] different databases - a type of data fragmentation in a propose indexing methods for fast sequence matching using distributed environment. In fact, the United States Department R* trees, the Discrete Fourier Transform and the Discrete of Homeland Security (DHS) recognizes that the proliferation Wavelet Transform. Toroslu et al. introduce the problem of of databases and schemas involving fragmented data poses a mining cyclically repeated patterns [31]. Han et al. introduce challenge to information sharing. As a result, the DHS is the concept of partial periodic patterns and propose a data promoting a "System of Systems" approach that is based structure called the Max Subpattern Tree for finding partial initially on the creation of standards for interoperability and periodic patterns in a time series [19]. To accommodate the communication in areas where standards are currently lacking phenomenon that the system behavior may change over time, [9]. Indeed, efforts are underway to establish standards in a flexible model of asynchronous periodic patterns is schema integration (e.g., OWL [13], GJXDM [18]). proposed in [36]. In [37], instead of frequently occurring Nonetheless, even should there be widespread acceptance of periodic patterns, statistically significant patterns are mined.

such standards, the ability to integrate schemas automatically Aref et al. extend Han's work by introducing algorithms for is still an open research issue [17]. incremental, online and merge mining of partial periodic  Currently, there are no ARM algorithms capable of mining patterns [5]. Bettini et al. propose an algorithm to discover distributed higher-order associations. Existing ARM temporal patterns in time sequences [7].

algorithms for mining distributed data are capable of mining Multi-relational ARM is a type of ARM algorithm only data that is either horizontally or vertically fragmented designed specifically to mine rules across tables in a single [11][29][33]. In addition, they assume that data/schema database [14]. In fact, multi-relational data mining in general integration problems have been solved [12]. Absent the ability (not limited to ARM) is an emerging research area that to reason about record linkage, distributed ARM algorithms enables the analysis of complex, structured types of data such are incapable of identifying higher-order associations. as sequences in genome analysis. Similarly, there is a wealth Similarly, existing algorithms capable of mining higher order of recent work concerned with enhancing existing data mining associations are incapable of mining distributed data. This approaches to employ relational logic. WARMR, for example, paper proposes a novel distributed higher order textual mining is a multi-relational enhancement of Apriori presented by (D-HOTM) framework that (1) provides a theoretical basis for Dehaspe and Raedt [14]. Although WARMR pro-vides a higher order itemsets generation and evaluation; (2) is able to sound theoretical basis for multi-relational ARM, it does not discover propositional rules based on higher-order seriously address the efficiency of computation. In fact the associations between records linked by common items; (3) in runtime performance of WARMR depends heavily on the the absence of knowledge of the complete global schema, implementation of -subsumption, and because - enables mining of distributed data in a hybrid form that is subsumption is NP-complete, performance is poor. In neither horizontally nor vertically fragmented. addition, the model sacrifices the perspicuity of a     propositional representation. In summary, existing higher Indexing [23], we leverage the latent information in higher order ARM algorithms are neither capable of dealing with order connections, and thus refer to higher order itemsets as distributed data (particularly in the absence of knowledge of latent. In the following, we will first precisely define higher the complete schema) nor do they efficiently support 3rd and order association, and then present our approach to the higher order record linkage. generation and evaluation of latent itemsets.

More recently, as the need to mine patterns across If item a and item b from different transactions can be distributed databases has emerged, distributed ARM associated across n distinct records, then items a and b are nth- algorithms have been developed. Existing distributed ARM order associated, denoted as algorithms are based on a kernel that employs either Apriori a -r' i r2 i2 - ... - rn 1i I -rn b where represents the or a similar ARM algorithm based on data-parallelism [3].

t er repes The Fast Distributed Mining (FDM) is based on count distribution co-occurrence relation and i Si termed a linkage item. The [I]. The advantage of FDM over count distribution is that it uorder of a higher-order association is determined by the reduces the communication cost by sending the local frequent numbrd to distinct rors on Tis defntitionalw e candidate itemsets to a polling site instead of broadcasting. rerdio occat mosonce n a gilven transiive lnk.

Also based on CD, Ashrafi et al. [6] propose the Optimized O Distributed Association Mining (ODAM) algorithm which a -j ii 1 i2 - 1 a, which allows an item to be linked to both reduces the size of the average transaction and reduces itself at any order.

the number of message exchanges in order to achieve better Latent itemsets are itemsets in which item pairs may be performance. Noting that FDM does not scale well as the associated by orders of one or higher. For example, the number of sites grow, Schuster and Wolff [29] propose the itemset abk, formed from the higher order link Distributed Decision Miner algorithm based on sampling a rl b r2 rn 1 -n k is latent higher order techniques. Otey et. al. [28] propose an incremental frequent  I  g itemset mining algorithm in a distributed environment which associated: ab is nSthorder associated, bk is ntoth-order focuses on efficiently generating itemsets when the data is associated, and ak is nth-order associated. Due to these updated. associations, abk is a latent itemset.

It is noteworthy that all of the distributed ARM algorithms Considering that for a given higher order link we surveyed assume that the databases are horizontally a -rl b -r2 c rn 1 f -rn k, many other higher order distributed. This limits the applicability of these algorithms. links share the same record sequence. The number of such Thus no existing distributed ARM algorithms are capable of n I identifying higher-order associations, while both existing links is ( ri rij The latent itemsets generated from distributed and higher-order ARM algorithms are unsuitable for use in a distributed environment in which the complete all these links actually are the same as the subsets generated global schema is unknown, data is fragmented in a hybrid from the union of the records. Thus, instead of dealing with a non-vertical, non-horizontal form, and errors occur in record bunch of higher order links, we choose to use the record linkage. In the following section we introduce the concept of sequence, referred as link group, to accomplish the same goal.

latent itemsets which capture the higher order association A link group is a group of higher order links between among items. The support calculation for latent itemsets is records which have the same record sequence. Similar to also proposed. Definition 1, we define the higher order links between records  ri and rn as: r_~a1 r2 _a2 ... . 1~I_an 1 r, where ai is aIII. Approach linkage item. And the link group is written as  The first step in higher order association rule mining is to rj 1 2 r lI rn where I= ri 1+ T discover higher order itemsets. From higher order itemsets, simplify this notation, henceforth, we use higher order association rules can be generated. In this section, we present two different approaches to the discovery t t r a l g of higher order itemsets. First, however, we must provide a latent itemsets generated from the higher order link theoretical framework on which to base higher order itemset a -rl b -r2 c - -rn 1 f rn k could also be discovered discovery. We begin with two different definitions in order to explore the space of higher order itemsets: latent higher order from the link group tj ... 1 r . The size of a link itemsets and explicit higher order itemsets. In the following, group is defined as the product of the sizes of Ij. For example, we introduce definitions and the approaches based on them. given a 3rd-order link group Lg:  To generate the context of latent itemsets in link groups, A. Latent Higher Order Itemset Mining (LHOIM) each record could be mapped to a node, and edges mapped to  Latent higher order itemsets are formed by linking common shared items, then the problem of finding all link different contexts through common item(s), referred to as groups reduces to finding all simple paths between two linkage items. As in our prior work with Latent Semantic vertices in a graph. Finding simple paths between two vertices     is solved using a backtracking technique. The latent itemsets The first step is to form an undirected graph from the input are then generated from the merged records of the link groups. records based on the user's choice of entities. This graph is  Suppose latent itemset A is generated from link group then split into disjoint subgraphs, which is input to Enumpath  r, - r2 - r, I - r, with size s. Based on a in step 4. Enumpath employs the algorithm in [32] to find all straightforward application of Apriori, the support of A would simple paths (i.e., link groups) between two vertices. The' . . . ~~~worst case time complexity of this step iS O(1 V B ) for abe the frequency of occurrence in the link group, i.e., s. This approach presents two challenges: it results in very large given path where V is the set of vertices and B the edges in G.Steps 5 to step 7 in Figure 2 generate merged records from supporstvaes,andues i.tignorsth mefectof thesorde to each link group. Steps 8 to 16 discover the frequent latent calculadethee issues, inwatt follows aich ipraesente to itemsets. The latent itemsets which meet the support thresholdcalculate support for latent itemsets which leverages both the bcm h rqetltn -tmesue ognrt h  size of the ink group an the order.become the frequent latent k-itemsets used to generate the szetofA)bethe set oflinkgroupadhoe whichcontainthelatent latent k+l-itemsets. Except for the support calculation, thisLet L(A) be the set of link groups which contain the latent lel-iepossssmlatohtofArr.

itemset A. We define the support of a latent itemset A as: log10 (l.size + 1) B. Explicit Higher Order Itemset Mining  Eorder Latent itemsets implicitly include itemsets of differentI L(A) .order orders. Explicit itemsets, on the other hand, maintain clear (1) boundaries between itemsets of different orders. An nth-order  The idea behind this global support is simply to account explicit higher order itemset is an itemset for which each pair for both the number of higher order links supporting a given of items is nth_order associated. For example, if abc is a 3rd_ latent itemset as well as the order of the itemset. As order order itemset, then there must exist at least three 3rd-order grows, intuition suggests that support ought to decrease - thus associations between a and b, b and c and a and c the denominator l.order. This reflects the assumption that the respectively. The context of explicit k-itemsets is defined as a longer the link between records, the weaker the itemset k-recordset where there exists at least one nth_order link group association. In contrast, intuition also suggests that the more between each record pair. Thus, an nth-order explicit higher link groups that contain a given itemset, the stronger the order itemset i1i2 ... supported by an nth-order recordset r1r2... r, support should be. These two intuitions are just that - contains no two items from the same record.

certainly, extensive experimentation is required to ascertain Similar to link groups, the size of a recordset is calculated the utility of this definition of support. Nonetheless, our by taking the product of the sizes of each link group. It is preliminary results are quite encouraging [25]. The challenge important to note that a given recordset might be composed of arises when one considers the exponential growth of the link different link groups. This may occur for nth-order recordsets groups' sizes given that order grows linearly. Again, intuition when n is greater than two. In this case, given j instances of suggests that both of these factors are equally important. nth-order k-recordset rs, its size is defined as: Thus, in order to constrain l.size to grow linearly with order, j k(k 1)/2 the log1o is taken. Also, one is added to lsize in the numerator sizenfk (rs) = E ( lgv .size) to ensure that the argument to log10 is non-zero. u=T v=T . Given the sizes for all  Based on the framework discussed above, an algorithm to recordsets, the support of a k-itemset is defined as in equation discover latent itemsets in presented in Figure 2. (2) below as:  Latent Itemset Mining max-order log10 l sizen k (rs) +1  Input: D, L, max_order, minsup SUPk (is) = E Output: latent itemsets t=l t 1. Form adjacency list This metric is similar to Equation 1 - the global support is 2. Generate connected sub-graphs calculated by adding the local support at each level. The local 3. for each G support is also designed based on the intuition that the size of 4. Enumpath(G, max-order) 4. Enupacth(G maorder )- the recordsets should be of same importance as the order. To5d - 2 - rn 1 n constrain sizenk(rs) to grow linearly with order, first the 6. r= ri; r.order = n; r.size = lg.size square root of sizenk(rs) is taken and then the log1o. The 7. add r to R square root accounts for the 0(n2) growth of number of edges 8. L1 = {supported 1-itemsets}; in a recordset as order grows; the logi} accounts for the 9. for ( k=2; Lk ,!=null; k++) exponential growth of sizenk(rs). As before, one is added to10. Ck = apriori-gen(Lk-1); 11. for each r do sizen-k(rs) in the numerator to ensure that the argument to log1o 12. Ct = subset(Ck, r) is non-zero.

13. for all candidates C Ct Based on the framework discussed above, an algorithm to 14. c.count+=loglO(r.size+l)/r.order discover explicit higher order itemsets is presented in Figure 3.

15. Lk = { c Ck c.sup minsup } EHOIM is structured in an order-first level-wise manner.

16. Result= Lk Level-wise means that the size of k-itemsets increases in each  Figure 2. Latent Itemset Mining Algorithm     Explicit Higher Order Itemset Mining VI. D-HOTM Framework Input: D, L, maxorder, minsup Output: higher-order itemsets In this section, we outline the Distributed Higher Order 1. Form Adjacency List Text Mining framework, which discovers rules based on 2. For each pair of vertices (x,y) in G higher order itemsets of entities extracted from textual data.

3. Enumpath(G, x, y, maxorder) The D-HOTM system is composed of entity extraction and 4. For each nth-order association group 1: association rule mining phases. More detail is in [25].

rl - r2 ~ * * * rn 1 - rn The entity extraction phase of D-HOTM is based on [35].

n I The technique employed by these authors, termed RRE  5. rs=(rl, rn), rs.size ri ri+l Discovery, discovers reduced regular expressions for use inrs=(r1, rn), rs.size =(i~ i5~~) information extraction. The algorithm discovers sequences of rs.order = n, words and/or part-of-speech tags that, for a given entity, have  6. if RS2(rs, rs.order) is valid high frequency in the labeled instances of the training data 7. RS2(rs, rs.order).size += rs.size (true set) and low frequency in the unlabeled instances (false 8. else RS2(rs,order)=size set). The algorithm first ascertains the most frequently 9. For ( k = 3; RSk1? ;k++) appearing element of a reduced regular expression (RRE) 10. For (n = 2; n < maxorder; n++) which is called the root of the RRE. It then broadens the 11. RS,_k = Gen-RS(RSn k I ); scope of the RRE in 'AND', 'GAP', and 'Start/End' learning 12. For each recordset rs RSn k hases. (See figure 3 in [35].) 13. Enum_IS(rs, n); pafte fig 3 m [35].m 14. For each itemset is where lisl=k After applying the entity extraction algorithm to 15. Is).-max-order unstructured textual data, the items (i.e., entities) extractedSk(iS).SUP logl0oXII<As).sUp+l Lu populate databases local to each site that in turn become input  t=2  16. Answer=Answer {isIISk(is).sup>=minsup} to our distributed latent itemsets mining algorithm. Each row in a given local database represents an object, which is for example a particular individual mentioned in an investigative  iteration (as is the case for Apriori), while order-first means report. In addition to the items identifying the object such as a that at each level, itemsets are generated across all orders. The person's name or social security number, each row also EHOIM algorithm is presented in Figure 3. In addition to the contains other items known to exist in the source document. It notation used in LHOIM, EHOIM uses RSk to represent the is clear that this distributed data is not horizontally set of k-recordsets. Each member has three fields: recordset, fragmented because there is no guarantee that every site will order and size. RSn k is used for the set of nth-order k- include the same set of items. On the other hand, the data is recordsets; each member has two fields: recordset and size. not vertically fragmented either, because there is no one-to- Similarly, we use ISk for the set of k-itemsets where each one mapping connecting records in the distributed databases.

member has the global support of the corresponding itemset. In addition, the (local) 'schema' for each individual document IS kis used for the set of nth_order k-itemsets, where each varies, and no clean division of all objects' items into itemset has its own local support. identical sets can be made as required for vertically  The first three steps of EHOIM are the same as LHOIM - fragmented data. As a result, the distributed data is neither the generation of link groups. For each link group, steps 5-8 in vertically nor horizontally fragmented, but is present in a form Figure 3 generate the corresponding 2-recordsets, calculating we term a hybridfragmentation.

the size at a given order and storing it in RS2. Steps 9 through The D-HOTM framework provides different options for 16 comprise one outer and two inner loops. The outer loop sharing records between databases in a distributed proceeds in a level-wise manner and keeps track of the sizes environment. The first is the traditional approach in which all of recordsets. Although the (k+l)-recordsets are generated in records are fully shared and the same model is built on each an Apriori-like fashion based on k-recordsets from the site. In this approach, the final model at a given node is based previous iteration, no pruning is performed for recordsets. on both local and remote data. Alternatively, on a given node Step 11 generates the nth_order k-recordsets based on the nth_ D-HOTM can use remote data for higher order link generation, order (k-l)-recordsets using Apriori's candidate generation but filters remote records when generating itemsets. This ability. The size of the recordset is calculated based on the enables a better local model to be built while respecting data equation for sizenk(rs) above. For each nth_order k-recordset privacy concerns. Finally, different sites can use different generated, step 13 enumerates all possible nth_order k-itemsets linkage items, again resulting in different local models.

from the recordset. Steps 14 and 15 calculate the global The D-HOTM system is based on the Text Mining support for a single k-itemset across orders from two to Infrastructure (TMI) developed by the authors [20]. Originally maxorder based on the support in Equation 2. If the global designed for single-processor applications, in its most recent supportAmeets the threshold, the k-itemset is added to the final release (version 1.3), the TMI now includes support for output in step 16. mining in parallel or distributed environments based on  OpenMP or MPI.

240D    HVOI, in many cases showing improvement right through 4th_

V. Experimental Results and Evaluation order. This is a very significant result as it demonstrates  The D-HOTM system and algorithms were evaluated on conclusive evidence for the value of higher order association two real-world data sets, one from a Richmond, VA police rule mining. Figure 4 also depicts the results for experiments department database and one from an online e-commerce site, D-HV and D-HVI in which the models were constructed by Gazelle.com. The Richmond, VA dataset currently contains leveraging remote data during higher order record linkage, but over two hundred thousand records, each with about 70 fields. only local data was used to generate rules. In this case too the We broke the dataset into geographic neighborhoods results reveal a trend of increasing performance as order for analysis, and executed D-HOTM on subsets of each increases. Although the evidence is not as strong, still for neighborhood. In particular, we split each neighborhood into three of the four neighborhoods, the trend is clear. Thus for two parts, one containing records of crimes committed prior two different approaches to constructing models, one privacy to 2003 and the other containing crimes from 2004 through preserving, higher order record linkage improves performance 2006. We created a ground truth by applying the standard (1st- of name-crime pair prediction.

order) association rule mining algorithm Apriori to the three In a second set of experiments with explicit higher order year portion after 2003, and obtained name-crime 2-itemset itemset mining (EHOIM), we employed a real-world dataset pairs. Following this, for each neighborhood tested, we from the KDD Cup 2000 [22] competition. The data is e- executed D-HOTM on the first half of the data in order to commerce transactions from Gazelle.com, a now-defunct predict name-crime pairs that would emerge as Ist-order 2- website for selling socks, pantyhose, etc. This dataset is of itemsets in the following three year period. Different linkage particular interest to us because it has proven difficult to items were used in order to explore the quality of different model in prior work published on KDD Cup 2000. This may models. This is because using more linkage items generally be due, for example, to the sparse nature of the transaction results in a better model. Figure 4 depicts the results of data.

executing D-HOTM on four of the largest neighborhoods in In total, there are 530 transactions involving 244 products the Richmond, VA area: Church Hills North, Gilpin, Jeff in the dataset. Of these, we randomly selected sets of 50, 75, David and Shockoe Bottom. For each neighborhood we 100, and 200 transactions as well as using the full 530 conducted six experiments, four global and two privacy transaction dataset. In order to evaluate the EHOIM preserving. As noted, the experiments involved the use of algorithm, we compared the itemsets generated by EHOIM different linkage items. In addition, all experiments were with two other algorithms: Apriori (1St-order) and Indirect based on the use of associations up to 4th-order. (2nd-order) [30]. The EHOIM algorithm was limited to 6  The first experiment, HV, used home address and vehicle order.

ID as the linkage items. Following this, HVI added document Three different evaluation methods were employed to ID (some records have the same document ID). HVO added demonstrate the utility of higher order associations. First, in occupation, as did HVOI. Several trends can be seen in order to demonstrate the intrinsic value of higher-order Figure 4. First, it is clear that D-HOTM correctly predicted itemsets, we conducted experiments that show that EHOIM increasing numbers of name-crime pairs as more linkage items discovers support for itemsets in small datasets that is only were used. This can be seen by comparing the experiments discoverable by Indirect or Apriori with larger datasets. In that used two linkage items such as HV vs. those that used other words, we demonstrate the ability of EHOIM to more more (such as HVI). This result is not surprising and in fact is accurately calculate support for known good itemsets. Second, expected. A second important trend revealed in Figure 4 is the we demonstrate EHOIM's ability to discover novel itemsets, increase in recall of name-crime pairs as order increases. This undiscovered by either Indirect or Apriori. These novel trend is exhibited almost without exception regardless of the itemsets are either examples of associations that are unique to linkage items chosen. For example, all four neighborhoods higher-orders or are examples of relationships between showed an increase over Ist-order performance for HVO and categories of products on Gazelle.com that are unique to  Church Hill North Gilpin higher orders. We explore these relationships using qualitative 30 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~anecdotalevidence that illustrates the usefulness of the  20 HVOD approach.

l_10 -~D-HV H~ As revealed in Figure 5, results based on multiple runs of  a4 1Z?' 2 3 4 randomized data consistently demonstrated that high support Order itemsets could be discovered by EHOIM using smaller  Je[ffDavl ShockoeBoton datasets than required by Apriori or Indirect to discover the IIIGII--HV I 1 1 1same itemsets. Because our algorithm leverages additional,  H111 !!!!M!!!!!! ! 5!!!!!!!!!!!!11latent information, it can provide more accurate support -DLHV H calculations. We first ran Apriori on the entire set of 530  X 4 records, and discovered 40 itemsets with support larger than two while 145 itemsets had support larger than one. These  Figure 4: Predicted Name-Crime Pairs itemsets act as our ground truth dataset. In each data series,     linkage. We developed a theoretical framework that defines higher order itemsets and their corresponding contexts. In  ~)S~i~B~hp4O-ThpO~s~i%Serimp40op4 tested a distributed higher order association rule mminig m~~~~~~~~~~~~~based onl higEher-rder associatioens In a distributetd  0A --~~~2d on en  50 75 100 200Sd 50 75 100 apractical issues in areas such as the utility of higher-order b)eieB~Tcp45-Top145 d)SerdeEBThp145-Thp145 associations as well as record linkage, evaluation metrics and  Figure 5: Recall Charts on Gazelle.com Data issues in efficiency of execution. Second, our current we randomly selected 50 records as the first test set, then framework for reasoning about record linkage needs to be added randomly selected records to bring the total to 75, and expanded in several ways. Third, metrics are needed to so on for the 100 and 200 record sets. Then, the Apriori and provide a measure of the strength or importance of higher- EHOIM algorithms were applied on each dataset respectively, order links and link clusters. Finally, since both false positive To compare the higher order itemsets generated by EHOIM and false negative mismatches are possible in the linkage with the ground truth itemsets discovered by Apriori, we item/object ID mapping process in D-HOTM, additional chose the top-N itemsets ranked in order of support from high theoretical work is needed to develop suitable metrics for support to low support. In the generated higher order itemsets, evaluating the utility of the resulting rules.

for example, we selected about 45 itemsets to compare with the top 45 itemsets in the ground truth. This particular number Acknowledgements was selected to include all itemsets with the same frequency as the 45th itemset in the ground truth. The same method was The authors wish to thank Lehigh University, the applied when comparing EHOIM's results with the top 145 Pennsylvania State Police, the Lockheed-Martin Corporation, itemsets of the ground truth. The recall comparisons are the City of Bethlehem Police Department, the National portrayed in Figure 5 for orders up to six. From these recall Science Foundation and the National Institute of Justice, US charts, we draw the following conclusion: for most sample Department of Justice. This work was supported in part by datasets (sizes 50 to 200), higher order (especially 3rd and NSF grant number 0534276 and NIJ grant numbers 2003-IJ- higher) results in higher top-N recall of highly-ranked 1st- CX-K003, 2005-93045-PA-IJ and 2005-93046-PA-IJ. Points order itemsets than the 1Storder Apriori algorithm. This is a of view in this document are those of the authors and do not significant result in that it supports our thesis that higher order necessarily represent the official position or policies of Lehigh associations reveal not only novel relationships but also University, the US Department of Justice, the National discover usefulknowledge in smaller datasetsuthan required Science Foundation, the Pennsylvania State Police or the bys Stporder methods. Lockheed Martin Corporation.

For comparison purposes we also applied LHOIM on We are also grateful for the help of co-workers, family Gazelle.com data and achieved similar results for the 200 members and friends. Co-authors S. Li, C. D. Janneck, T. Wu record dataset, but little to any benefit in the smaller sets. and W. M. Pottenger also gratefully acknowledge the Interestingly, the Gazellecom experiments reveal the different continuing help of their Lord and Savior, Yeshua the Messiah characteristics of LHOIM and EHOIM. Clearly, EHOIM (Jesus the Christ) inourlives and work. Amen.

discovers more hidden associations than LHOIM. In particular, EHOIM discovers latent information within smaller References datasets that LHOIM misses. On the other hand, the time complexity of the LHOIM algorithm is significantly less than [1]. R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski, and A. N. Swami. Mining association rules  VI. Conclusions and Future Work 207-216, Washington, D.C., 26-28 1993.

We have embarked onn sambitious program of research [2]. R. Agrawal, H. Mannila, R. Srikant, H. Toivonen, and A. I. Verkamo.

byI't.order methoo Fast discovery of association rules. Advances in knowledge discoveryand development that addresses sigificant challengesLn and data mining, pages 307-328, 1996.

distributed data management faced by organizations such as [3]. R. Agrawal and J. C. Shafer. Parallel mining of association rules.

law enforcement agencies and healthcare providers. We have IEEE Trans. On Knowledge And Data Engineering, 8:962-969, 1996.

identified critical assumptions made in existing association [4]. R. Agrawal and R. Srikant. Mining sequential patterns. Eleventh complex distributed environments in which the complete [5]. W. G. Aref, M.G. Elfeky and A.K. Elmagarmid. Incremental, Online global schema is unknown, data is fragmented in a hybrid and Merge Mining of Partial Periodic Patterns in Time-Series non-vertical, non-horizontal form, and errors occur in record     vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 332-342, 2004. episodes in event sequences. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery,  [6]. M. Z. Ashrafi, D. Taniar, and K. Smith. ODAM: An optimized vol. 1, no. 3, 259-289, 1997.

distributed association rule mining algorithm. IEEE Distributed [27]. USDOJ News. Over 65 Arrested in International Methamphetamine Systems Online, 05(3), March 2004. Investigation. 2003.

[7]. C. Bettini, X.S. Wang, S. Jajodia and J. Lin. Discovering frequent http://www.usdoj.gov/dea/pubs/pressrel/pr04l503.htmI 'etptenwihmlilgrnlrtein time sequences. [28]. M.E. Otey, S. Parthasarathy, W. Chao, A. Veloso and W. Meira.event patterns with multiple granularities Paale and distributed mehd fo inrmna reuntme   [8]. C. Borgelt and R. Kruse. Induction of Association Rules: Apriori 34, No. 6, pp. 2439-2450, 2004.

Implementation. In 14h Conf*on Computational Statistics, 2002. [29]. Schuster and R. Wolff. Communication-Efficient Distributed Mining  [9]. D. Boyd. Director of the Department of Homeland Security's new of Association Rules. Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int'l Conf. Management Office of Interoperability and Compatibility, in a presentation at the ofData, ACM Press, 2001, pp. 473-484.

Technologies for Public Safety in Critical Incident Response [30]. P.N. Tan, V. Kumar, and J. Srivastava. Indirect association: Mining Conference and Exposition, September 2004. higher order dependencies in data. Technical Report TROO-037,  [10]. K. Chan and A. Fu. Efficient Time-Series Matching by Wavelets. In University of Minnesota, 2000.

Proc. of 1999 Int. Conf. on Data Engineering, Sydney, Australia, [31]. H. Toroslu and M. Kantarcioglu. Mining Cyclically Repeated Patterns.

March. 1999. Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2114, p. 83, 2001.

[11]. Cheung, Han, Ng, Fu, and Fu. A fast distributed algorithm for mining [32]. T. UNO. An Output Linear Time Algorithm for Enumerating Distributed Information Systems. IEEE Computer Society Technical Japan, 47-53, 2003.

Committee on Data Engineering, and ACM SIGMOD, 1996. [33]. J. Vaidya and C. Clifton. Privacy preserving association rule mining in  [12]. C. Clifton, M. Kantarcioglu, A. Doan, G. Schadow, J. Vaidya, A. vertically partitioned data. In KDD '02, pages 639-644, New York, Elmagarmid, and D. Suciu. Privacy-preserving data integration and NY, USA, 2002. ACM Press.

sharing. In DMKD '04: Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGMOD [34]. Wilson. Meth crisis 'disastrous' for US. Citizen, Oct 2005.

workshop on Research issues in data mining and knowledge [35]. T. Wu and W.M. Pottenger. A Semi-Supervised Active Learning discovery, pages 19-26, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM Press. Algorithm for Information Extraction from Textual Data. JASIST,  [13]. Dean M. and Schreiber G. OWL Web Ontology Language Reference. volume 56, number 3, pages 258-271, 2005.

Editors, W3C Recommendation, 10 February 2004. [Online Article]. [36]. J. Yang, W. Wang and P. Yu. Mining asynchronous periodic patterns Retrieved Nov. 25, 2005 from the World Wide Web: in time series data. Proc. SIGKDD, 275-279, 2000.

http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-owl-ref-20040210/. [37]. J. Yang, W. Wang and P. Yu. Mining surprising periodic patterns.

[14]. L. Dehaspe and L. D. Raedt. Mining association rules in multiple Proc. SIGKDD, 2001.

relations. In ILP '97: Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Inductive Logic Programming, pages 125-132, London, UK, 1997.

Springer-Verlag.

[15]. M. Elfeky, V. Verykios and A. Elmagarmid. TAILOR: A Record Linkage Toolbox. In Proc. of the 18th Int. Conf. on Data Engineering, 2002.

[16]. C. Faloutsos, M. Ranganathan, and Y. Manolopoulos. Fast Subsequence Matching in Time-Series Databases. In Proc. of the 1994 ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. on Management of Data, Minneapolis, Minnesota, May, 1994.

[17]. M. R. Genesereth, A. M. Keller, and 0. M. Duschka. Infomaster: an information integration system. In ACM SIGMOD Conference, pages 539-542, 1997.

[18]. GJXDM. Global Justice XML Data Model. [Online Article]. Retrieved Nov. 17, 2005 from the World Wide Web: http://www.it.ojp.gov/gjxdm  [19]. J. Han, G. Dong, and Y. Yin. Efficient mining partial periodic patterns in time series database. Proc. ICDE, 106-115, 1999.

[20]. L.E. Holzman, T.A. Fisher, L.M. Galitsky, A. Kontostathis and W. M.

Pottenger. A Software Infrastructure for Research in Textual Data Mining. The International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools, volume 14, number 4, pages 829-849. 2004.

[21]. E. Keogh, K. Chakrabarti, M. Pazzani and S. Mehrotra.

Dimensionality Reduction for Fast Similarity Search in Large Time Series Databases. Springer-Verlag, Knowledge and Information Systems, p. 263-286, 2001.

[22]. Ron Kohavi, Carla Brodley, Brian Frasca, Llew Mason, and Zijian Zheng. KDD-Cup 2000 organizers' report: Peeling the onion.

SIGKDD Explorations, 2(2):86-98, 2000.

[23]. A. Kontostathis and W. M. Pottenger. A Framework for Understanding LSI Performance. Information Processing & Management, Volume 42, Issue 1, Pages 56-73. January, 2006.

[24]. V.I. Levenstein. Binary Codes Capable of Correcting Deletions, Insertions, and Reversals. Sov. Phys. Dokl. 10:707-710, 1966.

[25]. 5. Li, T. Wu and W. M. Pottenger. Distributed Higher Order Association Rule Mining Using Information Extracted from Textual Data. SIGKDD Explorations, vol. 7:1, June, 2005.

