Applying Web Usage Mining Techniques to Discover Potential Browsing  Problems of Users

Abstract  In this paper, a web usage mining based approach is proposed to discover potential browsing problems.

Two web usage mining techniques in the approach are introduced, including Automatic Pattern Discovery (APD) and Co-occurrence Pattern Mining with Distance Measurement (CPMDM). A combination method is also discussed to show how potential browsing problems can be identified  1. Introduction   Website design is an important criterion for the success of a website. In order to improve website design, it is essential to understanding how the website is used through analysing users? browsing behaviour.

Currently there are many ways to do this, and analysis of the clickstream data is claimed to be the most convenient and cheapest method [3]. Web usage mining is a tool that applied Data Mining techniques to analyse web usage data [1], and it is a suitable technique that can be used to discover potential browsing problems. However, traditional web usage mining techniques are not sufficient enough for discovering potential browsing problems, such as Clustering, Classification and Association Rule.

In this paper, we proposed an approach, which is based on the concept of web usage mining and follows the KDD (Knowledge Discovery in Database) process.

Two main techniques are included, which are Automatic Pattern Discovery, and a co-occurrence pattern mining, which is improved from traditional traversal pattern mining. These techniques are claimed can be used to discover potential browsing problems.

2. An Approach for Applying Web Usage Mining Techniques  In this paper, we proposed an approach for applying web usage mining techniques to discover potential browsing problems. Figure 1 presents the proposed approach, which is based on the KDD process [2]. In this approach, the KDD process will be run as a normal process, from data collection and pre-  processing, to pattern discovery and analysis, recommendation and action. The second step (pattern discovery and analysis) will be the main focus of this paper.

Figure 1. A KDD based approach for discovering potential browsing problems   3. Automatic Patterns Discovery (APD)  In our previous work [4], some interesting patterns have already been identified, including Upstairs and Downstairs pattern, Mountain pattern and Fingers pattern. The Upstairs pattern is found when the user moves forward in the website and never back to the web page visited before. The Downstairs pattern is that the user moves backward, that is the user returns to the visited pages. The Mountain pattern occurs when a Downstairs pattern immediately follows an Upstairs pattern. The Fingers pattern occurs when a user moves from one web page to browse another web page and then immediately returns to the first web page. These patterns are claimed to be very useful for discovering potential browsing problems (see [4] for further detail).

The APD method is based on the concept of sequential mining to parse the browsing routes of users.

The APD method is performed by a three-level browsing route transformation algorithm. The level-1 elements include Same, Up and Down. The level-2 elements are Peak and Trough, and the final level is to discover the Stairs, Fingers and Mountain pattern (See [5] for more detail about the APD method).

Table 1 shows an example of number-based browsing sequences, which are transformed from the browsing routes of users (the number denotes the  0-7695-2916-X/07 $25.00  ? 2007    occurrence sequence of the visited web page in a user?s session). Table 2 shows the discovered final patterns by performing the APD method.

Table 1. Number-based browsing sequences Number Number-based sequence 1 0,1,2 2 0,0,1,0,2,0,3,0,4,0,5,6,7,6,7,8,6,4,6,5,0  Table 2. Final patterns Number Patterns 1 Upstairs 2 Finger, Finger, Finger, Finger, Mountain,  Mountain, Mountain  4. Co-occurrence Pattern Mining with Distance Measurement (CPMDM)  CPMDM is another technique that can be used to analyse the browsing behaviour of users, which is an improvement of co-occurrence pattern mining by introducing a Distance measurement. Co-occurrence pattern is a pattern that used to describe the co- occurrence frequency (or probability) of two web pages in users browsing routes. The additional measurement, Distance, is a measurement that used to measure how many browsing steps from one page to another in a co-occurrence pattern.

There are three different directions of the distance measurement, including Forward, Backward and Two-Way. The Forward distance measures the distance from web page A to B of the co-occurrence pattern A B. The Backward distance on the other hand measures the distance from B to A of the co- occurrence pattern A B. The Two-Way distance combines forward and backward distance. It ignores the direction of the association rule, and takes all co- occurrence patterns about A and B.

5. Combining APD and CPMDM for Discovering Browsing Problems   The analysis results of the APD and CPMDM are two totally different analyses of users? browsing behaviour. However, there will be some biases if only one of these two methods is used to assess the website?s design. Therefore, if the analysis results of the APD and CPMDM can be combined, more concrete indications of potential problems in the website?s design can be discovered.

Table 3 shows an example about combining the APD and CPMDM methods for discovering potential, browsing problems. In this case, the starting page of the co-occurrence patterns is the home page of the  University of York website. In the table, the Support means the probability of the co-occurrence pattern and the Distance is the average forward distance of the pattern. The proportion of Stairs and Fingers pattern is measured by using the APD method. In this case, we consider that the fingers pattern is a problematical pattern, and the longer the distance means the more difficult for a user to traverse from one page to another.

Therefore, the browsing route from home page to /uao/ugrad/course page can easily to be discovered as a route that potential browsing problem may occur.

Table 3. Combining the APD and CPMDM of ?The people who view home page then view? URL Support Distance  (Average) Stairs Pattern  Fingers Pattern  /uao/ugrad/ 0.25 9.1271 44% 39% /gso/gsp/ 0.173 5.3195 52% 26% /uao/ugrad/courses/ 0.127 16.9021 34% 47%  6. Conclusion  This paper proposed a users? browsing behaviour analysis approach which is based on applying web usage mining techniques. The concepts of the APD and CPMDM have been briefly introduced, and the combination method has been discussed in this paper as well. From the example of the combination method, it showed that potential browsing problems of users can be discovered easily. The approach that proposed in this paper is therefore beneficial for the area of website design improvement.

