

Abstract?The extensive amounts of knowledge and data  stored in medical databases require the development of  specialized tools for storing and accessing of data, data analysis  and effective use of stored knowledge of data. The goal is to  present how methods and tools for intelligent data analysis are  helpful in narrowing the increasing gap between data gathering  and data comprehension. This goal is achieved by applying  Association Rules Technique to help in analyzing and  retrieving hidden patterns for a large volume of data collected  in a medical database for a large hospital. The approach used  led to results normally unattainable using conventional  techniques. Specifically, an episode database for Nephrology  examinations, signs, symptoms and diagnosis is used.

Theoretical and practical features for the Incremental  Enhanced Association Rule Algorithm are presented. These  features include Rules, Classification, Clarity, Automation,  Accuracy, Relational Database Management Systems  (RDBMS) and Raw Data.



I. INTRODUCTION  Modern hospitals are well equipped with monitoring and  other data collection devices, which provide relatively  inexpensive means to collect and store the data in hospital  information systems. Extensive amounts of data gathered in  medical databases require specialized tools for storing and  accessing data, data analysis, and effective use of data. In  particular, the increase in data volume causes great  difficulties in extracting useful information for decision  support. Moreover the traditional manual data analysis tools  and methods for computer-based analysis are incapable to  deal with the tremendous data volumes.

To overcome these problems, medical information may  use the technologies developed in the new interdisciplinary  field of knowledge discovery in databases (KDD),  encompassing pattern recognition, machine learning,  visualization, and statistical tools to support the analysis of  data and the discovery of regularities and irregularities that  are encoded within the data. The results of computer-based  analysis have to be communicated to business users in  understandable way.



II. BASIC TERMINOLOGY: DATA MINING, RULE ASSOCIATIONS  A. Data Mining:  Data mining can be defined as a decision support process  in which we search for patterns of information in data.

Another definition of data mining is that it refers to the  automated process of data analysis in which the system takes  the initiative to generate patterns by itself.

B. Rule Associations  Frequent pattern mining plays an important role in  several Data Mining tasks including association rules [6]  [9], sequential patterns [5] [12] [11], partial periodicity and  constraint based associations [16].

Rules have the advantage of being able to deal with  numeric and non-numeric data in a uniform manner. Rules  can also work well on multidimensional and OLAP (On  Line Analytical Processing) data because they can deal with  ranges of numeric data and their logical formats which  allows their patterns to be merged along multiple  dimensions.

Recently many researchers have investigated incremental  mining algorithms for mining frequent patterns that use  information collected during an earlier mining process to cut  down the cost of finding new patterns in the whole database.

Theses algorithms were investigated in many areas and in  many techniques, some of these algorithms used tree  structures[4], others used weighting techniques[18], some  researchers presented incremental mining algorithms for  distributed databases [2], others presented similar algorithms  for web databases [3][17] or for on line data streams [1] or  for spatial databases [10][ 14] or for constrained  databases[15], some researchers presented incremental  mining algorithms that uses sliding window[7] and many  other different incremental mining algorithms [13][8][6].



III. APPLYING DATA MINING TECHNIQUES IN A MEDICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM CASE  A. The nature of medical databases:  Modern hospitals are well equipped with monitoring and  other data collection devices, which provide relatively  inexpensive means to collect and store the data in hospital  information systems.

Mining Medical Databases using Proposed Incremental Association  Rules Algorithm (PIA)  Laila Elfangary and Walid Adly Atteya  Helwan University   DOI    DOI    DOI 10.1109/ICDS.2008.10    DOI 10.1109/ICDS.2008.10           Extensive amounts of data gathered in medical databases  require specialized tools for storing and accessing data, data  analysis, and effective use of data.

In particular, the increase in data volume causes great  difficulties in extracting useful information for decision  support. Moreover the traditional manual data analysis tools  and methods for computer-based analysis are incapable to  deal with the tremendous data volumes.

To overcome these problems, medical information may  use the technologies developed in the new interdisciplinary  field of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD),  encompassing pattern recognition, machine learning,  visualization, and statistical tools to support the analysis of  data and the discovery of regularities and irregularities that  are encoded within the data.

The results of computer-based analysis have to be  communicated to business users in understandable way.

In this respect, the analysis tools have to deliver  transparent results and most often facilitate human  intervention in the analysis process. A good example is a  machine learning tool that, as a result of data analysis, aims  to derive a symbolic model of high transparency and  accuracy.

The well-developed information infrastructure of modern  hospitals provides relatively inexpensive means to store the  data, which can become widely available via  internet/intranet.

The rapidly emerging globality of data requires standards  in terminology, vocabularies and formats to support data  sharing, standards for interfaces between different sources  of data and integration of heterogeneous data (including  images), and standards in the design of electronic patient  records.

Many environments still lack such standards, which  hinders the use of data analysis tools on large global  datasets, limiting their application to datasets collected for  specific diagnosis, screening, prognostic, monitoring,  therapy support (treatment without drugs or operations) or  other patient management purposes.

Patient records that were collected from one of the  greatest Cairo Hospitals for diagnosis and prognosis  typically encompass values of clinical and laboratory  parameters, as well as results of particular investigations  specific to the given task  These data sets used in monitoring were collected from  patients in intensive care or over long periods of time (three  years interval) in the case of patients with chronic diseases  (acute diseases over long time).

B. Potential Benefits of applying Knowledge Discovery (KDD) in medical databases:  The data consists of medical tests (attributes / itemsets)  prescribed for patients. There are hundreds of medical tests  but only a few of them were prescribed for each patient. The  goal is to see if any of the medical diagnosis could be  predicted by combination of any medical tests. If such tests  were found, they could potentially be used to avoid giving  patients redundant tests. Also complex/expensive tests may  be replaced with simpler/cheaper tests. Moreover, patterns  that indicate if the patient is likely to be affected with a  certain diagnosis should be discovered.

The medical staff had severl goals:  1. Model the outcome of the medical test in terms of other tests.

2. See what kinds of tests were prescribed together.

3. See what kinds of test were associated with medical  diagnosis.



IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF RULE ASSOCIATION TECHNIQUES ON THE MEDICAL DATABASE:  A.  Assumptions:  The implementation of the Incremental Enhanced  Association Rule Algorithm [6] was done to help in  discovering and presenting the features of the algorithm, to  accomplish this task, the following steps were made.

1. Initial database was gathered from the medical database of the hospital  2. After certain intervals and when new transactions were added to the database,  these increments were also collected.

3. The Incremental Enhanced Association Rule Algorithm was applied many times  on these increments to extract the desired  rules.

4. Support and Confidence for the rules were modified many times and the influence of  their change on the rules was recorded on  all experiments.

5. All experiments were implemented on the same hardware (same computer with the  same processor and memory).

6. All experiments were implemented on the same operating system (Windows 2003  with the minimum services installed).

7. No additional processes were running in the background.

8. No scheduled programs were running.

9. No Screen saver was chosen.

To be sure that there?s no affecting external criterion  when calculating time for all experiments, the experiments  were implemented many times and the readings were  recorded. When comparing the readings, which were  approximately the same, the average of the readings were  recorded for statistical analysis for both of the techniques.

B.  Applying Association Rules Technique on the medical data:  This research was done in the medical domain to discover  rules in a large set of data recorded in The Nephrology  Department in the Hospital concerning the IGA  glomerulonephritis?diagnosis  IGA glomerulonephritis: Chronic form of  glomerulonephritis, which is inflammation in the kidney  characterized by the inflammation of the capillary loops in           the glomeruli of the kidney (Network of tiny blood vessels  in the kidneys where the blood is filtered and waste products  are removed).

Because it is the policy of the hospital to record the  follow-up information we have full records for the patients  symptoms, signs, and examinations. The medical tests and  diagnosis that were given to the patients are described in the  following table:      Code Medical Tests  AP Heamaturia  BP Mild Elevation Serum Cereatinine  CP Hypertention  DP Normal Light Microscopy  EP Purpura  HP Mesangial Expantion  Table (1) Sample of medical tests    Code Medical Diagnosis  ZN No IGA glomomlonophritis  ZP IGA glomomlonophritis          Table (2) Sample of medical diagnosis  The Information Technology Department of the hospital  coded the tests as in Table (1) and Table (2), in addition they  prepared a file containing the measurements for the patient  in a conventional format as in Table (3), the first column  represent the patient number which is a serial number (in our  case it represents the transaction id), the second column  represents the signs/symptoms/examinations code which is  the medical test (in our case it represents the itemsets to be  investigated) or the diagnosis prescribed for the patients.

There were 16640? transactions in the database for 3360?  patient and eight different itemsets. The next section  contains figures that describe the steps in implementing the  Association Rule Algorithm. It shows the medical tests and  the transactions in the database, and how data was processed  into the (TID, itemset) form, then how the Incremental  Enhanced Association Rule Algorithm [6] were applied on  the processed data, also how rules are generated and how the  reports for the frequent itemsets and for the discovered rules  are generated.

Transaction Id Examination/Diagnosis  1 AP  1 CP  1 DP  1 ZP  Table (3) Extract of the database transactions table  This data was processed by the program to create a  combined file in a transactional format with two columns as  shown in Table (4), the transaction ID for the patient and the  tests/diagnosis prescribed for him, this would enable the  discovery of associations between these itemsets.

Transaction Id Examination  1 AP-CP-DP-ZP  Table (4) Extract of the database transactions table after program  processing    The Incremental Enhanced Association Rule Algorithm  [6] was applied to this data which were experimented with  various supports. The rules discovered were then made  available to the medical staff for comment. These rules have  been approved from medical point of view by medical  specialists.

The algorithm generated different rules. One of the most  interesting and good rules for the medical staff was:    If Heamaturia  And Mild Elevation Serum Cereatinine  And Hypertention  And Normal Light Microscopy  Then IGA glomomlonophritis  With Confidence = 99 %

V. KEY FEATURES FOR THE INCREMENTAL ENHANCED ASSOCIATION RULE ALGORITHM:  A. Key Features:  1) Rules: Can the technique be used to efficiently create  rules in the database, and does it have a proven method for  combining user rules to make predictions?

2) Classification: Can the technique be used to perform  classification on input data?

3) Clarity: How clear is the data mining technology at  explaining or exposing the model that is being used to make  the prediction and are the results that come out of the use of  the technique clear and understandable, or are they complex  and non-intuitive?

4) Automation : Is the technique relatively automated and  easy to use, or does it require a lot of expertise in data  mining?

5) Accuracy: How accurate is the data mining technology  at getting the right answer?

6) RDBMS: Is the technique amenable to being  embedded directly into RDBMS data warehouse systems, or  does it need to have proprietary data structures?

7) Raw Data: Can the technique work with the predictor  values as they appear in the original database, or does a lot  of processing need to be performed?

B. Results:  Rules: When applying the Incremental Enhanced  Association Rule Algorithm on medical data, it was found           that Rule induction systems extract rules from the database  and make them understandable to the end user.

Classification: Although rule induction systems have  been used to summarize data through high-level macro rules,  they are not mutually exclusive in the way that they divide  the data the way that clustering systems typically do.

Clarity: Rule-based systems are relatively  understandable, but the great number of rules might  overwhelm the user.

Automation: Rule induction systems tend to be highly  automated in the construction ordering and presentation of  the rules. The user is often required to investigate through  large numbers of rules that are proposed as interesting in  order to actually determine whether the rule is important or  not.

Accuracy: When rule induction systems are used for  prediction, their predictive accuracies can be among the  best. In Association Rule we had 99 % Confidence for the  observed rule.

RDBMS: Rule induction systems generally utilize  algorithms that are difficult to implement directly within an  RDBMS without a database extract. The rules themselves  can be deployed against an RDBMS via SQL.

Raw Data: These systems may require some pre-  processing for the data but are better than most of the Neural  Network algorithms.

CONCLUSION  Discovering association rules between items in a large  collection of data has been described as an important  technique in Data Mining.

An episode database for Nephrology examinations, signs,  symptoms and diagnosis is used. Applying the Incremental  Enhanced Association Rule Algorithm [6] to this episode  data led us to discover patterns that are helpful in diagnosis  research to identify minimum number of tests for each  diagnosis. Thus minimizing redundant tests and replacing  expensive or complex tests with cheaper or simpler tests.

Also this might help in indicating if the patient is likely to be  affected with a certain diagnosis.

We presented the different key features that were  observed during applying the Incremental Enhanced  Association Rule Algorithm on the medical data. The  Technique helped to discover the tests that are associated  with the medical diagnosis IGA Glomerulonephritis.

The Incremental Enhanced Association Rule Algorithm  generated many useful rules and expressed the discovered  information in an understandable way. The rules discovered  were then made available to the medical staff for comment.

These rules have been approved from medical point of view  by medical specialists.

However, when applying Association Rules Technique  on the medical database a great deal of pre-processing for  the data was required to convert data into the (TID, itemset)  form.

The results obtained from this research demonstrate the  potential value of Data Mining in medical information  systems to discover the hidden medical rules.The approach  used led to results there are normally unattainable using  conventional techniques.



VI. SUGGESTED FUTURE WORK  Scalabilty is one of the most important considerations in  Data Mining. As business organizations collect more and  more data, the problem size also increases. Moreover, new  applications continue to be developed. Extending the  techniques presented in this work to deal with larger data  volumes through distributed and parallel computing could  be useful in order to handle larger Data Warehouses.

Another future directions for this work is to apply the  Data Mining Techniques namely the Association Rules  Technique in another domain to help in identifying new  patterns and discovering new hidden information.

