Transportation Data Analyzing by Using Data Mining Method

Abstract   Intelligent transportation systems (ITS) encompass a broad range of wireless and wire line communications- based information and electronics technologies. One of the key problems of intelligent transportation system is the analysis and management of traffic information [2].

Some obvious information is obtained easily though traditional query operation from traffic database, but deeper information that hides in the traffic database is difficult to be discovered.  Based on it, the author proposed a data mining method, which is applied in intelligent transportation system (ITS) well. This is a belief abstract.

1. Introduction   Intelligent transportation systems (ITS) encompass a broad range of wireless and wire line communications- based information and electronics technologies.

Intelligent transportation system (ITS) is a most promising method in dealing with the traffic problems [1].

One of the key problems of intelligent transportation system is the analysis and management of traffic information. Some obvious information is obtained easily though traditional query operation from traffic database, but deeper information that hides in the traffic database is difficult to be discovered. Deep level information usually contains characteristics of data and forecast information of data development tendency.

Data mining currently is hot topic research area and is applied in database, artificial intelligence, statistics, and so on. It may discover valuable knowledge and the patterns in the large-scale database for users.

2. Data mining method   The analytical techniques used in data mining are often well-known mathematical algorithms and techniques.

What is new is the application of those techniques to general business problems made possible by the increased availability of data and inexpensive storage and processing power. Also, the use of graphical interfaces has led to tools becoming available that business experts  can easily use. Some of the tools used for data mining are [2]: 1) Artificial neural networks. On-linear predictive models that learn through training and resemble biological neural networks in structure.

2) Decision trees. Tree-shaped structures that represent sets of decisions. These decisions generate rules for the classification of a dataset.

3) Rule induction. The extraction of useful if-then rules from data based on statistical significance.

4) Genetic algorithms. Optimization techniques based on the concepts of genetic combination, mutation, and natural selection.

5) Nearest neighbor. A classification technique that classifies each record based on the records most similar to it in an historical database.

3. Association rules mining   Association rule mining finds interesting associations and/or correlation relationships among large set of data items. Association rules show attributes value conditions that occur frequently together in a given dataset.

Association rules identify collections of data attributes that are statistically related in the underlying data. An association rule is of the form X => Y where X and Y are disjoint conjunctions of attribute-value pairs. The confidence of the rule is the conditional probability of Y given X, Pr(Y|X), and the support of the rule is the prior probability of X and Y, Pr(X and Y). Here probability is taken to be the observed frequency in the data set. The traditional association rule mining problem can be described as follows. Given a database of transactions, a minimal confidence threshold and a minimal support threshold, find all association rules whose confidence and support are above the corresponding thresholds.

The steps of association rules mining based on data cube as follows Step1: mining frequent item-set which satisfies the minimum support on data cube Step2: association rules of frequent item-set are generated.

2008 International Symposiums on Information Processing  DOI 10.1109/ISIP.2008.152   2008 International Symposiums on Information Processing  DOI 10.1109/ISIP.2008.152     4. Intelligent transportation systems application   In the ITS, violating regulation information, driver information and vehicle information are quite tedious.

This original data is difficult to mine out the effective patterns. Data selection and cleaning are first. Then integrate the data, process data and start mining. Finally, the patterns that are mined out are evaluated. Mining process as shown in Fig .1.

Fig .1 Mining process   The frequent patterns are obtained by mining nearly  50,000 effective data in the ITS database. The smallest support is 0.01, and the lowest degree of confidence is 0.10.Finally, frequent patterns of effective association rules are shown as follows:  R1:L5=> V1 10%, 16% indicates that the possibility of running a red light in place L5 is 16%, and support degree is 10%.

R2:E2=> V2 31%, 42% indicates that the possibility of the driver that education is senior middle school running a red light is 42%, and support degree is 31%.

R3:T1=> V1 36%, 40% indicates that the possibility of running a red light in the morning is 40%, and support degree is 36%.

According to above mining patterns, we can conclude that running a red light in the place L5 is very serious. In fact, this place is the access to province level roads and the peripheral municipal traffic transportation. So, the traffic flow is big. Simultaneously, L5 is far away from the urban district and the police forces are separated. We suggested that the hairpin curves or the multi-level crossing bridge should be constructed to reduce the traffic pressure; we also should increase police forces to strengthen management. In violation regulation records, many drivers? education is elementary school.  It also explains that the driver's self-consciousness of observing traffic regulations at this education level is low.

Regarding to this educational level drivers, we should strengthen a training to enhance the self-consciousness of observing the traffic regulations. The serious time interval of violation regulations is the early morning when people are going to work .At many roads, the management of traffic polices can not meet  the needs, the better management is expected to enhance.

5. Conclusion   In summary, a data mining algorithm is used in  intelligent transportation system. The result manifests that the algorithm is effective through testing in intelligent transportation system.

