

Abstract?Due to the forthcoming regulation schemes throughout Europe, new challenges for natural gas network operators arise. The pressure for realising and operating cost- efficient network structures increases as the regulation is based on comparison between network operators and the tolerable costs are set by the network operator with minimal costs. Computer- based optimisation methods, which will also be applied by Regulatory Authorities as part of the analytical cost models for calculating the efficiency of electricity and natural gas networks, provide the opportunity to identify long-term cost-efficient network structures, so called reference networks.  Boundary conditions of natural gas networks, which concern the system?s technical safety and thus need to be regarded during network planning, are given by the rules set of each country?s technical association for natural gas supply.

Degrees of freedom for the optimisation are given by the choice of different network structures, the number and operating pressure of pressure stages and for the dimensioning of equipment. Therefore, computer-based optimisation methods are required for solving the extensive optimisation problem. An optimisation method for natural gas distribution networks based on Genetic Algorithms is proposed. The method is capable of calculating cost-efficient network structures with regard to all technical and economical boundary conditions and is also used by the German Federal Network Agency for calculating reference networks with minimum costs for given supply tasks. Exemplary results demonstrate the method?s capability and the advantages given by the application of this method on long-term planning of natural gas networks.



I.  INTRODUCTION he cost pressure on distribution companies has increased as a result of the upcoming regulatory framework in the  European power and gas markets. Therefore, in particular gas network operators who focused mainly on the compliance of the technical safety proposals by national technical and scientific associations for gas and water networks need to reveal potentials for a cut down of costs in the field of network  planning.

The reduction of directly controllable costs in the short-  term?e.g. a decline in maintenance work or an abandonment of investments?provides a limited lowering of costs, if the high reliability and safety standards of existing networks should be maintained. Another option for lowering network costs is the operational optimisation. The aim of this method is to supply all customers via the existing network at minimal costs with regard to contractual obligations [1], [2].

Nevertheless, as a result of the timely narrow planning horizon, advancements in efficiency are constricted to short- term manipulable expense factors.

A sensible approach seems to be the refinement of the network planning process in order to determine efficient networks, which provide for an equivalent level of reliability and technical safety compared to the existing network and at the same time lower costs. Therefore the application of a computer-based network planning instrument for the objective determination of long-term cost-efficient networks is necessary. At present there exists no instrument for the integrated planning of gas distributions networks with different pressure stages. Hence the primary objective of this paper is to introduce the status quo of current developments of a computer-based technique for the integrated planning of gas distribution networks with variable pressure stages.

In case of the long-term planning of electrical networks computer-based procedures are deployed that optimise the network structure as well as the dimensioning of necessary operating facilities with regard to the given supply task. All relevant technical and company internal planning criteria need to be considered. Numerous studies have proven the overall functionality of the aformentioned procedures for realistic planning tasks [3]. On the other hand the planning of natural gas networks has been vastly driven by the company?s success of acquiring new customers in the past. Therefore apparantly the long-term strategy has depended on subjective expert knowledge of the planning engineers in charge [4].

The objectification of the network planning process by  Long-term Planning of Natural Gas Networks  Michael H?bner1, Hans-J?rgen Haubrich1   1 RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany  Schinkelstra?e 6 52062 Aachen, Germany Phone: +49 2418096719 Fax: +49 241 8092197  E-mail: michael.huebner@iaew.rwth-aachen.de haubrich@iaew.rwth-aachen.de  T      means of long-term cost-optimal networks (target networks) gains in importance against the background of the liberalisation and regulation of the European power markets.

Thus the application of computer-aided optimisation procedures is indispensable for natural gas networks.



II.  NETWORK PLANNING Due to the complexity of the network planning process it  seems both necessary and beneficial to subdivide it into two separate planning stages [5], see also Fig.1.

A.  Long-Term Planning Regarding a planning horizon of several decades the  existing network structure and operating facilities may be ignored. The long-term planning is based on the aforementioned assumption that is often referred to as Greenfield development. Therefore the long-term planning will identify cost-efficient network structures neglecting the existing facilities.

B.  Expansion Planning The expansion planning determines cost-efficient step-by-  step development strategies starting with the existing network structure and aiming at the identified target networks on the basis of the outcomes of the long-term planning [6].

Uncertainties concerning e.g. load growth, changes in interest rates etc. may be considered in this planning stage.

Expansion Planning Long-Term Planning  Demand/Supply Scenarios  t  Existing Network Target Networks  Possible Planning Projects  Uncertainties  Expansion Plan     Fig. 1.  Expansion and Long-Term Planning  As the long-term planning resembles in many respects the  determination of reference networks and is therefore attached with special consideration in the regulatory context this article will focus exclusively on the long-term planning of natural gas networks.



III.  COMPUTER-AIDED NETWORK PLANNING  A complete description of the underlying degrees of  freedom and boundary conditions of the network planning is fundamental to the development of efficient network structures. In the following the main aspects of both will be presented. For a summary see also Fig. 2.

A.  Boundary Conditions The supply task is defined by the geographical location of  network customers as well as their demand and feed-in  respectively. Topographic characteristics of the supply area restrict the degrees of freedom considering the choice of possible pipeline trenches and location of stations.

Optimisation Procedure  Pressure Stages  Network Structure  Degrees of Freedom Network Structure  Gas Network at Optimal Costs  Pressure Regulating Stations  Piping Sections  Operating Facilities  Degrees of Freedom Facilities  Technical Boundary Conditions / Supply Task     Fig. 2.  Boundary Conditions and Degrees of Freedom for Network Planning  Technical restrictions are given by each operating facility?s  operating characteristics and safety requirements both regarding the system?s safety and individual customer specifications. They primarily consist of maximal and minimal admissible connection pressures for every nodal point, maximal gas speeds in pipelines for a limitation of noise emissions and maximal volumetric flow rates in pressure regulators.

Company-internal planning guidelines that exceed technical minimum requirements correspend to a demanded retention capacity that is necessary for a safe operation especially in cases of critical network loadings.

It may also be used?especially in networks of high operating pressures?for an optimisation of the gas acquisition strategy. Information on the calculation as well as dimensioning of retention capacities are published by national technical and scientific organisations [7].

B.  Degrees of Freedom Degrees of freedom exist in the choice of different network  structures, the number and pressure of pressure stages and for the dimensioning of equipment. Fig. 3 depicts the chosen network model that forms the basis of the proposed optimisation approach. It is composed of stations and interconnecting trenches on the primary level. Stations are specified by their associated coordinates and conduce to the geographical positioning of pressure regulators and network customers. Trenches may contain pipelines of different pressure stages in order to connect two stations.

The model allows for a definition of multiple pressure stages that are connected via pressure regulators within a station. Each node represents a pressure stage in each station.

The closed analysis of possible dislocations of network customers between pressure stages as well as the fundamental determination of efficient vertical network configurations? realisation and positioning of pressure regulators?is made possible by the presented network model.

Customer (B) Demand,  Min./max. Pressure  Station X Station Y  Trench Admissible Types  Customer (C) Demand,  Min./max. Pressure  Pipeline, Netzbereich B Admissible Types  Node Pressure Stage: C  Regulator A/B Admissible Types  Node Pressure Stage: B  Node Pressure Stage: A  Node Pressure Stage: B  Regulator B/C Admissible Types   Fig. 3.  Network Model   As the pressure level of each pressure stage is depending on  the location and discharge pressure of the used pressure regulators that is determined within the optimisation procedure, the resulting operating pressure is an outcome of the optimisation. Therefore it is possible to objectively determine the optimal combination of pressure stages.



IV.  OPTIMISATION PROCEDURE Considering the aforementioned network model and the  resulting degrees of freedom, computer-based optimisation methods are required for solving the extensive optimisation problem.

Heuristic optimisation algorithms have proved to deliver an optimal performance for the determination of cost-efficient network structures. Their essential advantages are a reduced computational effort leading to computing times of typically few hours for realistic natural gas systems while simultaneously delivering several similar cost-efficient network structures [8]. These advantages allow sensitivity analysis by a variation of boundary conditions and supply tasks on network structure and network costs and lead beyond to a greater flexibility for the future network development. In contrast to exact algorithms heuristic algorithms yield no guarantee for optimality. Nevertheless numerous studies indicate that the difference between these nearly optimal results and the absolute optimum is typically below 1 % [9] and therefore negligible for realistic problem formulations.

Genetic Algorithms are an?especially for combinatorial optimisation problems?widely adopted heuristic optimisation approach that will be applied for the introduced optimisation problem. They refer to the natural evolution of animals over multiple generations.

An overview of the applied optimisation procedure is illustrated in Fig. 4. First of all possible optimisation variables consisting of usable trenches, pressure regulating stations and types of operating facilites are assembled. They enter the optimisation procedure in combination with the given boundary conditions.

In each iteration of the closed optimisation core a multitude of different possible network concepts is drafted stochastically. Each network concept will first of all be analysed regarding its technical feasibility. If any boundaries are violated, a variance of repair functions is applied in order to transfer the draft into the admissible solution space. Local Search algorithms improve the network structure with limited changes and thus support a faster convergence towards optimal network structures.

Degreesof Freedom and Boundary Conditions  Parameterisation and Initialisation  Application of Genetic Operators (Selection, Cross-Over, Mutation)  Closed Optimisation of Pressure Stages and Network Structure  Target Networks at Optimal Cost under Consideration of Technical Specifications  Netzaufbau NetzaufbauPressure Stage x  Technical Verification, Repair Functions  Lokal Search for Convergence Enhancement    Fig. 4.  Optimisation Procedure   In the next step network costs for each concept will be  determined and attributed to the corresponding concept as quality rating. All concepts will be arranged according to their quality in order to compose a new genetic pool for the stochastic generation of new network concepts. The best network concepts will be transferred unchanged into the new population. Thereby the already achieved level of quality will likewise be transferred combined with completely new concepts. Genetic Operators?e.g. Selection, Cross-Over, Mutation?will be applied on the whole population. If no significant advancement in quality is perceived the iterative process will be aborted and the best network structure will be exported.



V.  EXEMPLARY RESULTS In the following the utilisation of the aformentioned  optimisation approach on a realisitic planning example will demonstrate its capabilities. Initial state is an urban supply area of around 8.2 km2 containing two pressure regulators with 670 (Medium Pressure-MP) and 30 mbar (Low Pressure- LP) respectively and a maximum capacity of 1000 mN3/h. The majority of the area?s supply takes place in the medium pressure stage. Low pressure for the supply of household customers is used exclusively in the central region. Minimum pressure for household and industrial customers is 100 mbar and 22 mbar for MP- and LP-stage respectively.

The networks actual state is illustrated in Fig. 5 along with its pressure profile in grayscales. It exhibits a throughout homogenous profile due to the high dimensioning of existing pipelines.

0 0.4 0.8bar  MP - Pressure Regulator LP  - Pressure Regulator     Fig. 5.  Existing Network Structure  In the following results of a computer-aided long-term  network planning for the introduced supply task are described in detail. No further possible pipeline trenches are introduced as degrees of freedom but the existing trenches may be used with a wide variety of possible pipeline types that are in particular characterised by their hydraulic diameter.

In order to identify the influence of the geographical positioning of pressure regulating stations a second investigation was conducted with a dislocation of the current MP-pressure regulating station close to the highest load density. No other assumptions have been altered.

Fig. 6 illustrates both determined target networks and their pressure profile considering the given boundary conditions.

Target Network 1 Target Network 2  0 0.4 0.8bar Omitted Pipeline  a) b)   Fig. 6.  Target Network 1 and 2 ? Network Structure   Due to the structure of the overlaying high pressure network that was not in the scope of the current investigation a dislocation of existing pressure regulating stations would not impose additional costs. The resulting target network with the repositioning is shown in Fig. 6b.

The technical restrictions in particular minimum pressure restrictions that lead to a feasible pressure bandwith are widely  taken advantage of. Some regions exhibit a pressure just above the requested 100 mbar.

In Fig. 7 the annual i.e. long-term averaged costs of the actual network configuration are set off against both target networks. The costs of both target networks are largely reduced compared to the actual network but differ against each other only slightly. The majority of cost reductions is caused by a reduction of the total length of all used trenches and by on average downsized pipeline diameters. A further reduction of the total length of pipelines is economically infeasible due to the necessity of a complete piping of highly loaded sections that characterises  the given urban supply task.

a T?   Fig. 7.  Comparison of Annual Network Costs   Additional cost reduction of target network 2 compared to  target network 1 attributes to an on average reduced distance between network customers and their feeding pressure regulating stations. Thus smaller pipeline diameters can be used.

In analogy to the presented investigation, effects of a variation of other degrees of freedom or boundary conditions may be examined. With respect to the given supply task a variation of operating pressures, e.g. an operating pressure upgrade of the low pressure subnetwork to medium pressure or the construction of additional pressure regulating stations, is estimated to have a great impact on the overall network costs.

In order to explore the approaches behaviour, Fig. 8 presents the convergence characteristics for the given optimsation task. Efficient local search as well as repair algorithms lead to a fast convergence to the known optimum within approximately 60 iterations. Especially in terms of an expansion of the optimisation problem and associated increase in evaluation time of each network concept the fast convergence may prevent an exponential rise in computational effort.

0.3  0.4  0.6  1 20 40 60 100  Mio.

EUR  Annual Network Costs  Iteration    Fig. 8.  Convergence Characteristic  of Optimisation Procedure

VI.  SUMMARY Due to the forthcoming regulation schemes throughout  Europe, new challenges for natural gas network operators arise. In the past natural gas networks have been planned without the specification of long-term objectives and therefore often exhibit oversized dimensioning of the underlying network structure as well as the utilised operating facilities.

This in consequence leads to corresponding higher network costs.

Computer-aided optimisation procedures provide important assistance for the retrieval of potentials for future cost reductions. While the development and application of such optimisation procedures for the planning of electricity networks is widely adopted and state-of-the-art, the planning of natural gas networks has been accomplished by dominantely subjective manual example investigations and thus without the necessary objective future orientation.

The presented approach enables the long-term planning of natural gas networks under consideration of all relevant technical and furthermore company internal guidelines. It yields multiple alternative but likewise cost-efficient network structures in considerable low computational time.

With the aid of sensitivity analyses possible effects of varying boundary conditions on structure and costs of target networks may be quantified. These sensitivity analyses allow for a fundamental determination of optimal planning principles and are therefore able to explain minimal network costs for a given set of boundary conditions.



VII.  REFERENCES [1] Wong, P. J.;Larson, R. E.: Optimization of Natural Gas Pipelines via  Dynamic Programming. IEEE Transaction Auto. Control, AC-13(5), P.

475-481, 1968  [2] Ehrhardt, K., Steinbach, M. C.: Nonlinear Optimization in Gas Networks. Modeling, Simulation and Optimization of Complex Processes, Redakteure: Bock, H. G.; Kostina, E.; Pu, H. X.; Rannacher R.; Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 2005  [3] Fritz, W.; Maurer, Ch.: Modell- und Vergleichsnetzanalyse ? Anwendungsbeispiele f?r Strom- und Gasnetze. e/m/w ? Zeitschrift f?r Energie, Markt, Wettbewerb, Heft 1/2006, P. 22-25, 2006  [4] Hofbauer, M.; Anders, S.; Sigrist, R.; We?ing, W.: Modell einer kostenoptimierten Gasverteilung. GWF-Gas/Erdgas 144, Nr. 5, 2003  [5] Haubrich, H.-J.: Planung der Hoch- und H?chstspannungsnetze. In: Hosemann, G. (Hrsg.), H?TTE Taschenb?cher der Technik, Handbuch der elektrischen Energietechnik, Band 3, Netze, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1988  [6] Strategic Expansion Planning for Electrical Networks Considering Uncertainties, European Transactions on Electrical Power, Volume 16 (2006), Issue 6, P. 661 ? 671  [7] Deutscher Verein des Gas- und Wasserfaches e.V. (DVGW): Arbeitsblatt G 2000 ?Gasbeschaffenheit?, Bonn 2006  [8] Paulun, T., H?bner, M., Maurer, C., Haubrich, H.-J.: Rechnergest?tzte Ermittlung langfristig kostenoptimaler Netzstrukturen f?r Gasverteilungsnetze. GWF-Gas/Erdgas , Volume 148, 2007  [9] Gottlieb, J.: Evolutionary Algorithms for Constrained Optimization Problems. 1. Auflage, Shaker Verlag Aachen, 2000  [10] Maurer, C.; Haubrich, H.-J.: Planning of High Voltage Networks under Special Consideration of Uncertainties of Load and Generation, Proceedings of CIGRE 2006  [11] Maurer, C.: Integrierte Grundsatz- und Ausbauplanung f?r Hoch- spannungsnetze. Dissertation RWTH Aachen, ABEV Volume 101, Klingenberg Verlag, Aachen, 2004

VIII.  BIOGRAPHIES Michael H?bner was born in Hamm, Germany on August 25, 1979. He  graduated from Gymnasium Hammonense, Hamm, and studied Electrical Engineering at RWTH Aachen University. In 2005, he completed his diploma thesis at the Institute of Power Systems and Power Economics. His working experience includes an internship at NEMMCO Ltd., Melbourne, Australia, and work as a scientific member at the Instsituto de Energ?a El?ctrica San Juan, Argentina. His research project focuses on the Long-term Planning of Natural Gas Networks.

Hans-J?rgen Haubrich was born in Montabaur, Germany, on March 1, 1941. He received his Diploma and Doctor?s Degree in Electrical Engineering from the Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany, in 1965 and 1971 respectively. In 1973 he joined the Vereinigte Elektrizitaetswerke Westfalen AG, Dortmund, where he was head of the main department for network planning. At the same time, he was teaching at the University of Bochum and the University of Dortmund as Honorary Professor. Since 1990 he has been head of the Institute of Power Systems and Power Economics and the Forschungsgemeinschaft Energie (FGE) at RWTH Aachen University. His research is focused on technical and economic aspects of electrical power engineering. In 1999 he became the president of the ETG in the VDE (Association of Electrical Engineering, Electrics and Information). He is member of the Engineering Convention of the Academy of Science of Berlin- Brandenburg and North-Rhine Westphalia. Since 2001 he has been a board member of Forschungsgemeinschaft fuer Elektrische Anlagen und Stromwirtschaft e. V., FGH (research society for electrical systems and power economics). He is also a senior member of IEEE.

