Data Mining for Spatial Relations Based on Zero Initialization

Abstract This paper discusses the basic features and the  models of spatial data. Beyond current topology and distance relations, it comes up with the location, neighborhood, nearness and influence conceptions of spatial data and consummates the descriptions of spatial relations. It points out only the location data is the primitive data, other spatial relations are derived data. Based on the computability of derived data, the feature of raster data that the whole research area is been structured with regular cells and related theory and technology in map algebra, the paper adopts the idea of zero-initialization and proposes the method of data mining for spatial relations based on location data.

Key Words: Zero Initialization, Spatial Relations, Spatial data mining, Map Algebra, Distance Transformation, Voronoi diagram     1. Introduction   Spatial data mining can be defined as extraction of implicit knowledge, spatial relations or other patterns  not explicitly stored in spatial databases. Mining association rules successfully in spatial data mining is often based on complete and well-organized spatial relations and attributes, but in reality we are often faced with incomplete spatial knowledge. So models of spatial relations are a key component of GIS.

Efforts have been made to formally defined spatial relations. The foundation model for such a formal presentation is the 4-intersection model proposed by Egenhofer and Franzosa. Later, Egenhofer and Herring extended this model to 9-intersection by addition of the exterior of an entity, which is then defined as its complement [1-3]. Last, Chen Jun presents a modified model, called the Voronoi-based 9-intersection model, which results from the replacement of the complements of spatial entities by their Voronoi regions [4].

However, these discussed spatial relations above are relations between two spatial entities. But in-depth study found that, despite the relation between two is a very important foundation, but it can not replace those spatial relations among three, ?, and k entities where k is possibly very big. The reality is: there may be so many entities in space and the number of relations   DOI 10.1109/ALPIT.2008.24     between them is quite substantive. The explicit expression of these spatial relations encountered insurmountable difficulties. Reflecting on the spatial data structure and model, we need to re-consider whether there is a spatial data structure contains complex spatial relations. The study of map algebra and zero initialization showed that the raster data structure happens to have such characteristics and the location data of raster contains all other spatial relations [5, 6]. So this paper adopts the idea of zero initialization that we only initialize the primitive data (i.e. the location data) and derive spatial relations while need with map algebra algorithms.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives a short overview of spatial data mining and spatial relations and introduces Zero Initialization.

Section 3 presents the method of date mining for spatial relations based on location data. Section 4 shows our advantage. Section 5 shows our conclusions.

2. Basic Concepts  2.1. Spatial Data Mining   Spatial data describes information about the space occupied by objects. Spatial data has many characteristics that distinguish it from relational data.

For example, it has topological, distance and direction information organized by multidimensional spatial indexed structures.

Spatial data mining is the process of discovering interesting and previously unknown but potentially useful patterns from large spatial datasets. Extracting interesting and useful patterns from spatial datasets is more difficult than extracting corresponding patterns from traditional numeric and categorical data due to the complexity of spatial data types and spatial relations [7].

2.2. Spatial Relations  In [3], Egenhofer et al. introduce three types of  spatial relations: topological, distance and direction relations. They are called binary relations since we can determine spatial relations between pairs of objects.

Topological relations are those which are invariant under topological transformations. That is, they are preserves if the entities are translated, rotated or scaled.

A formalization of topological relations is the so-called 4-intersection and 9-intersection models.

They present a definition of topological relations derived from the 9-intersection model. The topological relations between two objects are: disjoint, meets, overlaps, equal, cover, covered-by, contains, and inside as we show in figure 1. Each element in the figure describes a different topological spatial relation.

A disjoint B A contains B A inside B A equals B  A meets B A covers B A coverdeby B A overlaps B  Figure 1. Topological relations   The second type of relation refers to distance  relations. These relations compare the distance between two objects with a given constant using arithmetic operators like <, > and =. Distance relations specify how far the object away from the reference object is. They were often described as at, close, in the vicinity and far away (see figure 2).

A close B A far from B  Figure 2. Distance relations   The direction relations of two spatial objects (A     and B) using one representative point of the object A and all points of the destination object B. It is possible to define several possibilities of direction relations depending on the number of points that are considered in the source and the destination objects [8]. In fact, the study of direction relations is not clear. So it will not be discussed in this paper.

2.3. Zero Initialization   Spatial data in general consists of geometrical and thematic data. According to [6], spatial location data and relations are considered geometric properties.

Thematic data is alphanumeric data related to spatial objects. In this paper, since we do not discuss the thematic data, the spatial data is equivalent to the geometric data. In order to better explain the relations between spatial data, we classify spatial data as primitive data and derived data. The primitive data is the elementary data, and the derived data is the resultant data that can be computed from the primitive.

Engenhofer pointed out that spatial relation is an expression for the constraint of spatial data, and divided the basic spatial relations into topological, distance and direction relations as mentioned in section 2.2. But Through in-depth research we found that there were a variety of other spatial relations between entities. For example, space adjacent relations based on public Voronoi edge, k-order adjacent relations, fuzzy relations such as nearby and uncertain relations between entities etc [9]. The reality is: there may be so many entities in space and the number of relations between them is quite substantive. In the circumstances, There are insurmountable difficulties in evidently displaying of spatial relations and dynamic maintenance. The concept of zero initialization attempts to provide a solution that can quickly and completely produce all types of spatial relations for spatial analysis, rather than doing a lot of initialization before analysis [10].

The study of map algebra showed that the location  data of raster contains all other spatial relations [5]. In order to improve the current spatial relations, we define four types of spatial relation data: location, adjacency, nearness and influence. This four spatial data can be complete description of spatial data and spatial relations. The simple definition of these four types is as follows: ? Location data: the location data of spatial entity.

? Adjacency data: the data concerned with ?adjacent?, it can be related and distinguished by ?public element? or ?adjacent element? of spatial entity, i.e., the topological relation data discussed in academe.

? Nearness data: relations in nearby space.

? Influence data: the various relations between entities after deducting adjacency and nearness data.

Although the spatial relations are complex and substantive, they can be realized through appropriate data structure and algorithms. The location data is the most basic data in GIS and Adjacency, Nearness and Influence data can be derived from it. So the location data is the primitive data. Adjacency, Nearness and Influence data are derived data. While building a GIS, we may only initialize the primitive data and derive other data while need with map algebra algorithms.

This is the main idea of zero initialization. Zero initialization emphasizes that there was no initialization of ?non-essential data?. It is the method of smallest data initialization.

3. Data Mining for Spatial Relations   The kinds and quantity of spatial relations may be quite complex and substantive. There will be different ways of organizing and expressing of them according to different objectives, purposes and scales. There are always some problems such as ?not prepared when needed? and ?prepared but never used?. So it can not meet the need of dynamic geographical processes. To avoid above bottleneck, Based on the idea of zero     initialization, we only initialize spatial location data and derive spatial relations. This will put GIS forward.

3.1. Spatial Data Mining for Topological Relations   For vector data structure speaking, topological relations is usually calculated by 9-intersection model (see Figure 3 (a)). Where ?A is the boundary of A, A0is the interior of A and A- is the exterior of A, respectively. The annotation for B is the same. In this model, the exterior of A is normally defined as the complement. Because of its infinity, it may result in some difficult problems. Chen Jun presents a modified model, called the Voronoi-based 9-intersection model, which results from the replacement of the complements of spatial entities by their Voronoi regions [4] (see Figure 3 (b)). It is obvious that the calculation process is extremely complex. So we will adopt the raster data structure to compute the intersection.

(a) 9-intersection model  (b) Voronoi-based 9-intersection model  Figure 3. 9-intersection model and voronoi-based 9-intersection model  ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ?  ?  ?  ???? ??????? ????  = ??? v  v  v  v  BABABA BABABA BABABA  BAR    9 ),(  ? ? ?  ?  ?  ? ? ?  ?  ?  ???? ??????? ????  = ????  ?  ?  BABABA BABABA BABABA  BAR    9 ),(   For raster data structure speaking, the traditional  thinking was that it was difficult to establish topological relations. But in fact it is not the case at all.

Because of the feature of raster data that the whole research area is been structured with regular cells, the intersection can be obtained by overlay calculation and it is easy to be quantified. The way to calculate topological relations of two entities is as follows:  Apply overlay operation to corresponding raster images of A and B and evaluate the intersection.

?. If the intersection is empty, then inspect the raster cells on the border. If the cells on the border  are 8-neighbored cells of another entity, then the relation of A and B is topological adjacency, otherwise it is disjoining.

?. If the intersection in not empty, and it is the proper subset of A and B, then the relation of A and B is intersecting. If the intersection is equal to A, then A is contained by B. If the intersection is also equal to B, then A is equal to B.

It is obvious that the calculation process is simple.

From here we can see that the spatial topological relations are in fact contained in location data.

3.2. Spatial Data Mining for Distance Relations   Entities have the character of spatial metric, so do  spatial relations. Metric is a spatial or temporal unit used to measure a particular entity or phenomenon.

The distance relations are based on distance metric.

The complete quantitative distance relations consist of adjacency, nearness and influence relations. Here, the adjacency relation whose distance is zero is same to topological adjacency above.

The Nearness relation is relational data of spatial point, line and surface in near space. It is the expression for the near extent of distance between entities. It has two levels of meaning:  ? Determinate nearness relation (usually called buffer analysis).

? Spatial division based on nearest relation.

Voronoi diagram is a typical example of it. Nearness is a relative concept, and it contains a series of nearness relations such as nearest and hypo-nearest relations.

The buffer can be obtained with the method of distance transformation of map algebra. Distance transformation is a process that calculates and marks the distance of raster cells from the reference. After distance transformation, each raster cell of image has a value that shows the distance from its nearest entity [5]. If we want the buffer with distance ?three?, we only extract the raster cells whose distance value is     smaller than ?four?. So does buffer with other value.

This shows buffer with different width can be easily and quickly achieved through distance transformation based on location data. As shown in Figure 4, where (a) is the original image with location data, (b) is the image after distance transformation (called distance transformation diagram), (c) is the buffer with distance ?three? and (d) is the buffer with distance ?nine?.

(a) Original image ? b?  Distance transformation  diagram  ? c?  Buffer with distance ? three? ? d?  Buffer with distance ? nine?  Figure 4. Buffer analysis based on location data    Voronoi diagram is a spatial division of nearest region of discrete points. Given some number of points in the plane, their Voronoi diagram divides the plane according to the nearest-neighbor rule. This rule states that each point is associated with the region of the plane that is closer to it. Based on the definition of the Voronoi diagram, the spatial division can be extended to natural graphics, which contain the point, line, surface, composition of them and so much as natural graphics with complex bending. The Voronoi diagram can be obtained as follows: ? Apply distance transform to original image and achieve the distance transformation diagram.

? Extract the raster cell with relative maximum distance value. These raster cells compose the line of Voronoi diagram, and spatial division is obtained [11].

As shown in Figure 5, where (a) is the original  image with location data, (b) is the image after distance transformation (called distance transformation diagram), (c) is the Voronoi diagram of natural graphics. With this approach, we can not only calculate the Voronoi diagram in ordinary space, but also can calculate the Voronoi diagram in space with obstacles. If we initialize the raster cells of line and surface as ?obstacle? as shown in Figure 5 (d), the Voronoi diagram in space with obstacles is presented in Figure 5 (f). The difference rests with the calculation for distance transformation in the first step, that we replace it by distance transformation in space with obstacles (see in Figure 5 (e)).

(a) Original image (b) Distance transformation diagram  Figure 5. Voronoi diagram based on location data  (c)Voronoi diagram  (f) Voronoi diagram in space with obstacles  (d) Original image in space with obstacles  Obstacle ObstacleOb sta  cle  O bs  ta cl  eObstacle Obstacle  Obstacle Obstacle  ObstacleObstacle  (e) Distance transformation in space with obstacles    The influence relation is the relational data of all entities. It is an expression of degree of influence of     the entity on the arbitrary point in space. It has two basic elements: weight and distance. The influence relation generalizes the spatial relations which are directly proportional to some features of entity and inversely proportional to the square of distance. It is consistent with field theory model and is the universal relation in space. We show this relation with weighted Voronoi diagram in GIS. The weighted Voronoi diagram can be obtained as follows: ? Apply weighted-distance transform to original image and achieve the weighted-distance transformation diagram.

? Extract the raster cell with relative maximum distance value. These raster cells compose the line of Voronoi diagram, and spatial division is obtained.

As shown in Figure 6, where (a) is the original image with location data, (b) is the weighted value diagram, (c) is the image after weighted distance transformation (called weighted distance transformation diagram), (d) is the weighted Voronoi diagram of natural graphics.

(a) Original image (b) Weighted value diagram  (c)Weighted distance transformation diagram  (d) Weighted voronoi diagram  Figure 6. Weighted voronoi diagram based on location data Thus it can be seen that the location data is the  base of other relation data. Adjacency, Nearness and Influence data can be derived from the location data.

Therefore, when we intend to solve different problems,  we need only initialize different location data in accordance with the target and purpose and derived other spatial relations.

4. Advantages  Currently, the data mining association rules  successfully in spatial data mining is often based on complete and well-organized spatial relations and attributes, but in reality we are often faced with incomplete spatial knowledge. The study of map algebra showed that the location of raster contains all spatial relations. So we proposed the concept of zero initialization that we only initialize the location data and derive other relational data while need.

The location data is the primitive data, other spatial relations, such as topological relations, distance relations, can be derived through the method above.

Based on the computability of derived data, the method proposed in this paper can meet the need of dynamic geographical processes. So it can avoid the bottleneck of ?not prepared when needed? and ?prepared but never used?.

5 Conclusion  In this paper, we propose a zero initialization based  method of data mining for spatial relations. As we mentioned, although the spatial relations are complex and substantive, they can be realized through appropriate data structure and algorithms. The all algorithms in this paper has a time complexity of n and a space complexity of n2, including applying distance transformation and extracting Voronoi diagram. So it is not necessary to prepare all spatial relations when building GIS. We only need the location data and derived other spatial relations. In this way, we can avoid the problems such as ?not prepared when needed? and ?prepared but never be used?. The idea of this paper will fit the need of continuous dynamic geographical analysis. This will put GIS forward.

6. References   [1] Egenhofer MJ, Franzosa R. Point-set Topological Spatial  Relations. International Journal of Geographical Information  Systems, 1991, 5(2):161-174  [2] Egenhofer MJ, Mark DM. Modeling Conceptual  Neighborhoods of Topological Line Relations. International  Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 1995,  9(5):555-565  [3] Egenhofer MJ, Herring JR. Categorizing Binary  Topological Relationships between Regions, Lines and  Points in Geographic Database. Technical Report, 91-7,  Orono: University of Maine,1991  [4] Chen J, Li CM, Li ZL, Gold C. A Voronoi-based  9-Intersection Model for Spatial Relations. International  Journal of Geographical Information Science, 2001,  15(3):201-220  [5] Hu P, You L, Yang CY, Wu YL. Map Algebra. Wu Han,  China: Wu Han University Press, 2002  [6] Hu P, Li SQ, Hu H. Geographic Information Theory and  Zero Initialization. Beijing, China: Sino Maps Press, 2006 [7] Shashi Shekhar, Yan Huang, JiaWei Han, Sanjay Chawla,  Sucharita Gopal. Categorization of Spatial Data Mining  Techniques, Scientific Data Mining, working chapter, 2001.

[8] Manuel Pech Palacio, David Sol. Graph-based  Knowledge Representation for GIS Data. Proceedings of the   Science. 2003  [9] Hu Sheng-wu, Wang Hong-tao. Recent research of  spatial relation. Science of Surveying and Mapping, 2007,  32(1): 153-159  [10] Hu Hai, Hu Peng, You Lian. The Applilcation of  Obstacle Spatial Analysis Technology in Emergency Aid.

Geomatics World, 2008(1): 39-45  [11] Xia Lanfang, Hu Peng, Bai Yiduo, Huang Menglong.

