

Network Security Data Mining Based on Wavelet Decomposition*    Ming Meng Department of Economics & Management  North China Electric Power University Baoding, Hebei 071003, China  ncepumm@126.com    * Project Supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (70671039) and Scientific Research Foundation for Young Teachers, North China Electric Power University.

Abstract - The network log file database is important to security management. But, with the development of internet, it has become too bulkiness to be used directly. In this paper, the wavelet decomposition is adopted to mining the useful rules from the network security data. This is different from traditional data mining methods of association rules. Multi-resolution analysis of wavelet transform method is used to analyze and mine the data of network security log file database on different time scale. The period law of the attack number in different time domain is found by this method. These are important messages for taking relevant measures to insure network security.

Index Terms - Discrete wavelet transform, Network log file database, Data mining, security management.



I.  INTRODUCTION  With the expansion of internet, the network security log file database has greatly increased. Extracting useful information from tons of net security data will become more and more important. The continued growth in data collection of it ensures that the fundamental problem which knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) addresses, namely how does one understand and uses one's data, will continue to be of critical importance across a large number organizations.

Although simple statistical techniques and machine learning for data analysis were developed long ago, advance techniques for intelligent data analysis are not yet mature. KDD can be regarded as one of the prime function of data mining that is a new generation of information processing technology. Data mining involves fitting models to or determining pattern from observed data. The fitted models play the role of inferred knowledge. Deciding whether the model reflects useful knowledge or not is a part of the overall KDD process for which subjective human judgment is usually required.

Typically, a data-mining algorithm constitutes a model, a preference criterion, and a search algorithm. The more common model functions in data mining include classification, clustering, rule generation and knowledge discovery [1].

Ariori algorithm [2], as the representative of traditional data mining ones, finds useful rules through processing frequent item sets. These methods can?t solve the problem of discovering knowledge from time serial data, such as network security one. Berndt and Warping [3] has researched how to  get a similar time serial mode to the reference one. They realize this by a dynamic time curve method. Rafiei D. and Mendelzon A. [4] has further developed time series data mining method by Fourier transform. This method can realize data dimensions reduction but it could only analysis the whole frequency characters in time axes, that is to say, it could not offer any local ones.

The wavelet transform is initiated by Morlet [5] in 1980 when he analysis earthquake data. Mallat S G. [6, 7] brought forward the concept of multi-resolution analysis to develop the wavelet theory in 1989. The merits of wavelet lie in its character of localization at time domain and frequency one.

Just because of this, the wavelet wins through the limitation of Fourier transform and named as math microscope. Under the researches of many experts, the wavelet theory has greatly evolved in latter years and new algorithms [8-10] are constantly brought forward.

The discrete wavelet transform (DWT), which is an orthonormal transform, re-expresses a time series in terms of coefficients that are associated with a particular time and with a particular band within a dyadic division of the frequency range. In this paper, we adopt DWT to mining the data of network security log file. It aims at offering a new idea for network security log file database mining.



II. THE DWT ALGORITHM  The Fourier transform gives the frequency information of the signal, but it does not tell us when in time these frequency components exist. The information provided by the integral corresponds to all time instances because the integration is done for all time intervals. It means that no matter where in time the frequency f appears, it will affect the result of the integration equally. This is why Fourier transform is not suitable for non-stationary signals.

The DWT is defined by the following expression:  m,i   1X [ ] [ ] m  mm n  i nax n aa  ? ??? ?             (1) In (1), x[n] and ?[?] refer to the digitized input signal and  the discretized mother wavelet, respectively.

The DWT can be implemented by means of a filter bank,  such as the one shown in Figure 1.

Proceedings of the 7th World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation  June 25 - 27, 2008, Chongqing, China     Fig. 1 The demonstration for discrete wavelet transform (DWT)  In Figure 1, g and h are the impulse response of a suitable high-pass filter and of its dual low-pass filter, respectively.

Both the number and the value of the coefficients of each filter are characteristic of a given mother wavelet. These filters have three main characteristics: 1) they are FIR filters; 2) the sum of the coefficients of the high-pass filter is zero, whereas the sum of the coefficients of the low-pass filter is unity; 3) the norm of both filters is one.

The application of a wavelet transform has the effect of decomposing a time-based signal f(t), just as network security log file data one, into frequencies that are localised in time [11]. A time series can be decomposed into a set of wavelet coefficients W(t0; s) where t0 is a point in the time series and s is a characteristic frequency scale. The amplitude of the wavelet coefficient gives the measure of the energy in the signal at a particular time of a particular frequency. Growth and decay rates of these frequencies, corresponding to the imaginary parts of the eigenvalues, can therefore be estimated from the rate of changes of W(t0; s) with respect to time, see below. For the kernel of the transform a wavelet g(t; s) is chosen which, for a fixed value of s, gives a simple shape and structure of the type of function into which the time series is to be decomposed. A commonly used wavelet transform is the Morlet wavelet (Healey, 1995; Farge, 1992) given by  2( ; ) exp[ ( ) / 2 ]g t s st imst= ? ?                      (2) This wavelet is an oscillation with a Gaussian modulation  and as such resembles a wave packet. The parameter m determines the number of oscillatory cycles in the packet. For a fixed s the wavelet is translated by t0 then projected onto f(t) by  0( , ) ( ) ( 0 ; )W t s s f t g t t s dt ?  ?? = ??                   (3)  where the s factor normalises the energies in each scale. It is observed that the integral on the right-hand side is a convolution operation between f(t) and g(t; s). So if we take the Fourier transforms of these  ( ) ( ) i tF f t e dt?? ? ?  ?? = ?                          (4)  ( ; ) ( ; ) i tG s g t s e dt?? ? ?  ?? = ?                        (5)  and let H(?; s) = F(?)G(?; s) then the wavelet transform becomes  0( , ) ( ; )2  i tsW t s H s e d?? ? ?  ?  ?? = ?            (6)  An example given by Healey (1995) concerns the time series  1 1  2 1 2  3 2  sin( ) exp( ) ( ) sin( )  sin( ) exp( )  c t t t t f t c t t t t  c t t t t  ? ? ?  ? ?  <? ?= < <? ? >?  (7)  where?= 0.15, ?= 0:015 and the constants cn are chosen to ensure that f(t) is continuous.

The central unmodulated section of (7) is picked out easily and the amplitude increases and decreases either side.

Leakage into other frequencies is due to the compact nature of wavelets, but leakage is seen to increase near to t1 and t2 where discontinuities exist in the first derivatives. The essential part of this method is that the real part of the complex conjugate pair of eigenvalues ??i? can be estimated from the rate of change of amplitude of the frequency ? at a particular moment in time by  1 | ( , ) |( , ) ln | ( , ) |  W t st s W t s  ?? ?  ? ?+= ? ?   (8)  where again ? is the sample time. This is in effect fitting an exponential function to the wavelet transform over a specified interval at a certain frequency.

Sometimes eigenvalues in the form of exponential growth or decay coefficients in the ?zero? frequency components, corresponding to real eigenvalues, are required. In many cases though it is not possible to resolve W(t0; s) below a certain frequency dependent on the duration of the time series. In such cases it is better to extract such eigenvalues directly from the raw waveform by fitting exponential functions to appropriate intervals near to the fixed point of interest. It should be borne in mind that in some cases the time series will grow from or decay to some value or offset other than zero.

We now turn our attention back to the parameter m which appears in (2), and gives the number of oscillatory cycles within the Gaussian envelope represented by (2). During studies of this method it was noticed that the wavelet transform function, W(t0; s), is less able to resolve frequency when m is low. To determine an acceptable minimum value for m an expression of the form f(t) =exp(?at2)cos(bnt) was examined using the wavelet transform method. For this study we set the parameters to a=0.01 and b=0.14 which renders n a good approximation of the number of cycles visible in the Gaussian envelope. In other words, the parameters a and b were chosen so that the number of cycles seen in the graph by someone not knowing the expression for f(t), is n. The parameter, m, was varied at discrete values between 1 and 5 inclusively while maintaining n=m.

It was noticed that for n=m<4 there is significant leakage into higher frequencies. Indeed for n=m?2 this leakage extended as far as the Nyquist frequency. Only for n=m?4 does the modulated frequency become satisfactorily resolved.

Therefore this method is best employed where isolated bursts contain at least four cycles. For the analysis of time series with bursts containing less than four cycles it is almost certainly necessary to resort to phase space techniques. Indeed Healey     (1991) succeeded in estimating eigenvalues from sub-cycle ?Silnikov spiralling?.

When m<n then the corresponding wavelet is poorly resolved in the frequency domain but is more localised in the time domain. On the other hand when m>n we find that the wavelet spreads out over the time domain but is better resolved in terms of frequency. This shows the importance of matching m correctly to n in a particular time series. We find that good resolution of the wavelet is acceptable when m is within about 20% of n.

By using DWT, we could get the signal?s frequency information characters of any resolutions. That is to say, it could elicit useful information from anfractuous signals.



III. THE DWT DATA MINING  Web servers are often be attacked from outside. With the increasing of web users, the net security log file database has greatly expanded.  The 24-hour attack number to an opening net server system has exceeded 3?106 (shown as follows). The security log file is very important to ensure net safety, find net bugs and surveil hacker intrusions. But many security log file databases are left unused just because its bulkiness nowadays.

In this paper, we select a web server as the research object and record the attack number of each 15 minutes from 0:00 to 24:00. Continual 28 days (the first day is Monday) record data is selected to wavelet decomposition (Fig. 2). We now just analyz? the numbers of possible malicious attack ??? try to find its rules here.

Fig. 2 Raw data of attack number.

Here we adopt Morlet wavelet function (introduced before) to discompose historical security data. Although there only 28days? historical data are selected to analysis, the continuous 2688 data points (Fig. 2) are too clutter to tell us any useful rules of attack. ?he different layer discompose results could tell us many useful information.

From the similar vector of third layer (Fig. 3), we can clear find that each day have two attack number peaks. For most days, the second peak is higher than the first one.

Fig. 3 The similar vectors of third layer  In order to further observe, we select the second 1/4 of the third layer?s similar vector to demonstrate. It is shown in Fig. 4.

Fig 4 The first 1/4 of third layer?s similar vector  Compared to the raw data, we can conclude ??	? useful attack number rules. They are listed as follows:  TABLE I ONE OF THE WAVELET DATA MINING RESULTS: THE DAILY ATTACK RULE First peak Second peak First valley Second valley  2:00 21:00 14:00 22:30 Other layer discompose results could tell us other  information. Such as the fifth similar vector (Fig. 5), which clearly tell us that the attack numbers is similar from Monday to Thursday. The attack number of Sunday is much more than usual and less than Friday. The attack number of Saturday is the most.

Fig. 5 The similar vectors of fifth layer  From the decompose result, we can easily find many useful laws. According to this, many measures will be taken in practical network security management. Further more, other attack characters could also be analyzed by the same method and other useful laws will be finding.



IV. CONCLUSIONS     This paper adopts wavelet transform as the multi- resolution tool to analyzing and mining network security log file database. It expands data mining methods? research domain from traditional association rules. By using DWT mining to security log data, this paper achieves attack times cycle characters from different scales. Based on the mining fruits, the manager can take relevant measures to ensure the web server from danger. The research idea of this paper can be also used in other time serial data analysis.

