

Abstract?On-line social networking has become a very  popular Web 2.0 application. This paper studies the issues around using web mining techniques for analysis of on-line social networks. Techniques and concepts of web mining and social networks analysis will be introduced and reviewed along with a discussion about how to use web mining techniques for on-line social networks analysis. In addition this paper sets out a process to use web mining for on-line social networks analysis, which can be treated as a general process in this research area. Discussions of the challenges and future research are also included.

Index Terms?Web Mining, Social Networking, Social Networks Analysis, Association Rule, Visualization

I.  INTRODUCTION   OCIAL networks analysis is an interesting research direction to analyze the structures and relationships of social networks,  such as analyses of density, centrality and cliques in social network structures [26]. A social network is usually formed and constructed by daily and continuous communication between people and therefore includes different relationships, such as the positions, betweeness and closeness among individuals or groups [17]. In order to understand the social structure, social relationships and social behaviors, social networks analysis therefore is an essential and important technique.

In recent years, on-line social networking has become a very popular application in the age of Web 2.0 [13], which allows users to communicate, interact and share on the World Wide Web [1]. Some on-line social networking websites have even become among the most popular sites on the web [23][9][18]: for example, Flickr for online photo sharing, Youtube for online video sharing and Linkdin for professional networking.  Some portal-based on-line social networking websites such as Facebook, MySpace, etc integrate multiple functions. In addition, the rapid growth in the number of Blogs also provides good platforms for users to communicate and share. Thus, on-line social networking is now part of human life. Huge resources of interpersonal communications, relationships and behaviors are now available for on-line social networks analysis, all produced by the incredible  developments of on-line social networking websites and applications [7].

The history of social networks analysis is older than everybody now reading this paper, dating back more than a hundred years to around the 1900s, and mostly in the field of sociology [26]. During this period, the studies of social networks analysis focused on small groups and small social networks. However, it became harder and harder to manually analyze very broad social networks. Therefore, strong computation power and information technology has became a very important tool for social networks analysis and the direction of the research is therefore now moving from sociology to computer science.

For on-line social networks analysis, the analysis targets are mainly focused on resources from the web, such as its content, structures and the user behaviors. Among the information techniques that can be used for the analysis of on-line social networks, web mining is claimed to be the most suitable [5].

Web mining is an application of Data Mining and main analysis targets are from the World Wide Web, in the form of web content mining, web structure mining and web usage mining [4]. Therefore, it is more than suitable to use web mining techniques for on-line social networks analysis, and it is also the focus of this paper.

The paper is structured as follows: section 1 is the background and introduction of this paper; with the review of the literature about social network analysis and web mining provided in section 2. In section 3, a study of how web mining techniques can be used for on-line social networks analysis will be included, and a general process for applying these techniques will be proposed in section 4. In section 5, there is a discussion of the challenge of using web mining for on-line social networks analysis and some suggestions for future research directions.



II.  REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE   In this section, the literature about social networks analysis and web mining will be reviewed, in order to present a broad view of these two topics for readers.

S  Web Mining Techniques for On-line Social Networks Analysis  I-Hsien Ting Department of Information Management, National University of Kaohsiung  No. 700, Kaohsiung University Road, Nanzih District, Kaohsiung City, 811 Taiwan TEL: +886-7-5919751  iting@nuk.edu.tw        A.  Social Networks Analysis   In social networks analysis the main task is usually about how to extract social networks from different communication resources [17] [20]. The data used for building social networks is relational data [26], which can be obtained and transferred from different resources including the web, email communication, Internet relay chats, telephone communications, organization and business events, etc [3].

For example, email communications are a rich source for extracting and constructing social networks. By means of email social networks extraction, the relationship between email senders and receivers can be transformed by measuring the frequency of email communication and taking the communication behavior (such as reply, forward, etc.) into account [6]. The transformed relational data can then be used for social networks construction.

Visualization is also a hot topic of social network analysis, and it is a suitable technique in this area. Through the visualization of social networks, their character, such as the structure of networks, the distribution of nodes, the links (relationships) between nodes and the clusters and groups in the social networks[15][29], can be more easily understood.

In additional to social network extraction and visualization, there are other measurements that can be used for social network analysis as well [29]. For example, degree centrality in a social network is used to measure the betweenness and closeness of the social network [28]. Cluster coefficient measures the clusters in a social network and their coefficient.

The density measurement can be used to analyze the connectivity and the degree of nodes and links in a social network [19].

Path length and reachability can be measured to analyze how to reach a given node from another node in the social networks. Social networks analysis can also be used to discover the holes in a social network, and by this to fill the hole and expand the social network [8].

B.  Web Mining   Web mining is an application of data mining, the technique of discovering and extracting useful information from large data sets or databases [14]. Web mining therefore can be defined as to discover or extract useful information from the web [4].

Different Types of Web Mining   According to different analysis targets and resources, web mining techniques can be divided into three different types: Web Content Mining, Web Structure Mining and Web Usage Mining.

Web content mining analyzes content on the web, such as text, graphs, graphics, etc [2]. Recently, most web content mining research has  focused on text data processing. and  few have focused on other multimedia data. Natural language processing (NLP)is therefore the main technology that used in this area. The concept and techniques of Semantic Web and Ontology are also relevant here [11][21].

Web structure mining is a technique to analyze and explain the links and structure of websites, for which Graph theory is usually the main concept and theory used. In addition, the extraction of the structure of websites is always essential in this research area [8]. The main concern in this area is how to design and implement a crawler (or spider, bots) to extract and construct the structure of websites, such as in the research area of Deep-web.

Web usage mining can be used to analyze how websites have been used, such as determining the navigation behavior of users. The server-side Clickstream data (logs file) is the main source used for web usage mining. Client-side data (such as client-side logs file, cookies) is sometimes to be used in some research in order to more completely record user behavior. Different web usage mining analyses include basic statistical analysis of the navigation behavior of users in a website: such as how many times the website has been browsed, where the users come from, etc. Furthermore, advanced web usage mining analyses can also be provided, such as more complex analysis seeking to understand users' navigation history in a website or cross-website analysis [25].

Web Mining Techniques   Traditional data mining techniques can also be used for web mining, such as classification, clustering, association rule mining, and visualization. In web mining, classification algorithms can be used to classify users into different classes according to their browsing behavior, for example according to their browsing time. After classification, a useful classification rule like ?30% of users browse product/food during the hours 8:00-10:00 PM? can be discovered. The difference between classification and clustering is that the classes in classification are predefined (supervised), but in clustering are not predefined (unsupervised). The criterion by which items are assigned to different clusters is the degree of similarity among them. The main purpose of Clustering is to maximize both the similarity of the items in a cluster and the difference between clusters [16].

The association rule technique can be used to indicate pages that are most often referenced together and to discover the direct or indirect relationships between web pages in users? browsing behavior [25]. For example, an association rule in the web usage mining area could take the form ?the people who view web page index.htm and also view product.htm the support=50% and the confidence=60%?.

Visualization is a special analytical technique in web mining that allows data and information to be understood or recognized by human eyes by using graphical and visualized means to represent data, information and analysis results [15].

In web structure mining, it usually plays an important role in illustrating the structure of hypertexts and links in a website or       the linking relationship between websites. For the other two types of web mining technique, visualization is also an ideal tool to model the data or information. For example, a graph (or map) can be used for web usage mining to present the traversal paths of users or a graph may show information about web usage. This approach enables the analyst to understand and efficiently interpret the results of web usage mining.



III.  WEB MINING TECHNIQUES FOR ON-LINE SOCIAL NETWORKS ANALYSIS   This section will show how the three different types of web  mining along with the web mining techniques introduced in section 2 can be used for on-line social networks analysis.

A.  The Three Web Mining Types for On-line Social Networks Analysis   Web content mining, text mining or natural language  processing are very useful in on-line social network analysis.

For example, web content mining can categorize or classify documents on an on-line social networking website, especially articles on blogs or text forums. Article categorization is usually the first task for many on-line social networks analyses or applications.

Web content mining can also be used in on-line social networks analysis to analyze users? reading interests, and determine their favorite content. However, for most on-line social networks analysis tasks, it is usually necessary to utilize all three types of web mining and techniques together. For example, in social networks analysis like this case it is necessary to use the concept and techniques of both web content mining and web usage mining.

Web usage mining also plays an important role in on-line social networks analysis. It is useful for the analysis of social networks extraction discussed in section 2 of this paper. The usage data and user communications on an on-line social networking website can be transformed into relational data for social-networks construction [24]. In addition, web usage mining is also a tool for measuring centrality degree. For example, the closeness of blog users can be measured by:   ))*(*())*(*())*(*( iwfrwfbwfCloseness ++=   In the equation above, f denotes the frequency of a blog  behavior, and w is the weight of closeness for each blog behavior. The three blog behaviors are b=browsing, r=reading and i=interaction. This is just a simple example of web usage mining, but the techniques allow many possible means of on-line social networks analysis.

Web structure mining is the third kind of web mining and it is also useful for extracting and constructing on-line social networks to extract the links from WWW, e-mail or other  sources. It can also be used to analyze path length, reachability or to find structural holes, which are very basic and traditional social networks analyses. Web structure mining usually uses graphs and visualized means to represent the data about social networks, enabling the analyst to easily understand and analyze social networks[12].

For most on-line social networks analyses, the three types of web mining can?t work alone, it is not similar to other web usage mining applications. Sometimes, the three different types of web mining maybe used for just one particular kind of on-line social network analysis.

B.  Web Mining Techniques for On-line Social Networks Analysis   There are many different kinds of web mining techniques,  such as those discussed in section 2 of this paper. In this section, examples will given of two web mining techniques used for on-line social networks analysis. The two techniques are clustering and association rule mining.

Clustering: In social networks analysis, finding the group of closest  people in a network or cross networks is usually the main task, and is normally achieved by using a visualization technique in a small social network. However, only a few groups in a social network are expected to be discovered by using this approach, and further analyses are hard to do. Thus, the clustering technique can be used with a large social network in identifying more groups and clusters. Moreover, it can provide more detailed information than just using visualization can [27], including the closeness of a group, detailed information of the members in a group and the relationship between groups in a social network.

Association rule mining: This is popular in traditional data mining applications, such  as marketing analysis, and it is therefore also called market-basket analysis. In social network analysis, association rule mining can help discover the hidden relationships between nodes in a social network or even cross networks. For example, an association rule for on-line social networks analysis maybe ?person A knows person B and also knows person C, the support is 0.9 and the confidence is 0.5? or ?the person who read person A?s blog article and also read person B?s blog article, the support is 0.9 and the confidence is 0.5?.

Association rule mining therefore can provide a different analysis, transform more relational data, and identify more nodes and relationships in social networks. In addition, association rule mining is helpful for the application after social networks analysis, such as recommendation systems or information filtering systems [22].



IV.  THE PROCESS OF WEB MINING FOR ON-LINE SOCIAL NETWORKS ANALYSIS   This section proposes, and details the steps of, a general  process to use web mining for on-line social networks analysis. Figure 1 presents a general process using web mining for on-line social networks analysis. Its steps include selection of analysis targets, selection of on-line social networks analysis, data preparation, web mining techniques selection, results presentation and interpretation, recommendation and action.

Fig. 1. The general process of web mining for on-line social networks analysis   The first step is the selection of the analysis targets, such as  web, email, telephone communications, etc. Sometimes, more than one target will be selected. After this step, we then select what of kind on-line social networks analysis we will proceed with.

Once the analysis targets and the on-line social networks analysis methodology have been selected, the next step is data preparation. In this stage related data will be collected for analysis, then cleaned and formed as the final format to store in database.

The next step is selecting the web mining techniques to be used and then proceeding with them. More than one technique may be selected and sometimes a combination of techniques is necessary. The selected suitable techniques are then used to analyze the data collected and prepared in the third step of the process.

The results of the analysis after web mining are then presented and interpreted either manually or automatically.

Visualization techniques are sometimes used to assist the presentation of the results of the analysis, such as the extracted social networks.

The last step of the general process to use web mining for on-line social networks analysis is recommendation and action. This is an optional step, and the process may be terminated after the analysis results have been generated. The recommendation and action step deals with the results of the analysis; for example, if structure holes in a social network  have been discovered recommendations about how to fill the hole may be be  manually or automatically generated and then appropriate action can be taken.

This general process of using web mining for on-line social networks can be a continuous process. In some research projects, it start again after recommendations have been generated and action taken. The process starts again to perform the action performance evaluation or to do a new analysis.

The process proposed in this section is a general one and it doesn?t necessarily mean that any case that uses web mining techniques for on-line social networks analysis will follow it.

In some cases, modifications of this process are necessary to suit the requirements of different on-line social networks analysis projects. For example, the recommendation and action step in the process may not necessary for some cases and can be removed from the general process.



V.  DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH   This paper studies the application of the concept and techniques of web mining for on-line social networks, and reviews the related literature about web mining and social networks analysis. Moreover, how to use web mining and a general process of using web mining for on-line social networks analysis have also been proposed.

How to use the techniques of web mining for on-line social networks analysis is an interesting topic. However, there are several challenges in this research area to be overcome. For example, data sampling is a big issue when using web mining for on-line social networks analysis. In other web mining applications, data sampling is a simple task to reduce the amounts of data size. However, in on-line social networks analysis, it becomes a difficult task to select suitable samples representative of the real social networks. Furthermore, how to combine different types of web mining techniques for a particular piece of on-line social networks analysis is also usually an issue. The approach and process proposed in this paper will assist in dealing with some cases of on-line social networks analysis, but a fine tuning of the process is sometimes necessary.

We will shift our future research focus to overcome the challenges discussed above, such as the how to reduce the data size and not affect the characters of the social networks. In addition, we will focus on how to apply the web mining techniques to some real on-line social networking websites, such as blogs and on-line photo albums. These should be the next targets for web mining techniques for on-line social networks analysis.

