USING DECISION TREE AND ASSOCIATION RULES TO PREDICT CROSS  SELLING OPPORTUNITIES

Abstract: In saturated markets cross selling offers a number of  benefits to companies. While these benefits are recognized by mobile telecommunications companies, many have not fully embraced the concept in practice. This paper focuses on the prediction of cross selling opportunities and presents an innovative approach to forecast cross selling opportunities more effectively. The proposed approach combines decision tree and association rule to discover cross selling opportunity of a new service, WAP. The analysis is based on a sample of 969,228 customers selected at random from the data warehouse of a local mobile telecommunications vendor in China Mainland. The results showed that this approach can greatly improve the accuracy rate of forecasting and help telecommunications vendors make cross selling policies effectively.

Keywords: Decision Tree; Association Rule; Cross Selling; Mobile  Telecommunications Services  1. Introduction  Due to deregulation, new technologies and new competitors, the telecommunication industry becomes more competitive than ever. This competition for new customers in mature markets leads to the phenomenon known as ?churn?. To survive or maintain an advantage in such a competitive market, transactional record data are used to provide opportunities to segment the customer population into different groups based on the differences in their purchasing behavior. Furthermore, many telecommunications companies are turning to data mining techniques to solve such challenging issues as fraud detection [1], customer retention [2], prospect profiling [3] and even customer relationship management (CRM) [4].

Therefore, many models or theories were proposed to forecast the cross selling opportunities. For example, [4] provided a model named Latent Trait to find potential customer of cross selling in financial industry. [5] adopted Acquisition Patterns to analyze the cross selling  opportunities in financial services sector. The other models or patterns, such as Next-Product-To-Buy (NPTB)[6], Survival Analysis[7] and RFM (Recently, Frequency, Monetary)[8] etc., also can be found in the previous literatures.

Among the existing CRM tools, cross selling has recently gained increased attention for forging stronger relationship with customers. In telecommunications industry, successful cross selling allows the vendors to learn more about the user?s preferences and buying behavior, thereby increasing its ability to deliver ?the right product/service to the right customer at the right time.? However, a practical and effective implementation of cross selling is not easy to accomplish. What makes this particularly difficult is that the current standard model which are mostly based on clustering procedures are not sound enough to effectively predict cross selling opportunities. For example, many forecasting method mainly focus on part sides of customers as background characteristic and service selection, which makes vendors difficult to find ?right customers? for product or service.

Then more efficient and accurate forecasting model is required in this area.

In this research, two data mining tools, decision tree and association rule was combined to forecast cross selling opportunity of a new service, WAP (Wireless Application Protocol). The analysis result of the actual transactional record data shows that this new method can greatly improve the accuracy rate of forecasting and help vendors find a successful cross selling policy.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a framework describing the research method. Then, Section 3 uses our approach to deal with the actual transactional record. Specifically, we discuss the data, cross selling forecast procedures, the results and the combination of the two tools. Next, we discuss the managerial implications of our findings. Finally, we conclude the paper with directions for future research, as well as limitations.

2. Research Method  2.1. Decision tree  According to marketing theory, there are mainly two methods of market segmentation: one is based on customers characteristic, the other is based on customers? reaction to products. The former?s assumption is that customers with similar background characteristic will have similar consuming behavior and preference; the latter?s assumption is that customers with different reaction to product or service have a different background characteristic. Hence, in this study customers are grouped into two categories: ?WAP users? and ?non WAP users.? Next, we use decision tree method to analyze characteristic of WAP users. And then we seek customers with these characteristic in ?non WAP users?, who will be our target customer of cross selling WAP.

In this study, we select 7 variables as classification variable (input variable of decision tree) from customer database provided by the telecommunications vendor: consuming expense level, age level, brand type, time range since first online, customer type, mobile phone replacement characteristic and roam characteristic.

2.2. Association rule  Association rule is one useful tool of data mining, which is brought by Agrawal and Srikant first time in 1994[9]. It aims to dig up hidden association rules through analyzing transactional database. Since WAP is one of the new services provided by telecommunications vendor, if we can find what other new services have a strong association characteristic with WAP, and then we can aim at those non  WAP users using these new services, who is very possible user of WAP.

We took two steps to find out the strongest related telecommunication services. Firstly, we reviewed all of the current services the China Mobile provides to its customers.

Below 10 services were choose as our candidate association services: MMS, Monternet SMS (MSMS), listener request message service (LRMS), color ring (CR), WWW download of color ring (WDCR), mobile quick mail (MQM), A12581, voice magazine (VM), mobile paging service (MPS) and call forwarding (CF).

Furthermore, all of these services transactional data was transferred to the research database, and apply them to the association rule method. Then the result shows the new service or new services mix which has stronger relationship with WAP. In the end, we need to calculate the figure of customers who is using this service or service mix. This number presents the potential customers the vendor had for the WAP service.

2.3.  Research process  The Figure 1 shows the research process applied in this study. There are three phases: preprocess data, data mining, and merge forecast and execution.

Preprocess Data Firstly, clean up data source from the transactional database and transfer to the research database.

At the same time, the variables of decision tree model and candidate association services of association rules are set in as well. Secondly, the data is divided into two groups, namely training set and testing set. After that, transform variables. Finally we explore the data to find distribution and common characteristic of different data.

Data Source Data Split Variable Transformation Decision Tree  Model Evaluation  Model Implementation  Data Explore  Association Rules  Natural Attributes Behavioral Attributes  Accounting Attributes  New Services Usage ??  Pre-processing Data Mining Modeling   Figure 1. Research Process      Data Mining After preprocessing data, we use decision tree and association rule to carry out data mining, and find out common characteristic of WAP users and the association rules between association service or services mix and WAP.

Merge Forecast and Execution In data mining phase, we get the results from decision tree and association rules.

Then we forecast based on these two technologies, which means to find out the intersection and union set of their forecast results, and compare their accuracy. Finally we put this forecast method into practice.

3. Research results  3.1.  Sample  The data resource of this study is provided by CMCC of Henan province. To improve the sample?s effectiveness, we limit the study to all of the transactional data only from one city. The amount of the customers in the selected sample is 969,228, among there are 891,003 WAP users and 78,225 non WAP users.

All of the data are analyzed through running the world famous statistical software, SAS9.01.

3.2.  Decision tree analysis result  Through running SAS9.1 Decision Tree analysis model, we find out the result as shown in Table 1.

By analyzing of the decision tree result, the typical characteristic of WAP users is highlighted obviously. They are: higher expense level, younger clients, Gotone and  M-zone brand preference, being China Mobile users from 1year up to 2years, more frequency to replace phone, and more often roam. On the contrary, the clients with lower ARPU (Average Revenue per User per Month), relatively in high age, and preferring Shenzhouxing brand and with a longer history usually use WAP less.

Decision tree brings the typical characteristic of WAP users to the decision maker, but this is still not enough to make the cross selling strategy because there are some limitations of the transactional records known already. The common one is there is no detailed customer information for certain kind of CMCC clients (such as who are only using Shenzhouxing card), and also their consumption data. So if only decision tree is used to select the cross selling policy, this kind of customers may be blind for our policy. Then we need more support by analyzing via association rule.

3.3.  Result of association rule analysis  8 association rules are listed in Table 2, which were filtered out by association rule tool. Different service or service mix shows very different confidence rate with WAP.

As figured out in Table 2, there are 44.92% users choose MMS service, and inside, 96.9% of them also use the WAP, this indicates the MMS are highly associated with WAP.

Compared to that, 57.54% of customers who are using ?LRMS and A12581? order WAP service as well, but support of this rule is low to 0.72%, which means this rule has a relatively weak ability to forecast correctly.

Table 1: Analysis Result of Decision Tree  Input Variable Analysis Result Consuming expense  level ? In higher expense level, there are more WAP users than ordinary users; ? In customers with ARPU less than 5Yuan, WAP users account for a relatively little proportion.

Age level ? For customers between 18 and 30 years old, WAP users account for a obviously higher proportion than other customers? ? Main WAP users are between 18 and 50 years old.

Brand type ? WAP users? proportion in Gotone and M-zone, users is obviously higher than that in other brand; ? WAP users? proportion of Shenzhouxing card holders is obviously lower than that of ordinary users.

Time range since first online  ? Users often using WAP is mainly those with time range since first online longer than one year; ? Proportion of WAP users with time range since first online longer than 2 years is obviously higher than ordinary users.

Customer type ? WAP users? proportion in new customers is very little.

Mobile phone replacement characteristic  ? Users replace their mobile phone frequently use more WAP than non-frequent users.

Roaming characteristic ? Users roaming more frequently use more WAP than non-frequent users.

Table 2: Result of Association Rule Analysis New-S#1 New-S#2 New-S#3 New-S#4 Total Users Wap Users Non-wap Users Confidence Support  MMS    36,259 35,141 1,118 96.90% 4.07% SMS LRMS MPS  8,399 2,591 5,808 30.85% 0.94% SMS MSMS LRMS VM 10,385 3,104 7,281 29.89% 1.17% SMS MSMS MMS MPS 15,791 4,382 11,409 27.75% 1.77%  MSMS LRMS VM  11,827 3,263 8,564 27.59% 1.33% CF    10,363 3,543 6,820 34.19% 1.16%  MSMS LRMS A12581  9,454 3,324 6,130 35.16% 1.06% LRMS A12581   982 565 417 57.54% 0.11%   Table 3: Result of Combination Forecast  Verification Combination method Number of forecasted  customers Number of target  customers Actual WAP users of  target customers WAP penetration rate of  target customers Association rule (R) 67,154 24,856 15,657 62.99%  Decision tree (C) 21,150 9,517 5,234 55.00% R?C 78,836 32,865 19,164 58.31% R?C 9,468 1,508 1,268 84.08%   Association rule help the vendor find out the internal  relationship between new service and WAP and give the association rules between new service/new service mix and WAP. Now it is ready to verify this method?s effectiveness in random sampling  3.4.  Combination result analysis of decision tree and association rule  To verify the method?s effectiveness, we carried out a random sampling in users in the district, and we use 78,836 users as verification sample, accounting for 8.8% of total users. According the analysis result, we forecast the result as Table 3.

As showed in Table 3, we forecast 67,154 users through association rule (R), the forecast result shows that there would be 24,856 users are target customers of WAP, the actual WAP user amount to 15,657 of target customers, and accuracy rate of forecast is 62.99%. Through decision tree (C), we forecast 21,150 users, the forecast result shows that there would be 9,517 WAP users, and in fact there are 5,234 actual WAP users, and the accuracy rate of forecast is 55%.

Next, we compute the union set ?R?C?  and intersection set ?R?C?. The result of union set shows that target users of 78,836 users are 32,865, and the actual WAP users of target users are 19,164, the accuracy rate of forecast is 58.31%. Result of intersection shows that there are 1,508 users of 9,468 users are target customers of WAP, and 1,268  of target customers are actual WAP users, accuracy rate of forecast is 84.8%.

In a conclusion, different forecast method has a different accuracy rate of forecast. Union set has the highest forecast rate, and association rule follows, intersection method positions the third, and decision tree has the lowest accuracy rate of forecast. Considering setting down cross selling policy of WAP, different forecast methods provide a foundation for cross selling policy of different phases.

4.  Managerial implications  The purpose of cross selling is to ?deliver right product or service to the right customers at the right time.?[10] To find out ?the right customers? is an important premise to implement an effective cross selling. This study provides a theoretical foundation and method to get the right target user of cross selling strategy.

Firstly, two tools of data mining?decision tree and association rule ? can help to describe customers? characteristic synthetically via market segmentation variables, to dig out the internal relationship among different services. Then cross selling opportunities will be identified.

Furthermore, different forecast method and their combination have a different accuracy rate of forecast. As shown in this research, the intersection result of decision tree and association rule have much higher accuracy to forecast cross selling opportunities of WAP, than the union result of      them, this will be very helpful to target the potential customers quickly.

Last but not least, improper cross selling may lead to antipathy of customers and lower customer?s satisfaction and loyalty [11]. Hence, the target customers and sale time must be considered carefully when using cross selling.

According to the output of this paper, the intersection result of decision tree and association rule analysis is a reasonable target customer group when implementing cross selling is in the initial phase. By that way, the success chance of your cross selling would be greatly improved. When moving to the gradual execution of cross selling, the potential users can be extended based on the union analysis result which can provide more chance for the cross selling policy.

5.  Conclusions  The precondition of successful cross selling is to identify the cross selling opportunity. In this paper, we propose an innovative approach to forecast cross selling opportunities in telecommunications industry based on combination of decision tree and association rule. The presented approach involves two data mining tools: one is decision tree, to discover the characteristics of WAP users and the other is association rule, to identify new service or new services mix which is related to WAP. Subsequently, the combination analysis of these two tools was proposed for identifying the cross selling opportunity. The actual data was used to validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach and the results showed that this approach can greatly improve the accuracy rate of forecasting and help telecommunications vendors make cross selling policies effectively.

