APPLICATION OF ASSOCIATION RULES MINING IN POWER  DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT

Abstract: Applying association rule mining to power demand-side  management can supply references to optimizing decision-making program by power-supply companies. We introduce the principle of advancing power demand-side management measure accepted by user using association rules, and discuss the feasibility of choosing load-adjusting electric-power terminal based on multi-dimensional association rule mining. Giving an example, it introduces the application of deciding the varieties of power demand-side management energy conservation technology according as user attributes, quarter.

Keywords: Power demand-side management; Data Mining;  Association rules; Data cube  1. Introduction  Power demand-side management (DSM) refers to plan and implement series of measure by power-supply Company to alter user electric-power consume action, which brings load curve expected. Processing power DSM can improve load time character and quantity, which is significant to resource using integrative [1].

At present, many researches of power DSM include two categories: the one is to perfect DSM policy, statute and technology [2], the other is to analysis power DSM cost-benefit by applying mathematical modeling [3]. All of above focus on DSM cost or operation mechanism, and ignore power user need?s influence to DSM. As power service organization, power supply companies need realize the relationships between user demand and DSM measure.

Association rules data mining method is useful pattern mining knowledge aiming at different DSM issues. With plentiful information data in power supply system, it gives theoretical support to DSM technology decision-making reasonably. it analyzes how power market influences on DSM planning by association rules, which simplify actual complex issues.

2. Concepts of association rules data mining [4]  Association rules reflect the interdependence and relevance between one thing and other things. Association rules mining refers to mining valuable data which describing the links between the relevant knowledge in amount of data.

Let I={i1, i2,? ,in} be a set of item. Let D, the task-relevant data, be a set of database transactions where each transaction T is a set of items such that . Each transaction is associated with an identifier, called TID. Let A be a set of itemsets. An association rule is an implication of the form , where , , and  IT ?  BA ? IA ? IB ? ?=? BA . The rule A=>B holds in the transaction  set D with support s, where s is the percentage of transactions in D that contain A?B. This is taken to be the probability, P(A?B). The rule A=>B has confidence c in the transaction set D if c is the percentage of transactions in D containing A that also contain B. This is taken to be the conditional probability, P(B|A). That is, support (A=>B)=P(A?B)?confidence (A=>B)=P(B|A).

Rules that satisfy both a minimum support threshold (min_sup) and a minimum confidence threshold (min_conf) are called strong. If an itemset satisfies minimum support, then it is a frequent itemset. Apriori is a classical algorithm to find association rules of item-set.

3. Advancing power DSM measure applying power market association rules mining  3.1. Power DSM planning idea based on ?demand forecast?  The reason why user purchase electric-power is it can bring lots of advantage. The key of DSM actualization successful is usually urging user joining or accepting DSM plan actively. In detail, whether user is like to accept DSM      lie on variety of factors, including power price, demography index, power supply company?s inspirit, etc.

Analysis of such factors using association rules reflects some user?s demand characteristic to DSM measure. Then, aiming at different power market, a series of analysis can help power supply company to decide DSM implementing program respectively. Based on these, it can analysis DSM benefit of each power market with different possess ratio.

3.2. Analysis of association rules between power user demand characteristic to DSM  Forecasting power market demand refers to analysis all factors effecting user accept DSM measure. With Apriori algorithm, it identifies all frequent item-sets (a series of factor gather), and then find out the strong association which not only satisfy the minimum support while satisfying the minimum confidence. For example, through designing and investigating user demand questionnaires to DSM, it can get association statistic tables between power user and the demand factors of accepting DSM (see Table 1).

Table 1. the good supply list of a distribution center Power price  Technology character  Inspirits degree  Action factors  Legal criterion  User 1 ? ?   ?  User 2  ?  ?  User 3  ? ?  User4 ? ?  ?  User 5 ?  ?  User 6  ? ?  User 7 ?  ?  User 8 ? ? ?  ?  User 9 ? ? ?  Suppose the minimum support frequency is 2, Apriori algorithm mines out frequent 2 ? itemsets (see table 2).

Table 2  frequent 2 - itemset L3 Itemsets Support  { Power price?Character of DSM technology? Degree of inspirits } { Power price?Character of DSM technology?Legal criterion }     According to formula of confidence A=>B, support_count (A=>B)  confidence (A=>B) = P(B|A) = support_count(A)  It can get varieties of rules with each confidence from Frequent 2 - itemsets L3. If the minimum confidence  threshold is 60%, as strong rules, it exports the following rules:  Degree of inspirits=>Power price Character of DSM technology, confidence=2/2= 100%  ?  Power price Legal criterion => Character of DSM technology, confidence = 2/2 = 100%  ?  Character of DSM technology Legal criterion => Power price, confidence = 2/2 = 100%  ?  Legal criterion => Power price Character of DSM technology, confidence = 2/2 = 100%  ?  3.3. Design strategy of DSM measure extend in some power market  It?s known that, from above result, aiming at the first strong association rule, if proper degree of power company inspirit is main reason which effects user accept DSM measure, it?s possible that power price and character of DSM technology act too. In practice, power-supply company can combine with other marketing strategies to choose DSM market-exploited projects respectively. For example, they can make emphases on designing inspirit items on the basis of cost-benefit analysis, provide preferential price or allowance for DSM measure linking various power prices, and make some DSM technology or equipment top-priority, which can bring user advantage remarkably. Obviously, company must adjust DSM strategy content or structure in view of actual demand characteristic on other strong association rules.

4. Deciding DSM aim terminal based on power demand-side characteristics  Implementing power demand-side management must benefit both user and electric power company. After anglicizing user?s demand, company confirms seriously the aim of load shape amending. Subsequently, they choose electric-power terminal to adjust load.

4.1. Analysis of load unusual terminal character based on multidimensional association rules  Considering rationality and effectiveness, the basic principle of load optimizing or adjust is minimizing energy sources fee on both supply and demand sides. Load character parameter includes load ratio, peak and off-peak difference etc., whose influence factors involve mainly power structure, climate, holiday, and so on. To determine load adjusting power terminal, managers firstly find out load unusual point, that is the power terminal of unusual load shape, and analyze reason. So, power company must      consider the power terminal data as extending multi-dimensional resource not single. They especially classify power terminal?s integrated features, analysis relationship between load characters and different terminal attributes. In fact, power terminal resource database of electricity consumption, electrovalence, time, terminal attribute, power structure, etc.

All above memory in relational databases or data warehouse with their various forms and attributes. The association rule involving is multidimensional association rules. Multi-dimensional association rules mining can analyze unusual load character?s trend caused by electricity consumption, electrovalence, time, etc. It?s necessary making Multi-dimensional association rules mining on different background, which help power company decide power terminal implementing DSM.

4.2. Multi-dimensional association rules mining based on data cube [6]  Data in data warehouse organize in multi-dimensional form; multi-dimensional data model organizes data through data cube, which is the core of data model. The dimension is certain character of considered question, special view of observed data. The set of the characters consist of a dimensional. Data cube is an analogy of multi-dimensional data storage, not limit to 3-dimensional, can be n-dimensional.

Power terminal data resources contained various tables, such as user?s name, attribute, electricity consumption, power structure, time, and other information. The pattern of each table has different attributes; each property has different levels of classification. With the data warehouse and OLAP technology, dimension attribute users interest in appears in data cube dimension. According to certain tasks, association rules mining practice in data cube generated from database. Some algorithm similar to Apriori can solve multidimensional data mining.

4.3. Applications  It adopts the ideas of multidimensional association rule mining algorithm based on OLAP technology. In the following algorithm, it definites each options set pattern P<pattern. dimension>. In which, pattern refers to actual value of multidimensional attributes model contains, and dimension is each dimensional name of recourses, I is candidate projects dimension of itemsets. Specific algorithm described as follows:  input: introduce customer data: multidimensional data[d1?d2???dn]  minimums support degree: Minsupp, minimums confidence: Minconf  output: frequency itemsets L method: 1.K=1; L=?, 2. generate candidate 1- itemset for each  dimension C1,di ={all the distinct values in dimension di}  ;,111 ? dink CC == 3. generate frequent 1- itemset L1= gen_frequent (1, C1); 4. repeat K = K + 1; Generate candidate K- itemset Ck= gen_candidate (K, Lk-1); Generate frequent K- itemset Lk= gen_frequent (K, Ck); L= L L? k; Until Lk=? In process of DSM implementing, power company  must choose proper technology to adjust load shape. DSM technologies include green lighting, high effective equipment, load control, and so on. To power supply company, managers concern more unusual load point?s power function, power terminal?s attribute, time, and the relationship on them. In detail, the power function include lighting, electrical apparatus, heating system, etc. Besides, attributes of power terminal refers to industry, agriculture, business and residents. Finding out the relationship of those factors can help company choose the right DSM technology.

The data cube on my example compose of three types of data tables, such as time dimension, attribute dimension and electric power function. In my example, 480 unusual load points of some power supply company in a year are chosen to process 3D dimensional association rules mining, (seeing Table 3, after data pretreatment).

By OLAP technologies, it sets three-dimensional data cube on time dimension, regional dimension and goods dimension (seeing Figure 1).

Using the upper algorithm in Table 3 to mine, supposing minsupp and minconf as 18%, It gets the frequent predicate itemsets {1st  quarter, Residents, lighting} meeting requirements, that is, three of them are of associated relationship, which cause load unusual.

According to this rules, power supply companies can focus on green-lighting technology implement to resident electric power. At the same time, it?s a good idea to design peak-valley TOU power price in 1st quarter, which can adjust load shape of residents. This means can apply on other power terminal association rules mining, is useful to decide load adjust terminal and relevant DSM technology scientific.

Table 3 statistics of electric power terminal data  time Terminal attribute Power function Count  Quarter 1 Quarter 1 Quarter 1 Quarter 1  Quarter 2 Quarter 2 Quarter 2 Quarter 2 Quarter 2  Quarter 3 Quarter 3 Quarter 3  Quarter 4 Quarter 4 Quarter 4  Residents Business Residents Industry  Business Business Residents Residents  Agriculture  Residents Industry  Residents  Business Residents Industry  Lighting Heating system Heating system Refrigeration  Electrical apparatus Lighting Lighting Impetus Impetus  Lighting Heating system  Impetus  Heating system Heating system Refrigeration         Figure 1. 3-dimemsion data cube in unusual load points of  power terminal  5. Conclusions  (1) Applying association rules on mining the relationship between electric power terminal and DSM measure, can find out knowledge between power market demand and DSM market exploiting strategy. Combining with market segmentation of other factors, manager designs various DSM marketing projects externally to solve power DSM implemet.

(2) In multi-dimensional association rules mining, Apriori algorithm is efficient to several frequent predicates itemsets. Lessening the length of candidates? itemsets by pruning, it reduces support calculating time. However, if a data cube is closed, it thinks about the other methods because time to join and prune become longer.

Acknowledgements  This paper is supported by the Science Foundation of NCEPU under Grant 200511012.

