COMPARING DECISION TREE AND OPTIMAL RISK PATTERN MINING    FOR ANALYSING EMERGENCY ULTRA SHORT STAY UNIT DATA

Abstract? A data set contains patient records of Ultra Short Stay  Unit (USSU) at emergency department at Toowoomba Base Hospital. Some patients were admitted to the hospital for further treatment after a long stay at USSU and other patients were discharged after a short stay at USSU. In most hospitals the USSU is not enough for large demand, and there will be better utilisation of the unit if medical professionals know what types of patients are more likely to be hospitalised before any treatment at USSU. Two data mining methods; decision trees and optimal risk pattern mining, have been applied on the data to explore cohorts of patients who are more likely to be admitted to the hospital. Results show that decision tree method is inadequate for finding understandable patterns, and that optimal risk pattern mining method is good for mining meaningful patterns for medical practitioners.

Key words: Data mining, decision trees, association rules, risk pattern  mining.

1. Introduction  Durham [1] reported that data mining is usually used for knowledge discovery process, where a large number of data records are analysed in order to identify most meaningful patterns in the data set. Many pattern discovery methods have been developed and matured in the past few years to carry out sophisticated data mining on various data sets. These methods include decision trees and association rule mining. Useful patterns have been discovered which were previously unknown to the system and users.

Hospitals and clinics have acquired an extensive amount of patient medical data in the past years. Within these data sets, there is a valuable medical knowledge which needs to be investigated and discovered so that the medical practitioners will make use of it. Due to their predictive power, data mining tools have been widely used in health care applications.

Duckett and others [2] claimed that the sharp increase  in the number of presentations to the Emergency Rooms in recent years and reduced government funding, has prompted a number of studies undertaken by Acute Health Division [3] to minimise the number of admissions to hospitals. Medical resources are in an ever increasing demand, and there is an urgent need to optimising the use of these resources. Extracting patterns of the medical data is one of the means to improving the use of medical resources.

It also has the potential of early identification of disease outbreaks. Moreover, the optimal utilisation of medical resources in the emergency department makes a difference between life and death of patients.

The next section introduces data mining tools used in this analysis. Section three presents analysis of results and their interpretations. Section four presents a summary of current and previous research focused on explaining emergency department operations and improving emergency department performance. Section five concludes the paper.

2. Methods  2.1. Decision Trees  Decision trees are popular logical methods for classification. A decision tree is a hierarchical structure that partitions data into some disjoint groups based on their different attribute values. Leaves of a decision tree contain instances (records) of one class, and so it is used for classification. An advantage of decision methods is that decision trees can be easily converted into understandable rules. Quinlan [4] has developed C4.5 software which is the most widely used decision tree tool. This was preceded by its ancestor ID3 also developed by Quinlan [5]. The commercial version is C5.0.

C4.5 is a typical divide-and-conquer method. Firstly, it selects a best attribute by information gain ratio criterion, and then partitions the database into a set of disjoint sub       data sets by distinct attribute values of the selected attribute.

Next, it recursively partitions each sub data set in the same way. This procedure stops when the partitioned data set is pure (each data set only contains instances of one class.) or the data set size is too small to be partitioned. All the selected attributes and their distinct values form a decision tree, where each path from the root to a leaf is a rule. In practice, a presented rule set is completed by post-pruning the raw rule set derived from a decision tree. A greedy strategy based on an estimating error rate is used to prune rules.

Accuracy is an important measurement for rules from C4.5. Quinlan used pessimistic error rate in rule pruning.

Assume that P represents a set of attribute value pairs, called a pattern, and that c is a class. We present the pessimistic error as pessimistic accuracy in the following.

N z  N z  N f  N fz  N zf  cPAccuracy 2    421)( +  +?++ ?=?  where f = 1 ? prob(c|P), N is the number of instances (records) containing P, and z is the standard deviation corresponding to a statistical confidence c, which for c = 25% is z = 0.69.

2.2. Association Rule Mining  Association mining is a major data mining technique, and is a most common pattern discovery method. It retrieves all frequent patterns in a data set and forms interesting rules among associative patterns. Associations rules are in forms of ?If Then? format, and each rule is easy to understand and interpret. Most frequently used association rule mining methods are Apriori developed by Agrawal and Rican [6] and FP-growth reported by Han and others [7].

Two important criteria in association rule mining are: Support(P ! c) = prob(P, c), and Confidence(P ! c) = prob(c|P).

Association rule mining discovers all rules with users?  specified criteria, such as minimum support and confidence.

This is a strength because it does not miss any rules. In contrast, decision trees only find some rules of a large rule pool. However, this is also a weakness of association rule mining. Users are easily overwhelmed by a large number of rules, and miss interesting ones. Also, the efficiency of association rule mining deteriorates.

2.3. Optimum Rule Mining  To overcome two problems of association rule mining, Optimal Rule Mining reported by Li [8] is designed to discover rules in a data set efficiently using a range of interestingness criteria. An optimal rule set is significantly smaller than an association rule set. To further simplify an optimal rule set, a hierarchy of rule sets is proposed to present rules from simple to comprehensive: min-optimal, 1-optimal, 2-optimal, ... The min-optimal rule set contains a set of best rules, each of which explain an instance (record) with the highest interestingness among all rules can explain the instance.

As to interestingness of rules, different applications have different measurements. For medical applications, Relative Risk is an understandable one. For example, a summary of data is given in table 1.

Table 1: Cancer data  Lung cancer Normal Total Smoke 6 194 200 Non-smoke 4 796 800 total 10 990 1000   Out of 200 smokers, 3% suffer lung cancer. Out of 800  non-smokers, 0.5% suffer lung cancer. Therefore, smoking is 6 times more risky to lung cancer than non-smokers.

More formally, the notations summarised in table 2 are used, where ?P means that P does not occur.

Table 2: Formal notation Abnormal(a) Normal (n) Total P Prob(P,a) Prob(P,n) Prob(P) ?P Prob(?P,a) Prob(?P,n) Prob(?P) total Prob(a) Prob(n) 1   Relative risk of rule P?a is defined as: RelativeRisk(P?a) = prob(a|P)/prob(a|?P) Relative risk has been widely used in epidemiology,  and is understood by medical practitioners. A method of Mining Optimal Risk pattern (MORE) was presented by Li and others [9]. This method is far more efficient than association rule mining, produces a significant smaller rule set than association rules, and guarantees the patterns with highest relative risk for all records.

3. Results  USSU data set consists of 4321 records representing      patients who presented at the Ultra Short Stay Unit of the Emergency department at Toowoomba base hospital over the period of two and a half years. 808 records are for patients who were eventually admitted to hospital, and 3513 for those who were discharged after staying at USSU for less than 20 hours. The unit is designed to manage patients who need a brief time for observation and is a ten bed facility administered by the emergency department. This is not enough in some occasions, and doctors have to decide to transfer some patients to wards. There will be a reduction in administrative work if patients who are likely to be admitted to the hospital are transferred to wards without staying in USSU. This study is a try to predict what types of patients are likely to be admitted to the hospital in the initial assessment. Table 4 shows attributes of patients used in the prediction.

Table 3: patient attributes and their values  Attribute Description Values NEWDIAG RENAL DIABETES GENDER MS2 ETHNIC2 CARDIO PREVVIS MONTHADM TOOWOOMB AGECAT2 AGECAT TRIAGE ASTHCOPD ADMDAY SEASON  Diagnosis groups Renal Diabetes Gender Marital Status Indigenous Cardiovascular Previous visit to ED in last week Month of admission Where from Age in 4 categories Age in 10 year groups Triage Asthma or Co morbidity Admission Day Season  0..32 0..1 0..1 1..2 0..1 0..1 0..1 0..1 1..12 0..1 1..4 0..10 1..5 0..1 1..7 1..4   Table 4: Cancer data  Rule for admission Support number  Relative risk  TRIAGE = 2 NEWDIAG = 13 MS2 = 1  5 1.41  PREVVIS = 1 147 1.25  When we applied C4.5 to the data set, we obtained a  model with accuracy of 82%. This accuracy is satisfactory if the model is used as a black box. When doctors try to understand reasons for predictions, explanations provided by C4.5 are not adequate. Most rules generated from C4.5 have small support or low relative risk. For example, the two rules (shown in table 4) are discovered by C4.5.

The first rule has a small support and a low relative risk. The second rule has low relative risk although the support is large. Both rules are of no interest to doctors. In contrast, MORE can discover rules with user specified minimum support and minimum relative risk. Table 5 shows rules discovered in the admitted group for C4.5, MORE and association rule mining. Out of 20 rules, only 2 of them are significant if the minimum support and minimum relative risk are 5% and 1.5 respectively. These two rules do not include the rule with the highest relative risk. This shows that C4.5 is not adequate for discovering rules that can be understood by medical practitioners.

Association rule mining can be used for discovering risk patterns when the confidence is replaced by the relative risk.

However, association rule mining discovers too many rules where many rules carry repetitive information. Few users are able to examine these rules. MORE returns a reasonable size of pattern set which include patterns with the highest relative risk for all cases in the data. They are easy to be examined, and provide a complete picture for the data.

Table 5: Comparison of discovered rules  C4.5 Supp = 0.01 Supp =0.05 Total C4.5 MORE Ass. C4.5 MORE Ass.

20 11 230 12773 2 50 479   MORE also provide a function to organize rules in  hierarchical structures. A hierarchical presentation of risk patterns shows relative risk evolution. This can be meaningfully exploited by the medical professional. This is illustrated in table 6.

Table 6: Hierarchical presentation  Length Attributes Supp num RR 1 CARDIO = 1 57 2.23 2 CARDIO = 1  SEASON = 3 35 2.41  3 CARDIO = 1 SEASON = 3  AGECAT2 = 4  19 2.79   Relative risks are evolving as we move from more  general to more specific combination of rule attributes. The first rule states that there is 2.23 more chance of patients with cardiovascular disease to be admitted to the hospital than patients without this disease. If the same patient is 65+ years old then his chance of admission elevates to 2.43.

Furthermore, if the same patient presented at the USSU in Winter the chance of admission raises to 2.79. The reason that C4.5 is not suitable for exploring understandable rules      is that C4.5 is a classification system whose main objective is to minimize misclassification rate. To show how this objective is different form discovering medical meaningful risk patterns, we plot twenty rules discovered by C4.5 by their ranks in classification accuracy versus their ranks in relative risks in Figure 1. It is obvious that they are loosely correlated. Therefore, C4.5 does not discover rules with high relative risk.

Figure 1: Correlation between accuracy and relative risk measurement of 20 rules discovered by C4.5.

In addition, C4.5 employs a heuristic method for  exploring rules, and does not guarantee the completeness of results. Therefore, it misses a lot of rules that are of interest to users. Further, C4.5 tends to discover rules with fewer combinations in rule antecedents. Figure 2 shows attribute values appearing in rules discovered by C4.5 and MORE.

Many single attribute-value rules are discovered by C4.5.

These rules do not provide new and useful information to medical practitioner, since he can easily observe most of these rules. The Figure also illustrates that MORE discovers rules with higher attribute interactions than those from C4.5.

Rules with high attribute interactions provide new information to users since they can not be observed easily.

4. Related Research  Brossette and others [10] an Ceglowski and others [11, 12] applied data mining techniques for medical process mining, infection control, public health surveillance and emergency department data for the aim of improving the performance of emergency departments. Other studies had been applied to emergency room data for the sake of optimizing the use of dwindling hospital medical resources  in most western nations including Australia. This is largely due to various reasons as reported by Acute Health Division [3] and Lane [13]. Victorian Department of Human Services [14] and Department of Health [15] had focused on reducing the length of stay in the department. Eagar and Hindle [16] had studied case-mixes of presenting patients.

(a)     (b)  Figure 2. (a): 20 rules discovered by C4.5. (b): the first 20 rules discovered by MORE. The y-axis represents rules, and x-axis represents attribute-vales appearing in rules; They are produced by a modified program for visualising rules from Delautre and Demay [21].

Ceglowski and others [12, 17] used emergency room process philosophy, combined with data mining and resulted in the discovery of specific treatment pathways which model the treatment of patients. Classification and regression trees and self organising maps were used in this study. The conclusion was that workload in the emergency department depends only on the number of presentations, and not the type of procedure carried out. Ordonez [18] introduced search constraints to find only medically significant association rules and make search more efficient on the large number of produced association rules from medical data set. These rules relate heart perfusion measurements and patient risk factors to the degree of stenosis in four specific arteries. Then, he compared the selected rules with predictive rules mined with decision trees which have somewhat low reliability. Also, their attribute splits are different from medically common splits and most rules refer to small set of patients. In contrast, association rules generally include simpler predictive rules, they work well with user-binned attributes, rule reliability is higher and rules generally refer to larger set of patients.

Victorian Department of Human Services [14] aimed at grouping patients according to clinical state. The objective had been that patients who have similar diagnoses and characteristics are expected to undergo identical treatments and so use similar resources. Patients of similar cases are grouped together, therefore the use of the term ?case-mix?. This approach of dealing with emergency department patients includes gathering of data about patients, identification of variables, and parametric modeling of the relationship between variables.

Cellular manufacturing ideas had been applied to emergency department operations. This had led Walley [19] to a seven patient segments model. This, in fact, does present a simplified view of emergency department operations. However, it is expected that the ?investigations? and ?treatment? functions in several of the flows depicted in the model differ considerably and require resources, time and many levels of expertise for completion.

A number of emergency department case-mix studies have been carried out in Australia in the last two decades by Bond and others [20]. The first was the National Ambulatory Case-mix Project which had produced 36 emergency department classes based on presence of a doctor, procedure and diagnostic category. Another study in Western Australia between 1990 and 1992 developed Urgency and Disposition Group and Urgency Related Group emergency case-mix proposals. The patients were segmented by outcome of visit and urgency. Four outcomes had been used: i) Admitted, ii) Discharged; iii) Did not wait, iv) Died in emergency department or dead on arrival.

Urgency and Disposition Groups produce a reduction in  variance (R2) on total cost of 47% in Western Australia and nearly 44% in South Australia on data trimmed of outlying points. Disposition and Urgency Groups were considered clinically relevant and easy to collect.

5. Conclusions  We applied a decision tree method; C4.5 and an optimal risk pattern mining method; MORE, to an ultra short stay unit data of a local hospital to explore cohorts of patients that are more likely admitted to hospital. C4.5 is good for building a classification model with an acceptable accuracy. However, most rules generated from C4.5 have either low support or low relative risk. Furthermore, the number of rules generated by C4.5 is very limited, and hence rules do not provide the whole picture of information in data. C4.5 is not suitable for exploring interesting patterns. MORE produces manageable and optimal results.

The number of patterns is significantly less than association rules, but patterns include those with highest relative risks for all records. The presentation of discovered patterns in hierarchical structures facilitates, to the users, understanding the evolution of relative risk.

Acknowledgements  Authors thank Dr Mark Laverty at the Emergency Department of Toowoomba Base Hospital for providing the data set.

