An Artificial Immune System Model for Knowledge Extraction and

Abstract? This paper presents an approach to knowledge extraction and representation based on an artificial immune system. The main idea is to extract the important concepts from a set of text documents, and find the relations between such concepts. At the end, a graph representation is obtained, which is intended to present a picture of the documents? contents.

Some experiments were carried out in order to validate the proposed approach, and very promising results were obtained.



I. INTRODUCTION  Recently, the generation of textual information has grown  considerably; thus, currently, many people and organizations  need to work with huge amounts of data. Such data can be in  the form of working papers, corporate documents and e-mail,  among others. This situation raises the necessity of using  computational tools that facilitate the management of such  amount of information in a reliable, secure and efficient way  so that this information becomes helpful to people?s daily  work.

There are many sources which can be used to obtain  documents from specific areas; for this reason, someone who  is looking for information on certain subject must face the  problem of making a good selection of the documents that  are helpful and provide the appropriate information. Accord-  ingly, selecting the specific sources and filtering them is an  important task in order to acquire the relevant information  for a given purpose. Given this scenario, it is very important  to have tools that can help in the process of getting the  important meaning of documents, and to determine whether  they are relevant to the user or not.

Tools that are currently available, do not solve the problem  of information organization in a complete way. They provide  ways to store information, usually in the form of databases,  bibliography management systems, or e-mail management  systems. Even though the access to such information has  become very fast and efficient, there is still the need to  efficiently extract the knowledge contained in such textual  sources.

This paper presents a proposal for knowledge extraction  and visualization, which can be used in order to get the  important concepts from text documents and the relations  between such concepts. This process is based on concepts  simulating the biological immune system, specifically of its  pattern recognition and memory capabilities.

Andres Romero and Fernando Nino are with the Intelligent Systems Research Laboratory in the Department of Computer Engineering of the National University of Colombia.

Gerardo Quintana is with the department of Internal Medicine of the National University of Colombia  The rest of this paper is organized as follows: section  II presents some techniques commonly used knowledge  extraction and representation. In section III, there is a brief  background on Artificial Immune Systems on which this  work is based; particullary, the immune models that will be  used in knowledge extraction and representation in this work  are summarized. The proposed model to perform knowledge  representation and its components are presented in section

IV. Section V shows some experiments carried out on the  TechTC doucument set in order to test the proposed model; it  also presents an analysis of the extracted knowledge. Finally,  section VI presents some conclusions and future directions  to improve this work.



II. KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION TECHNIQUES  Semantic information refers to the tacit knowledge con-  tained in documents, which is not always explicit and it is  difficult to access; thus, there is a need to find appropriate  techniques that allow knowledge extraction and representa-  tion contained in such documents.

In [5], two main elements in the process of knowledge  acquisition are defined:  1) Lexicon Construction: this is the knowledge about the  words contained in the documents,  2) Generation of relations between the words in the  lexicon, such relations can be represented as a semantic  network or an ontology.

Most of the work related to knowledge extraction and  representation is focused on finding important concepts in  the documents; in order to achieve this, many techniques  have used information related to either the domain of the  documents or to the language, such as semantic networks  like WordNet [2], or in general some previuos information  about the documents.

In [1], a technique for text classification based on as-  sociation rules is presented. The main idea is to use an  association rule mining algorithm, to find rules that relate  concepts contained in the documents to the categories the  documents belong to. Once such rules are obtained, they are  used to classify new documents.

In [4], a method to access information, which is based  on the topics found in text documents, is presented. The  idea is to combine segmentation techniques with information  extraction techniques. Such information extraction process is  based on a previously constructed ontology, which is used to  connect the obtained text segments with the concepts in the  ontology.

In [11], the author presents a term weighting algorithm  for its use in text categorization. The main idea is to select  the most important features in a document, for each term, a  given weight is adjusted to help the categorization process.

In [12], a method for identifying the subject of documents  based in word co-occurrence is presented. Some words are  defined for each category, and then a classification based  on the occurrence or not of such words in the documents  obtained.

In the field of knowledge managenet, there has been less  work than on information extraction and text processing; in  [3], a methodology for knowledge management is proposed.

The proposed phases are:  ? Knowledge acquisition  ? Knowledge structuring  ? Knowledge refinement  ? Knowledge sharing  An idea behind these phases is to make the knowledge  easily accessible, and thus to be able to solve hard problems.

Some similar steps to knowledge managements are defined in  [20], but in this case, the process is based on formal concept  analysis.



III. ARTIFICIAL IMMUNE SYSTEMS  The natural immune system consists of molecules, cells  and organs distributed throughout the body. There is no main  organ that controls the functions of the immune system.

An important task accomplished by the immune system  is monitoring the body, for instance, looking for strange  elements that may cause diseases. Accordingly, an important  role of the immune system is to discriminate self from non-  self [10].

The immune system works in three different layers: phys-  ical barriers (e.g., the skin), the innate immune system and  the adaptive immune system. Most of the artificial immune  system models developed so far are inspired by the latter,  which presents the desirable properties for a computational  intelligence system, such as learning and memory [19].

Antigens are usually proteins or molecules external to the  body, which are derived from pathogens or malignant cells;  such antigens are characterized by regions called epitopes.

In defining antigens, two main properties should be distin-  guished: antigenicity, the capacity of a given antigen to be  recognized by the antigen-specific receptors expressed by T  or B cells; and immunogenicity, the ability of the antigen to  induce an immune response [14].

The adaptive immune response consists of the cellular and  humoral responses [6]:  1) Cellular Immune Response: A cell infected by a  virus can degrade such virus and transport sections of  its proteins to the membrane in order to present it;  such cell is called an Antigen Presenting Cell. Helper  T cells can detect proteins that are being presented  and are thus activated. Helper T cells are available  to generate identical copies of itself. Such activated T  cells circulate throughout the body destroying infected  cells.

2) Humoral Immune Response: This response is initi-  ated by cells called macrophages, which engulf anti-  gens, such as bacteria and viruses, then, they process  such antigens to take them to their cellular membrane  and present them to T cells. Again, T cells detect such  antigens that are being presented and get activated;  activated T cells are cloned producing identical copies.

Subsequently, T cells help B cells to diferentiate into  antibody producing cells (plasma cells). A B cell  that finds an antigen seen previously that activated  a T cell, engulfs such antigen and transport it to  its membrane to present it. If a T cell detects the  antigens presented by B cells, such T cell helps the B  cell produce copies that will differentiate into plasma  cells. Plasma cells produce identical antibodies (also  called immunoglobulins) that are specific to the antigen  recognized by the B cell. Recently generated antibodies  are capable of recognizing antigens to make easier the  task accomplished by the phagocytes. If all of these  antigens remain in the same location, phagocytes must  approach to the antigen identified by the antibodies and  destroy it [16].

The biological immune system has developed the ability of  generating a set of detectors, such that those that recognize  an antigen are selected. This system presents an almost un-  limited capacity to detect any chemical agent, either natural  or artificial [15].

An artificial immune systen can be defined as a computa-  tional system inspired by ideas, theories and components of  the natural immune system.

A. Immune Network Theory  The immune network theory, as proposed by Jerne (1973),  claims that the immune system holds a network of connected  B cells which are able to detect antigens. Such B cells  stimulate and suppress each other leading to a stable number  of cells in the immune system, but with an antibody diversity  able to detect a great variety of antigens. The idiotypic  network theory establishes that antibodies can match other  antibodies as well as antigens [8]. This matching and stim-  ulation process will lead to the diversity of the antibody  repertoire, which is the basis for the memory presented by  the immune system.

B. Applications in Feature Extraction  One of the main functions of the immune system is  to defend the body from external dangerous agents, such  function can be viewed, in general terms, as the classification  of such agents as belonging to one of two classes: self, those  belonging to the body; and non-self, those which are external  or are potentially dangerous to the body. This classification  process is performed using a vast collection of T cells which  are capable of recognizing proteins; such cells are produced  by its own learning algorithm [21]. This learning algorithm  inherent to the immune system has been used with relative  3414 2008 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2008)    success in text classification tasks and information extraction focused in such classification [13], [21].

Artificial immune systems have proved to be useful in feature extraction processes from several sources, such as images [7], email [17] and text [21]. Such feature extraction process can be efficiently used in order to get important features from text documents, which can represent the doc- uments? contents. There has been some work on document classification [13], [21] and spam detection [17], [19] which has taken ideas from the immune system in order to achieve their goals.



IV. PROPOSED MODEL  This paper presents a model for knowledge extraction and representation based on the behavior of the biological immune system. Also, The idea is, from a set of thext documents, to obtain a visual representation of the important concepts and relations between them.

This visual representation is designed to graphically show the content of the documents, and to provide the user with a friendly way to access the information contained in the documents, without having to read all the documents to find out what the user is looking for.

This representation also gives information about how im- portant concepts are related to each other, presenting groups of related concepts as clusters in a graph, so that it can be easy to see groups of related documents, i.e., documents on similar subjects are represented as a cluster containing the important words on that subject.

In order to achieve this task, there are some independent steps, carried out in order to get important concepts and their relations:  1) To determine important words in a single document 2) To process some documents to find the important  words in all the documents, and relation between such words  3) To generate a visual representation of the important words and their relations.

These steps are carried out using ideas and concepts taken from the biological immune system, in particular, those which involve pattern recognition. In order to get a representation of the documents contents, it is important to detect patterns inside the documents, such patterns will represent important concepts throughout the document set.

Memory is essential because important concepts and their relations are present in the documents and they will be processed by the system several times; for this reason, it is important to have memory of previously presented patterns.

This representation can be useful to get a general view of the documents, it can also allow the navigation throughout different subjects, and the users can perform search based on concepts rather than syntax.

A. Determining Important Words  This is the first step of the process and the idea is to filter out the contents of the document; this is important  because a single document can have thousands of words and processing all the words can be prohibitive. Thus, this step provides only a small set of words, which represent the most important concepts in the document, and such words represent the contents and meaning of the entire document.

This step is divided into the following subprocesses: 1) Removing stop-words from the document 2) Performing a stemming process 3) Measuring the importance of all the words 4) Selecting useful words based on the importance mea-  sure The first two subprocesses are standard in text processing,  and the importance measure is calculated following some rules taken from [18], and adjusted in order to deal only with a single document without knowing its category.

This measure is calculated as follows: ? To simulate multiple documents, a single document is  divided into several sub-documents and each one is treated as an independent document, as depicted in figure 1  Fig. 1. Sub-documents generated  After this division, some variables can be defined: ? P : sub-document size (number of words contained in  the sub-document) ? N : count of sub-documents extracted from the original  document and some calculations can be done to determine the impor- tance of each word:  n(w, i): number of times that word w appears in sub- document i.

P (w, i) = n(w, i)  P  where P (w, i) is the probability of finding word w in sub- document i.

I(w, i) is an indicator function that determines if the word w appears in sub-document i or not.

P (w) =  ?N i=1 P (w, i)?N i=1 I(w, i)  where P (w) is the average probability of finding word w in the sub-documents, which can be rewritten as:  P (w) =  ?N i=1 n(w, i)  P ?N  i=1 I(w, i)  2008 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2008) 3415    A(w) is the average of the sub-documents in which word w appears:  A(w) =  N  N?  i=1  I(w, i)  An important word appears in all the sub-documents, and  appears few times in each one. If a word appears in all the  subdocuments and in it appears many times in each sub-  document, it is a very common word and it should not be  considered as important.

Importance(w) = A(w)  P ? P (w)  An expression to compute the importance of a word can  be reformulated involving the previously defined variables as  follows:  Importance(w) = [ ?N  i=1 I(w, i)]  N ?N  i=1 n(w, i)  This expression means that the importance of a word can  be calculated using the total count of its appearances in the  document, and the number of sub-documents in which the  word appears.

B. Immune Network Operation  The knowledge extraction process follows the main behav-  ior of an immune network; such process takes the general  picture of an immune system, without digging into the  operation details, and focuses on the general dynamics of  an idiotypic network in order to get the important concepts  from the documents. The system does not need to implement  all the detailed operation of an idiotypic network, instead of  it, it uses only a top level abstraction of it, that is because the  general process is enough to obtain a set of antibodies that  conforms a good representation of the knowledge. The only  information required from the immune netowrk, at the end of  the process, is the set of important concepts, represented by  the most stimulated antibodies; and a set of relations between  such concepts, represented by the stimulation between the  corresponding antibodies.

At the end of the process, antibodies represent important  concepts in the documents, and the stimulation between  antibodies represent semantic relations between such con-  cepts, and supression relations represent semantically distant  concepts in the documents.

The main knowledge extraction process is based on an  artificial immune network. The components of this immune  system are represented using the following entities:  ? Antigens: They are represented using the most impor-  tant words in each document presented to the system.

? Antibodies: They represent words that have been pre-  sented to the system; each antibody is able to detect  the word that it represents when such word enters the  system.

? Antibody stimulation: It is the effect of the antigens  on the antibodies: the more important the word in the  document, the more stimulated the antibody that detects  it is.

? Antibody co-stimulation: It is represented using the  correlation between the importance of the words de-  tected by each pair of antibodies. Co-stimulus between  words x and y is defined as:  n ?  i xiyi ? ?  i xi ?  i yi? n  ? i x   i ? ( ?  i xi) ?  n ?  i y  i ? ( ?  i yi)  where xi and yi are the corresponding stimulus of the  antibodies x and y when the document i is presented.

The proposed artificial immune network works as follows:  1) A document is converted into a set of antigens, each  antigen representing one of the important words in the  document.

2) Antigen Presentation: Each antigen is presented to  the network; the corresponding antibody detects the  antigen, and it is stimulated with the value of the  word?s importance.

3) Network Dynamics: After each document (i.e a set  of antigens) is presented, the network dynamics re-  calculates the co-stimulation between each pair of  antibodies, using the rules for the previously defined  co-stimulation.

4) Network Meta-Dynamics: The network metadynam-  ics controls the size of the antibody population, remov-  ing those that are less stimulated, i.e., those antibodies  that have detected less antigens are weaker and more  likely to die.

These steps are detailed in algorithm 1:  C. Constructing a Representation  After presenting all the documents to the network, there  is a set of antibodies, and each pair of antibodies has a  costimulation that determines the level of relation between  the antigens that they represent. At this point, the set of  antibodies and their relations can be seen as a fully connected  graph.

In order to get a concise representation, it is useful to  select only the most important words and the most important  relations, thus, getting a sub-graph with the most repre-  sentative knowledge. This is accomplished by selecting the  most stimulated antibodies; these antibodies are used to start  constructing such sub-graph; with these first nodes, the graph  is constructed by selecting those antibodies with the highest  co-stimulation values with the current nodes in the graph.

This process is carried out until the maximum number of  nodes allowed in the representation is reached.

This graph construction process is detailed in algorithm 2.

This graph representation provides a view of the most im-  portant concepts in the documents, and the relations between  such concepts.

3416 2008 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2008)    Algorithm 1 Immune Network  for each document k in training set do  convert document into antigens and select only the most  important ones  for each antigen agi from document k do  present the antigen to all the antibodies  find the antibody ab with the highest affinity to abi if ab is nothing then  create antibody ab with the word from agi end if  stimulate antibody ab with the importante of antigen  agi.

end for  for each pair of antigens agi and agj from document  k do  find antibodies abi and abj that detect the antigens  co-stimulate abi and abj end for  if meta-dynamics then  for each antibody ab do  calculate the co-stimulation with the rest of the  antibodies.

end for  delete those antibodies with the lowest co-stimulation  values  end if  end for  If unrelated documents are presented to the system, the  graph will show some clusters, each containing the concepts  related to the topics in the documents.



V. EXPERIMENTATION  To validate the generated representation, some experiments  were carried out using the TechTC-300 collection [9]; this  collection contains 300 datasets for text classification, such  datasets are extracted from the web, and consist of actual  web pages categorized by human experts.

From this dataset, 4 categories were used to get represen-  tations of different subjects. The categories used were:  ? Economics  ? Medical  ? Opera  ? Reading Instruction  For each category, 50 documents were selected to be  presented to the immune network. The processing of each  document follows the rules defined in the previous section.

Thus, each document is converted into a set of antigens, each  antigen representing one word in the document. Antigens  are presented to the system, and the antibodies detecting  such antigens are stimulated; there is also a co-stimulation  between the antibodies.

After presenting all the documents, the graph that rep-  resents the contents of the documents is constructed. This  graph is constructed by performing the following steps:  Algorithm 2 Graph Construction  Parameters:  n: number of root nodes  d: graph depth  w: graph width  Select the n most stimulated antibodies from the network,  and add them to the graph as non expanded nodes  for each non expanded node in graph do  if node depth ? d then  select the w most co-stimulated antibodies  add the selected nodes to the graph if they are not in  already  add the corresponding edges to the graph  end if  end for  1) Determine the first word in the graph.

2) For each word in the graph:  a) Find the most related words.

b) Add such related words to the graph, if they have  not been included yet.

c) Add the relation between the words.

Steps 1 and 2.a are based on the word importance. Such  importance is calculated as the stimulation of the correspond-  ing antibody; if such stimulation is high enough, the word  is included into the graph, otherwise, the process stops. The  threshold to determine when to stop adding words to the  graph is determined by scaling the importance values to the  interval [0,1], as shown in figures 2 to 4.

Fig. 2. Importances for the economics category  Figures 2 to 4 show that there are some words that are  the most important, i.e., which have values near to 1. Notice  that the importance measure decreases quickly; this means  that there are a few words with high importance value, which  can be considered to be included in the graph. Also, there  is a point in the importance scale, where the remaining  words have very similar values, and such values are very  low. Therefore, these words must be considered as providing  low information to the process and should not be added to  2008 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2008) 3417    the graph.

Fig. 3. Importances for the opera category  Fig. 4. Importances for the reading instruction category  The graphs generated for the 4 categories are presented in  figures 5 to 8.

Figure 5 presents a view of the graph generated for the  documents under the category economics. In this case, the  most important word is econom, and, from this word, the  closely related ones can be seen in the graph. It is possible  to see that the most related words in the category are also the  closest words in the graph. In contrast, words with a lower  level of relation are located at the opposite side.

Figure 6 presents the graph for the category medical. In  this graph, it is possible to see some clusters, which means  that the documents in this category contain several important  concepts.

In figure 7, it is possible to see some information about  the documents in the opera category. For example, in the  upper part of the graph, it is possible to see that the tickets  are available online, and the users can mainly buy tickets for  thursday and saturday; also, it is possible to see the program  for the presentations on the webpages.

Figure 8 presents the representation for the reading in-  struction category. The concepts related to the main concept  read can be easily identified in the graph.

Fig. 5. Economics

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK  In this paper, a model inspired by the biological immune  system has been used to solve interesting problems in the  field of knowledge management; particularly, its abilities to  perform pattern recognition and memory have proven to be  useful to detect the important concepts in text documents in  an efficient way.

To solve the problem of knowledge extraction, a measure  to determine word importance has been proposed. Such  measure is defined in such a way that it can be applied to  a single document, providing a ranking of the words, which  allows to obtain the most important ones.

The word importance measure has been extended to mul-  tiple documents; therefore, given a set of documents, a mea-  sure that indicates the most important words throughout all  the documents is defined. In addition, relationships between  such words are identified, which helps to determine clusters  of related topics.

Based on the proposed word importance measures, in  single and multiple documents, a graphical representation of  the knowledge contained in the documents is created. Such  graph representation allows the user to navigate throughout  the topics of the documents, and to have an idea about their  contents without having to read them.

Given the graph representation, it is possible to visualize  the most important concepts in the documents, as well as  the relations between the words, which helps to determine  semantic relations the document contents. In this representa-  tion is also possible to identify word clusters that characterize  the different topics in the documents.

3418 2008 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2008)    Fig. 6. Medical  The graph representation can be used as a starting point  to get more detailed information from the documents. For  example, it can be used to perform search inside the doc-  uments, i.e., semantic instead of syntactic searches. This is  possible because the relations between the words can be seen  as a semantic similarity measure. Another possible usage  of this representation is to organize documents based on  the topics they contain. Consequently, it will be possible to  search documents on specific topics easily.

The proposed graph representation can be enhaced using  colors, or some graphic manipulations, focusing the users  attention to the most impotant concepts in the graph. In  general, it can be improved by drawing the graph with  additional information that should be extracted from the  documents.

Even though, the process presented in this paper worked  on the English language; it can be easily extended to other  languages. The only parts of the process bound to the  English language are the stemming process performed at the  beggining, and a stop word list used to filter words from  the documents. These stages of the process can be adapted  to their corresponding in other languages and the general  method will still work.

