

In these last years, Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) is receiving great attention as it provides an inexpensive and effective technology for object identification and tracking, with a wide range of applications. Examples include inven- tory management, industry automation, ID badges and ac- cess control, equipment and personnel tracking. Compared to conventional identification systems, such as barcodes, RFID tags offer several advantages, since they do not re- quire direct line-of-sight and multiple tags can be detected simultaneously.

Recently, RFID has appeared on the scene of mobile ro- botics, promising to contribute efficient solutions to data association problems in common navigation tasks. Nonethe- less, issues, such as how to deal with sensitivity of the signal to interference and reflections, and missing tag range and bearing information, have to be tackled for RFID to be suc- cessfully used in mobile robotics applications.

In this paper, we present a mobile robot global positioning system which combines passive RFID and monocular vi- sion. The method is intended to solve the so-called kid- napped robot problem, that is, the problem of estimating the robot pose when it is first booted up or it has been kid- napped and taken to some unknown location. The main nov- elty of the approach is the use of fuzzy logic to cope with both uncertainty in RFID data and missing tag position in- formation. Fuzzy logic allows us to manage inaccurate sen- sor data using rules easily understandable by humans. An additional advantage of the proposed method is that it does not require the robot to move around to solve ambiguities, nor does it need several tags to be properly arranged. Con- versely, only one passive RFID tag and a single visual landmark are sufficient to univocally estimate the pose of the robot in the environment.

It is assumed that passive RFID tags are distributed throughout the environment, along with visual landmarks consisting of coloured chessboard-like patterns. As soon as a tag is sensed, the bearing of the tag relative to the robot is estimated. For this purpose, a fuzzy reasoning method is implemented which is based on a fuzzy model of the an- tenna. Bearing information is, then, used to trigger a rota- tional movement of an onboard camera so as it is oriented toward the tag and its associated visual landmark. This re-   Manuscript received July 19, 2008.

A. Milella*, D. Di Paola, G. Cicirelli, and T. D?Orazio are with the Insti-  tute of Intelligent Systems for Automation (ISSIA), National Research Council (CNR), Bari, Italy. *Corresponding author: Annalisa Milella; phone: +39 080 5929447; e-mail: milella@ba.issia.cnr.it.

duces computational complexity than the case of using the vision system only to search for landmarks in the whole en- vironment. Finally, the robot pose is estimated. The localiza- tion issue is formulated as a linear camera calibration ap- proach, using control points extracted from the visual land- mark.

Experimental tests were performed in the ISSIA CNR Mobile Robotics Laboratory with the PeopleBot mobile ro- bot by ActivMedia Robotics, equipped with a SICK LMS 200 laser range finder, an AVT Marlin IEEE 1394 FireWire monocular camera, and an Alien Technology?s ALR-8780 reader with two circularly polarized ALR 8610-C antennas.

RFID works at 866MHz, communicating with Alien?s Class 1 128-bit NanoBlock tags by means of backscatter modula- tion. Several tags were installed in the environment and the algorithm was launched starting from different robot poses.

The output was compared with the one provided by Monte Carlo localization using laser data. Fig. 1 shows the results obtained for ten different robot locations around a tag. A portion of the environment map is illustrated, with overlaid the robot poses estimated by our approach, along with those provided by the laser-based technique. The relative position errors range from 4.1cm to 11.3cm with an average value of 8.3cm, while maximum and minimum orientation errors are of 0.0? and 6.0?, respectively, with an average value of 2.1?.

These results show that the proposed method contributes an effective solution to the kidnapped robot problem, providing localization accuracy comparable to that of laser-based Monte Carlo techniques, with the additional advantage of relying on low-cost sensors.

Using Fuzzy RFID Modelling and Monocular Vision for Mobile Robot Global Localization  Annalisa Milella, Donato Di Paola, Grazia Cicirelli, and Tiziana D?Orazio   Fig. 1.  Map of the environment with overlaid ten estimated robot poses in proximity of a tag.

