Analysis and Research for Network Management Alarms Correlation Based  on Sequence Clustering Algorithm

Abstract   The alarms correlation rules obtained on the bases of network management alarms play an important role on network management and network maintenance.

Alarms correlation is a difficult problem in network fault management; sequential pattern mining can be utilized to extract episode rules from network system alarms. This paper introduces the related studies of alarms association and sequential pattern mining; describes the features of network management alarms; presents a method of mining correlation rules of network management alarms by sequence clustering algorithm. The experiments show that many interesting correlation rules could be acquired efficiently.

Furthermore, these rules could be used to guide the intelligent network alarms filtering and fault location.

1. Introduction   With the growing size of the communication networks, the rapid growth of the network bandwidth and speed, the network faults are inevitable. The network management software produces a lot of data about network performances, network alarms and so on every day. When a single fault or invalidation happens in the network, a large number of alarm information may be produced, although the alarm information can help the network managers quickly and accurately location the fault, a large number of alarm information will also affect the fault location judgment and managers? reaction speed. In a sense, we do not lack the information at present, but are submerged by the information. Introducing data mining technology into the network management system is an important development direction of intelligence network management system.

Sequential pattern mining is an important subject of data mining, a further promotion of correlation rules mining, and it is also widely applied. This paper analyses some shortcomings of the traditional algorithm by the research of traditional sequential pattern mining algorithm's principle, presents the method of mining correlation rules by sequence clustering algorithm. On this basis, establishes network management alarms correlation mining model, we can mine a lot of meaningful alarms correlation rules by this model.

2. Basic concepts  2.1. Alarms correlation   Definition 1 (Alarms and alarms sequence) An ?alarm? is a notification of a specific event and  like an abnormally or may not lead in defects, an alarm may or may not represent an error. The sequence are composed of a number of alarms is called alarms sequence, it have very strong relevance of the time.

Definition 2 (Alarms correlation) Alarms correlation is the analysis of alarms  correlation, the process of alarms? compression and conversion, substitutes a number of alarms for a more informative alarm. The main functions are as follows:  (1)Alarms compression [A,A,?,A]?A: In compression phase, alarms are received in a time window and multiple occurrences of the same event, substituting the corresponding alarms for a single alarm [1].

(2)Alarms filtering [A,B,C]?A: Delete the alarms which fall short of the alarms correlation.

(3)Alarms count [n?A]?B: The substitution of a specified number of occurrences of an alarm, with a new alarm [2].

DOI 10.1109/ICICTA.2008.263     (4)Alarms suppression [B,A, priority(A)< priority(B)]?B: Suppression is a temporary inhibition of alarms referring to a given event, according to criteria (continuously evaluated by the correlation system) related to the dynamic context of the network management process [1].

(5)Alarms time sequence relationship: The different alarms are reported according to a certain kind of time sequence.

2.2. Sequential pattern mining   Definition 1 (Sequence) An itemset is a non-empty set of items. A sequence  is an ordered list of itemsets [2]. Without loss of generality, we assume that the set of items is mapped to a set of contiguous integers. We denote an itemset i by {i1, i2, ?, ij, ?, im}, where i, is an item. We denote a sequence s by (s1, s2 ..., sj, ..., sn), where s is an itemset. We denote a sequence ? by (?1??2???j???m), where ?j is an event. The length of a sequence is defined as the number of itemsets which are contained in the sequence, writing:  | |j j  l ?= ?   Definition 2 (Subsequence) Let ?, ? be two sequences. If there is an isotonic  mapping which can map the events of ? to the events of ?, we say that ? is a subsequence of ?, namely ? contains writing ?? ?.

Definition 3 (The support for the sequence) Let ? be a sequence of database D, the support for  the sequence ? is defined as the fraction of total sequences of database D who support this sequence.

Definition 4 (Large sequence) A sequence with minimum support is called a large  sequence. Note that each sequence in a large sequence must have minimum support. Hence, any large sequence must be a list of itemsets.

Definition 5 (Episode) An episode is a pair ?(V,?), where V is a collection  of alarm predicates, and ? is a partial order on V.

Given a sequence of alarms S, an episode ?(V,?) occurs within S if there is a way of satisfying the alarm predicates in V using the alarms of S so that the partial order is respected.

Definition 6 (Episode rules) Let ?, ? be two episodes, the implication   ???  denotes the relationship of them. We define confidence as strength of implication relationship, writing conf=fr(?,S)/fr(?,S). So we define episode rules as the implication relationship of two large episodes which with minimum confidence (minConf), writing ?=>?-?.

The knowledge we finally submit to the users is episode rules.

Definition 7 (Window) An alarms sequence in the alarms sequence S,  writing W(w,ts,te) ts< te, and the window W is composed of all of the alarms(A,t) which meet the request(ts?t?te). The width of the window W is defined as te-ts.

3. WINEPI algorithm   There is a vast set of methods used to alarms correlation, Agrawal, etc. first present the issue of sequential pattern mining [2], most sequential pattern mining algorithms are based on Apriori, so we call them Aprior like algorithms, such as WINEPI, GSP [4] etc.; another kind of algorithm is the growing technology of sequential pattern which is based on database projection, like FP growing method. The research of algorithms in this paper is based on the former.

Figure 1. Process of WINEPI  Because of the timing characteristics of alarms data, the episode rules mining is generally based on sequential pattern mining algorithm. WINEPI algorithm is the basic method of episode rules mining, Figure 2 illustrates its specific process, and the letters indicate the different types of alarms. The sliding time window with a length of w slides by unit step length from the initial moment of sequence S to the end, a set of windows W(S, w) is formed in this process. In order to enable the moment of alarm to be independent of the probability of that it is contained by windows, we stipulate that the first window Ws include and only include the first alarm of sequence, and the last window We include and only include the last alarm of sequence.

For any episode ?, we define its support in sequence S fr(?,S) as:  |{ ( , )| W}|( , ) ( , )  W W S wfr S W S w  ?? ? ?=   In the formula, |W(S, w)| is the number of windows in W(S, w), according to reference [4], we can easily know that, 1e sT T w? + ? is total time of sliding, let sliding step-length(step) be unit time 1, then the number of windows in W(S, w)is as follow: | ( , ) | 1e sW S w T T w= ? + ?     From the above analysis we can see that, the number of windows is total time of sliding, but, in fact, after the actual analysis of alarms sequence data, we see that the alarms are not in a row, and the time of interval between the two neighboring alarms may be very long. Thus, when the window slides by unit step length, a lot of empty windows (the window without alarm) will inevitably be produced, especially when a large amount of data is needed to process, the number of these windows must be very large. These windows are called noneffective windows in the analysis, and they will occupy a lot of resources.

4. Sequence clustering algorithm  4.1. Sequence clustering algorithm principles   Sequence clustering works by merging two technologies, clustering and sequence analysis. It is designed to analyze a population of cases that contains sequence data and group those cases into more or less homogeneous segments based on the similarity of those sequences. While the clustering is similar to the others, the sequence analysis is something new?a Markov Chain model (Figure 2).

Figure 2.  Markov Chain model  Based on the Markov chain, for any given length L sequence x{x1, x2, x3, ..., xL}, we can calculate the probability of a sequence as follows:  1 1  1 1 1  ( ) ( . , , ) ( | , , ) ( )  L L  L L  P x P x x x P x x x P x  ?  ?  = =  ? ? ?    The Sequence Clustering algorithm learns a mixture of Markov chains, where each mixture component corresponds to a particular cluster. A single case is generated from a mixture model as follows. First, a particular component (cluster) is randomly selected using a probability distribution over the clusters.

Second, depending on which cluster is selected, a sequence is generated from the Markov chain corresponding to that cluster (each cluster or component corresponds to a different Markov chain).

4.2. Sequence clustering algorithm process   Sequence Clustering algorithm depends on expectation maximization (EM).The EM algorithm uses a probabilistic measure, rather than a strict distance measure, to determine which objects belong to which clusters. Instead of choosing a point for each dimension and computing a distance, the EM algorithm considers a bell curve for each dimension, with a mean and standard deviation. As a point falls within the bell curve, it is assigned to a cluster with a certain probability. EM is an iterative algorithm that finds parameters corresponding to local optima for a model?parameters that locally maximize the likelihood of the data.

The overall process of the sequence clustering algorithm is:  (1)Initialize the model parameters somehow (e.g., at random)  (2)Given a current model parameters, each case is assigned to each of the K clusters with some probability. This is the E step.

(3)Revaluate the model parameters based on the weighed assignment of each case. This is the M step.

(4)Check whether the model has converged. If not, go to step 2 for a new iteration.

Figure 3. The process of Sequence Clustering  algorithm Sequence Clustering algorithm processes the data  according to the sequence order, because the sequences are in different size, of sliding window automatically changes with the size of sequence, Figure 3 illustrates its process. This method can avoid the production of a large number of noneffective windows, slides by window step length, saves resources and improves the resources utilization greatly.

5. Alarms correlation analysis model   Based on the above algorithm and combined with mature alarms correlation processing technology, I designed a new alarms correlation analysis model, Figure 4 illustrates it.

(1) ETL ETL (Extract-Transform-Load), namely packing,  refreshing data warehouse, and extract, transformation, loading process of data. After the preprocessing of appointed alarms tables by data preprocessing module, users can convert the alarms data tables into the mining unified data format.

(2) Alarms Correlation     The module converts and compresses alarms by alarms correlation analysis such as alarms compression, alarms filtering, alarms count, etc.

Figure 4. Alarms correlation analysis model (3) Sequence Clustering Mining The module calls Sequential Clustering mining  algorithm, mines the selected unified format data in the tables of mining database, and then outputs all of correlation rules.

(4) Post Processing The main function of this module is to compile the  results of mining into the form which is easy to understand and view for users, including the grouping, sorting and conversion for rules.

(5) Rules Knowledge Warehouse This module is used for the storage of alarms  correlation rules which are mined by rules engine, and it can also store the correlation rules proposed by the communication experts.

6. Experiments and Analysis   In order to validate the performance and efficiency of alarms association analysis model based on Sequence Clustering algorithm, this paper estimates and analyses the model by experiments.

Table 1. Original alarms data  TID ALARMTIME ADDRESS  PPI_AIS 2007-12-04 10:13:07 1-10-8-1-0X04  PPI_LOS 2007-12-04 10:13:16 1-10-8-1-0X03  LP_RDI 2007-12-04 10:15:15 1-10-9-1-0X04  ... ... ...

The procedures are programmed by SQL Server and  Visual C++. The alarms data comes from the communication network management system of an electric power company, some simple samples (some attributes are not shown) of original alarms records are shown in Table 1.

Figure 5. States conversion graph for TID  After experiments we can get correlation rules of network management alarms. Figure 5 illustrates states conversion graph for TID field. Similarly we can also take other fields as the forecast field. As long as we get relations (correlation rules) of the fields which can determine an alarm, such as TID field, ALARMTIME field, and ADDRESS field, we can ensure the correlation rules of alarms.

Table 2. Correlation rules Correlation Rules Probability  LP_UNEQ -> LP_RDI 0.67 GFP_LOF -> LP_RDI 0.50 AU_LOP -> PPI_AIS 0.50  ? ? After the analysis for the states conversion graph,  we can get alarms correlation rules of relevant fields, Table 2 illustrates some correlation rules for TID field.

7. Conclusions   This paper combines with mature alarms correlation processing technology, designs a new alarms correlation analysis model. The experiments show that many interesting correlation rules could be acquired efficiently. Furthermore, these rules could be used to guide the intelligent network alarms filtering and fault location. But there are still some problems needing further research and solution, such as intelligent preprocessing of alarms data, multi-field correlation rules mining and so on.

8. References  [1] Nahid Amani, Mahmood Fathi, Mehdi Dehghan, ?A case- based reasoning method for alarm filtering and correlation in telecommunication networks?, Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2005. Canadian Conference on 1-4 May 2005, IEEE Press, May 2005.

[2] Agrawal R, Scikant R, ?Mining sequential patterns?. Proc of Int Conf of Data Eng, Taipei, Taiwan, IEEE Press, 1995.

[3] Yan XF, Han J, Afshar R.Clospan, ?Mining closed sequential patterns in large databases?, Proc of SIAM Int Conf on Data Mining, San Francisco, CA: ACM/SIAM Press, 2003.

[4] R.Aawal and J.C.Shafer, ?Parallel mining association rules: Design, implementation and experience.? , Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Press, 1996.

[5] Mannila H, Toivonen H, Verkamo A I, ?Discovery of frequent episodes in event sequences?. Data Mining and knowledge Discovery, 1997.

[6] Bandini, S., Manzoni, S., Mosca, A., Sartori, F.? ?Intelligent alarm correlation? ? Systems, Man and Cybernetics, IEEE Press, 5-8 Oct. 2003.

