14-2

Abstract - New regulations mandated by the FCC would require telecommunications operators to assure a minimum backup power capacity at every site to improve availability of communications networks, especially during emergency situations. This paper explores the implications of the new Katrina Panel Order and its associated backup power rule within the context of mobile telecommunications infrastructure.

Operators can choose among a variety of technologies to implement the required backup capacity at cellular base station sites. Fuel cell generators can help overcome some of the challenges to meet compliance with the new FCC rule.



I. INTRODUCTION  Natural and human-caused disasters can disrupt grid power to critical infrastructure, including telecommunications networks, when the services supported by that infrastructure are needed most. To bridge these disruptions, backup power for telecommunications equipment is located on-site, or may be dispatched as portable power.

Events of the last decade have revealed that there are many sites that have insufficient backup power capacity, or none at all. The Northeast blackout of 2003 and Hurricane Katrina in 2005 are two such events that left many subscribers without telecommunications services after 2-4 hours, or less, causing communication difficulties with and among emergency personnel, and placing lives in danger.

To improve public safety the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has established rules [1][2] that would enforce a minimum backup capacity at all telecommunications sites in the US. Although some telecommunications service providers already comply with the minimum backup requirements, others are faced with the challenge of increasing the amount of backup capacity at certain sites by a factor of 2 to 4 times, or more.

Although, at the time of this writing, the FCC Katrina Order that would mandate minimum backup power capacities is being disputed, telecommunications service providers are assessing their options to comply with the rules, if and when they are brought into full force. We discuss here how backup power based on fuel cell technology can help service providers comply with the FCC mandate.



II. REGULATORY BACKGROUND  In response to the aftermath of the Hurricane Katrina disaster, the FCC established The Katrina Panel in January   2006 with the mISSIon of providing recommendations to improve disaster preparedness, network reliability, and communication amongst emergency personnel. The panel submitted their report on June 12, 2006 [3]. Based on the recommendations of this panel, the FCC started a process that resulted in the publication of the Katrina Panel Order [1] in June 2007. In response to petitions to the FCC, the Katrina Panel Order on Reconsideration [2] was released in October 2007.

Specifically, the amended backup power rule (Section 12.2 of Chapter 1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations) states that, apart from certain exceptions, local exchange carriers (LECs) and commercial mobile radio service (CMRS) providers  " ... must have an emergency backup power source (e.g.

batteries, generators, fuel cells) for all assets necessary to maintain communications that are normally powered from local commercial power, including those assets located inside central offices, cell sites, remote switches, and digital loop carrier system remote terminals. LECs and CMRS providers must maintain emergency backup power for a minimum of twenty-four hours for assets that are normally powered from local commercial power and located inside central offices, and eight hours for assets that are normally powered from local commercial power and at other locations, including cell sites, remote switches and digital loop carrier system remote terminals."  Further, the amended backup power rule states that: "Power sources satisfy this requirement if they were originally designed to provide the minimum backup power capacity level required herein and the provider has implemented reasonable methods and procedures to ensure that the power sources are regularly checked and replaced when they deteriorate."  Thus, there are two significant parts to the backup power rule: (1) minimum backup power capacity, (2) monitoring of backup power capacity to ensure compliance with minimum capacity requirements.

In this paper, we consider costlbenefit analyses for options to comply with the FCC backup power rule for cellular base station sites.

14-2  String1  String2  StringN  String2  String1  StringN  VRLA Battery 2  String2  String1  StringN  VRLA Battery 1  Fig. 2. Topology for eight hours of capacity by doubling the number of  battery strings.

The straightforward, brute-force approach to expand the backup capacity from four to eight hours is to duplicate the battery strings, as illustrated in Fig. 2.

Advantages of this approach are that no new engineering needs to be done, and no change to the supply chain is required.

Disadvantages include a doubling of required space and weight, doubling of the cost of battery replacement, and no expandability beyond eight hours.

C. Fuel Cell as Battery Extender to Eight Hours One way to use a fuel cell to expand existing capacity is to  provision a small fuel cell that supplements the energy supplied by the battery such that, in the event of a grid outage, the telecom equipment can remain powered for eight hours rather than four. This battery-extender topology is shown in Fig. 3.



III. BACKUP POWER ARCHITECTURES Today, there are numerous architectures used to provide  backup power to cellular base station sites, including a variety of battery technologies, permanent and portable internal combustion engine-based generators using a variety of fuels, fuel cell generators, and alternative energy sources such as wind and solar generators. Most sites have a battery bank - most often based on valve-regulated lead-acid (VRLA) technology - that provides typically up to four hours of 24V or 48V DC backup power capacity. As the four-hour battery model is one of the more common configurations, and as service providers are not expected to remove functioning assets, the base case for this analysis assumes that a site has four hours of backup capacity provided by VRLA batteries, and the objective is to increase the total backup capacity to eight hours.

For green-field deployments, it is assumed that that there are no pre-existing investments, so there is freedom to choose the backup power architecture based on the most economical path to compliance with the FCC backup power rule.

Internal combustion engine (ICE)-based generators are often also used as a backup power source, especially when extended run time is required. Some ICE-based generators are permanently sited, but many are portable, allowing a smaller fleet to be managed and generators dispatched to where they are needed in the event of an extended outage. As fuel cells are intended typically to be sited permanently, whereas generators mayor may not be permanently sited, ICE-based generators are omitted from this analysis.

String1  A. Installed Base Capacity The assumed power distribution topology for existing  installations is depicted in Fig. 1. The main AC grid provides primary power while a string of VRLA batteries with four hours of backup capacity provides secondary power to the telecom load.

String2 VRLABattery  StringN Fig. 3. Battery extender topology with fuel cell.

VRLA Battery  Fig. 1. Reference topology for installed capacity (four hours).

Although warranty terms for batteries vary, in this analysis it is assumed that battery strings need to be replaced completely every three years.

B. Capacity Expansion by Addition ofBatteries  The fuel cell and string of batteries ideally supply an equal amount of energy to the load over the eight hours, but due to charging losses, the fuel cell needs to provide slightly more.

In this analysis, the fuel cell net power is chosen to be half the power consumption of the telecom load, sized up by a factor equal to the inverse of the charging efficiency of the batteries.

Advantages of this approach are re-use of the existing battery plant, no increase in the cost of battery replacement, and the potential to extend backup capacity through the    Hydrogen Cooling Air Power Sub-System Sub-System Sub-System Electronics  Sub-System  prOVIsIoning of a larger fuel cell. A modular fuel cell construction facilitates this expansion strategy.

Disadvantages include the requirement for modification of the rack and cabinet hardware to accept a new piece of equipment with some unique requirements (e.g. a fuel feed), potential expansion of the supply chain to include vendors of fuel cell technology, and no expandability beyond eight hours without added investment in capital.

D. Fuel Cell as Battery Extender to Eight Hours and Beyond  An alternate strategy to the topology illustrated in Fig. 3 is to provision a fuel cell that matches the capacity of the telecom load. In this case, in the event of a grid outage, power can be provided to the telecom equipment as long as fuel is supplied. When the battery strings require replacement, the battery capacity can be reduced to the bridge-time requirements of the fuel cell, which can range from a few seconds to a fraction of an hour, depending on the choice of fuel cell technology.

The most significant disadvantage of this approach is that the existing battery plant with four hours of capacity is not needed, and so the advantage of the sunk cost of the battery bank is not exploited to the fullest. However, leaving the four hours of batteries in place enables the operational strategy of minimizing fuel consumption, and minimizing the number of start/stops for short outages.

E. Green Field Fuel Cell Deployment For new sites where the selection of backup technology is  open, consider a topology where the fuel cell is sized such that it can provide full power to the telecom load. In this case, the string of batteries is used only to bridge the time required to ramp the fuel cell to full power. This topology is illustrated in Fig. 4 below.

I String1  VRLA Battery  Fig. 4. Green-field deployment: fuel cell can provide full power to load, while small string ofbatteries (or some other energy storage device) provides bridging power until fuel cell reaches full power.

The switch on the DC bus selects power either from the battery bank or the fuel cell. The switch is conceptual; in practice, power electronics for each source may simply present an open-circuit to the bus when that source is not in use. During start-up, the switch selects the battery bank or some alternate energy storage device, such as ultracapacitors.

14-2  When the fuel cell reaches full power, the switch selects the fuel cell output. The amount of bridging energy required depends on the startup characteristics of the particular fuel cell.



IV. FUEL CELL ARCHITECTURES In this paper, the term "Fuel Cell" is used to refer to all of  the components that comprise a fuel cell (FC) generator, including the FC stack, the balance of plant (BOP) to support the FC stack, and optionally, a fuel processor (FP), which converts a hydrocarbon fuel source to hydrogen with some waste products.

In this analysis, only Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) FC stacks are considered. They can be further sub-divided according to the cooling sub-system; that is, "air-cooled" versus "liquid-cooled". An air-cooled FC stack enables a very simple BOP, and an overall low-cost system, whereas a liquid-cooled FC stack has superior durability at the expense of slightly increased cost and complexity.

A PEM fuel cell requires hydrogen to function. When using a feed stock other than hydrogen, on-site reformation with a dedicated fuel processor can be used to generate hydrogen as needed from various hydrocarbon sources such as propane, mehanol, or natural gas.

The start-up time of a fuel cell generator depends most heavily on the fuel source. If the fuel is pure hydrogen, the start-up time is limited solely by the time required for the fuel cell stack to reach full power, which can be typically measured in seconds. If the fuel is anything other than hydrogen, the start-up time is limited by the start-up time of the fuel processor, which can span from a few minutes to the better part of an hour, depending on the choice of reforming technology.

The simplified block diagram of a FC system (generator) is shown in Fig. 5.

Control Circuitry  Fig. 5. Simplified block diagram of fuel cell system.

The hydrogen sub-system is fed either by pure hydrogen stored as a compressed gas in a cylinder, or by the output of a FP module, which may produce pure hydrogen (depending on the degree of purification implemented), or a reformate stream consisting of hydrogen and other by-product gases.

Since neither the reforming process nor the FC electrochemical process involves combustion, nitrous oxides and sulfur oxides are not part of the waste by-products. The hydrogen sub-system regulates the pressure of the gas, and provides it to the inlet of the FC stack.

The FC stack converts hydrogen and oxygen from the air to an electric current through an electrochemical process.

+ Regulated  DC Out    14-2  The air sub-system provides oxygen for the reaction at the required rate of flow. The coolant sub-system removes heat from the system and keeps the stack at the optimal operating temperature. In an air-cooled system, the air and coolant sub- systems can be combined into one.

The power electronics sub-system converts the voltage and current produced by the stack into levels that are compatible with the requirements of the DC bus. The primary component of the power electronics sub-system is the DC-DC converter.

The control circuitry contains control logic that takes care of the sequencing and monitoring of the FC system for optimal operation, and as a fail-safe mechanism.



V. LIFE-CYCLE ANALYSIS A qualitative comparison of the advantages and drawbacks  of the various backup power topologies was provided in Section III. The objective in this section is to carry out an economic analysis of the various topologies to assess the lifecylce costs of each option.

A. Objective In each case considered, the objective is to quantify the  economic benefit of using a fuel cell solution to increase backup power capacity from four to eight hours. The fuel cell benefit is measured relative to that of the incumbent strategy which consists of doubling the number of battery strings. The difference in cumulative cash flows between the fuel cell solutions and the incumbent battery solution is used as a metric of economic performance, taking into account the time value of money through a discount factor. In the final year of the life cycle, the difference metric represents the Net Present Value (NPV) of the fuel cell investment versus the investment into a duplicate set of battery strings.

Three general comparisons are analyzed: 1. Incremental four hours of VRLA batteries versus the  "half-power" FC Battery Extender described in Section III C.

2. Incremental four hours of VRLA batteries versus the "full-power" FC Battery Extender described in Section III D.

3. Green-field implementation of four and eight hours of VRLA batteries versus a full-power FC with minimal energy storage (minimum required to bridge start-up time of FC).

In each of the three cases listed above, four different FC generators are considered, based on the fuel supplied:  1. Air-cooled FC fed by stored hydrogen gas.

2. Liquid-cooled FC fed by hydrogen that has been  reformed from methanol, and purified.

3. Liquid-cooled FC fed by the reformate output of a  liquid propane (LP) FP.

4. Liquid-cooled FC fed by the reformate output of a  Natural Gas (NG) FP.

B. Assumptions A model was created to analyze the life cycle costs over a  period of 10 years, after which it is assumed that all equipment at a given site will be replaced. Some of the  additional assumptions required for the analysis are listed in Table 1. For comparison, see [4].

TABLE I  MODEL ASSUMPTIONS  Parameter Value Comments General Parameters  Time discount rate 10%  "Green" tax subsdity 30% Of FC capital cost  Depreciation rate 25% For all capital  Output power 3kW Net  Number of startups per year 12  Battery Parameters Lifetime 3 years Batteries replaced  after 3 years Charging efficiency 80%  Price $0.50 USD/Ah Installation 20% of price  Hydrogen Fuel Cell Parameters Lifetime 4,000 hours Air cooled  System efficiency 45% Fuel in, to electrical out  Price $2,857/kW net High volume, 2010 projection  Fuel cost $50 USD/kg Delivered Methanol Fuel Cell Parameters  Lifetime 10,000 hours Liquid cooled  System efficiency 35% Fuel in, to electrical out  Price $3,000/kW net High volume, 2010 projection  Fuel cost $5 USD/gal Methanol/water mix  Liquid Propane Fuel Cell Parameters  Lifetime 10,000 hours Liquid cooled  System efficiency 30% Fuel in, to electrical out  Price $3,214/kW net High volume, 2010 projection  Fuel cost $1.80 USD/gal  Natural Gas Fuel Cell Parameters  Lifetime 10,000 hours Liquid cooled  System efficiency 30% Fuel in, to electrical out  Price $3,214/kW net High volume, 2010 projection  Fuel cost $12 USD/1000 Pipe-fed delivery cubic feet  c. Results The cash flows for the FC as a Battery Extender relative  to adding an incremental four hours of batteries are illustrated in Fig. 6 for the four different fuels considered.

The relative cash flows for four and eight hours of backup capacity in a green-field setting are illustrated in Fig. 7.

14-2  8 hours  4 6 .....X--?-B--:>E-.W ~"'~.~~-  / 4 hours ~.~--)("  4 6 .....*-~.*.'te ,x-x.. ....)('-  / 4 hours lX ......*-><'  /'  4 6 '~-~'*"':W ;t" -x..~~-  --1>5'_-y...~-x/ 4 hours /  /  2,500  5,000  (b)  2,500 8 hours  5,000  (a)  8 hours 2,500  5,000  7,500  Time, years  lime, years  6 8 10 (2,500) ~ _ _;;;;.)E-- -x.,.~. ~  I x.._~ 4 hours (5,000) ,,)J(:"' .....x.. .... )("  (7,500)  (10,000) -L- ---'  (2,500)  (5,000)  (7,500)  (10,000) -L- ----J  10,000  2,500.00  5,000.00  7,500.00  (2,500)  (5,000)  (7,500)  (10,000) -.L..- ----'  10,000.00  (2,500.00)  (5,000.00)  (7,500.00)  (10,000.00) ..1-- --'  10,000  Tim e, years  7,500  (c)  Cl en ::>  ~ u- .r:.

enco ()  C tn ::J  'iou: .s::.enca (.)  7,500  10,000  Q U) :::? 'iou: .r:.

II) ca (.)  (7,500.00)  (10,000.00) -L- ---'  10,000.00  7,500.00  5,000.00 Q U) 2,500.00:::? i  u:: .c II) (2,500.00)ftI  (5,000.00)  (7,500.00)  (10,000.00)  Time, years  (a)  10,000.00  7,500.00  5,000.00 Q U) 2,500.00:::? i  LL .c II) (2,500.00)ftI  Full power0 (5,000.00)  (7,500.00)  (10,000.00)  Time, years  (b)  10,000.00  7,500.00  5,000.00 Q U) 2,500.00:::? Haifpower 'i  ~-*-x0 LL , .c .*'-a.. -x' 8 10 II) (2,500.00) ~ftI  (.)  (5,000.00)  (7,500.00)  (10,000.00)  Time, years  (c)  10,000.00  7,500.00  5,000.00 c U) 2,500.00 * ....* .. *.~:::? 'i u:  8 10.s::.

II) (2,500.00)ca (.)  (5,000.00)  Time, years Time, years  (d) Fig. 6. Cash flows relative to incremental four hours of batteries for  (a) Hydrogen FC, (b) Methanol FC, (c) LP FC, and (d) NG FC.

(d)  Fig. 7. Cash flows for green-field siting relative to four and eight hours of batteries for (a) Hydrogen FC, (b) Methanol FC, (c) LP FC, and (d) NG FC.

14-2  D. Discussion In Figs. 6 and 7, the relative cash flows at year 0  corresponds to the differences in capital cost between the battery-based solutions and the FC-based solutions. It is evident that the up-front capital cost of the FC solution is higher in all cases considered.

Year 10 corresponds to the NPV of an investment in FC backup power relative to an investment in batteries. In the Battery Extender scenario (Fig. 6), a positive NPV is observed for FCs using methanol, LP, and NG as fuel, whereas the hydrogen FC is slightly negative, but close to breakeven. In the green-field scenario, all FCs yield positive NPV for eight hours of backup capacity, but are slightly negative at four hours of backup capacity. The steps in cash flow correspond to re-investment in battery strings every three years.

In the Battery Extender case, although the "full-power" FC is more expensive than the "half-power" FC (and cash flow is correspondingly more negative in year 0 for the full- power FC), the NPV is almost equal - and positive - in all cases. Breakeven occurs between years 3 and 4, after the first battery re-investment cycle. In fact, the full-power FC yields a slightly higher NPV for the methanol, LP, and NG fuels.

For the Battery Extender case, since the NPVs for the half-power and full-power FCs are almost equal, one could choose to provision a smaller FC to start to save on up-front capital investment, and later invest in more FC power capacity if backup time is to be extended beyond eight hours.

In the green-field case, for eight hours, breakeven is achieved between years 3 and 4, at the first cycle of battery string re-investment, as in the Battery Extender case.

Although the assumed outage profile is relatively light, there is enough fuel consumed in this model that the differences in fuel costs are evident. Using the fuel price assumptions provided in Table I, the prices per kWh of the various FC options are summarized in Table II.

TABLE II FUEL PRICE RELATIVE TO ENERGY OUTPUT  Fuel Price Hydrogen $3.33 USD/kWh Methanol/water mix $1.38 USD/kWh Liquid propane $0.21 USD/kWh Natural gas $0.16 USD/kWh  The higher price of hydrogen is reflected in the general downward slope of the relative cash flow in Figs. 6(a) and 7(a) after each battery re-investment. The downward slope  for methanol is less pronounced, and is almost non-existent for LP and NG due to the relatively low cost of these fuels.



VI. TECHNOLOGY SELECTION FACTORS The ecomonic consideration is just one factor, albeit a  very important one, that contributes to the selection of FCs over other incumbent technologies, such as VRLA batteries.

Other factors to consider include the ability to monitor and verify the backup capacity at any given site, space and weight-related issues, temperature dependent lifetime, and environmental impact.

For some time, there has been interest in better methods for assessing the state of health of lead-acid batteries [5]-[7].

As indicated in Section II, the new FCC backup power rule contains language related to the monitoring of backup power capacity to ensure compliance with minimum capacity requirements. The backup capacity of a FC can be determined simply by the level of fuel on hand. In the case of a gaseous fuel, such as hydrogen, the fuel level is indicated by a pressure gauge; for liquid fuels, the fuel level is determined by a fluid level gauge. In the case of piped natural gas, the backup capacity is limited only by the ability of the gas utility company to supply.

Space in telecom cabinets is sometimes scarce, and in these cases it may be difficult or impossible to double the number of battery strings at the site. FCs can be made very compact, with hydrogen FCs requiring the fewest components. FC solutions can be sourced today as dedicated cabinets and as rack-mount modules that can fit into standard rack configurations. As the size of the FC is determined only by the required output power, the same size of FC module can be used to provision any amount of backup time, determined only by the supply of fuel.

In addition to space constraints, some base station sites have weight limitations, especially those that are located on roof-tops. As indicated above, the size - and weight - of the FC is determined only by the power required by the telecom load.

The effect of temperature on the lifetime of VRLA batteries is well documented [8][9]. FCs do not experience lifetime degradation at high extremes of temperature. The lifetime of FCs is determined by the number of operational hours and the number of start-stop cycles. In regions where the electrical grid is stable such as the US, FCs can be expected to last ten years or more. After a FC reaches the end of its lifetime, it can be overhauled by replacing the membrane and catalyst material in the device, after which it can be re-deployed.

As an added benefit, there are no materials in the FC that pose a hazard for disposal, while the VRLA battery contains    both lead and acid, which require special disposal procedures.



VII. CONCLUSION This paper discussed how backup power based on fuel  cell technology can help service providers comply with the FCC backup rule which was mandated as part of the FCC Katrina Panel Order. The economic and operational factors of fuel cells and VRLA batteries were explored and compared.

There is a lifecycle economic benefit for the use of fuel cells when backup capacity of eight hours, or more, is required. This lifecycle benefit is realized in scenarios where existing sites with batteries are upgraded to eight hours of capacity, and in green-field sites where fuel cells are deployed with a minimal amount ofbridging energy.

The FCC backup power rule also requires that operators put in place mechanisms to assure that the minimum amount of backup time is always provisioned at every site. FCs help to ease this reporting requirement, as one can determine the backup capacity through the remote reading of a fuel gauge.

Fuel cell lifetime is not affected by temperature.

Environmentally, fuel cells have minimal emissions (hydrogen fuel cells produce only water), and there are no hazardous materials for disposal at the end of the useful lifetime.

Fuel cell technology is now mature and fuel cell products are commercially available. For service providers needing to provide backup power for outside plants, fuel cell backup power generators are available as indoor rack-mount units or in outdoor enclosures. The fuel cell form factor is small, as it is determined by power capacity rather than backup duration, so deployment of fuel cells for backup power is a practical option for end-users needing a robust, reliable, extended-duration backup power supply during an emergency. Options for fuel include hydrogen, methanol, propane, and natural gas, offering a number of deployment options depending on the available fuel infrastructure.

