Knowledge Discovery for Case Revising in CBR System

Abstract   Case Revising is a crucial but difficult step in case-  based reasoning(CBR) system. In this paper, the case revising rule, gained by applying intelligent retrieving method, is to help decision maker revise the case?s scheme. Generally it consists of Secondary Revising Rules and Primary Revising Rules. Firstly the rough set theory is applied to get the Secondary Revising Rules. Secondly, with the case revising transactions set obtained from decision makers as reference, the association rules mining method is employed to get the Primary Case Revising Rules. Lastly, by combining the two types of rules, the author expounds the detailed case Revising procedure.

1. Introduction   The most similar case for the new problem could be obtained in CBR system, and its scheme could serve as the initial scheme for the new problem, but the scheme is not perfectly okay with the new problem, so some revisions are need to be done. Since case revision depends on its domain, studies of which are few and far between.

However, nowadays, as an important part in the CBR system, it has attracted much attention in the field of research. In reference [1], it is presented that the meta knowledge and revising rules can be saved together with the cases, and it can be applied to instruct the decision- maker to revise the case and evaluate the case?s revisability when the case is re-used; In reference [2], the case candidates are compared and data mining technique is applied to discover the case revising knowledge; reference [3] suggests that it should take the good revisability of case as the base of the case re-using; reference [4] further suggests that fuzzy logic method should be applied to evaluate the case?s revisability as well as instruct choosing case. From these methods we find that they all focus on how to discover the case revising knowledge and how to evaluate the case revisability, and this can be an effective way to choose and revise the cases.

To revise case effectively, a method for discovering and using case revising knowledge is put forward in this paper. In this method the case revising knowledge is put  as rules, of which one is called secondary revising rules which are mainly determined by the attributes? values of cases; and the other is called primary revising rules, which is discovered from the revising operations made by decision maker. In this paper rough set theory is applied to get the secondary revising rules and the association rules mining method is applied to get the primary revising rules, then two kinds of rules are combined together for the case revising.

2. The Secondary Case Revising Rules and Its Discovery  2.1. The definition for Secondary Case Revising Rule   Each case in the case base can be divided into two parts, one is the problem description, and the other is the scheme. These two parts are all composed of some attributes, thus their definitions are as follows:  Definition 1 Case Base Let ),,,,( SA FSFAU  be a Case Base, where U  is the set of objects,  { }nxxxU ,...,, 21= , A  is the set of attributes describing problems, S  is the set of attributes describing scheme, AF  is the relation set between A  and U , i.e.

}:{ mjfF jA ?= , here )(: mjVUf jj ??  and  jV  is the value domain of attribute ja  in A , SF  is the relation set between A  and S ? i.e.

}:{ ' hkfF kS ?= , here )(: ' hkVUg kk ??  and  ' kV  is the values domain of kd  in S .

Definition 2 Secondary Case Revising Rule Suppose ),,,,( SA FSFAU  be a Case Base, the Secondary Case Revising Rule is the rule with the form of  })),(,(}:))(,{( SdxgdAaxfa kkklll ???? .

From the definition 2 we can see that the secondary  revising rules are related to some attributes describing the problems, which shows that according to some attributes   DOI 10.1109/FSKD.2008.187     describing problem some attributes? values of scheme can be determined, that is to say, part of scheme can be made.

Just because these rules are related to the inherent attributes of problems, it can be taken as a kind of static rules.

2.2. To Discover the Secondary Case Revising Rules   The rough set theory-based method can be applied to simplify the attributes of the decision table, thus the Secondary Revising Rules can be obtained. The rough set theory is put forward by Pawlak in 1982[5]. It is a new mathematical tool to deal with imprecise, incomplete and inconsistent data. Now, we have witnessed systematics, worldwide growth of interest in rough set theory and its applications. In application, rough set focuses on approximate representing of knowledge derivable from data. It has significant impact on the areas including data mining, machine learning, control theory, and pattern recognition. Rough set could handle discrete attributes and continuous attributes in database.

The steps to discover the case revising rules by using rough set theory are described as follows:  1) To Transform the Case Base into Decision Table The decision table must meet some conditions, and it  is defined as follows[6]: Definition 3 Decision Table Let  { } { }),,,,( dgdFAU  be a decision table, where U  is the set of objects, { }nxxxU ,...,, 21= , A  is the set of attributes describing problems, d  is the decision attribute, F  is the relation set between A  and U , i.e.

}:{ mjfF jA ?= , here )(: mjVUf jj ??  and  dd VUg ?:  is the relation set between A  and d , here dV  is the finite values domain of dg .

So, the case base can be transformed into decision table in the following ways.

(1)The attributes describing problems should be the condition attributes;  (2)Combining the attributes describing the schemes with their values as the value domain of decision attributes.

(3)Adding a new attribute to record the case number, and it should be not in the range of the attributes to be simplified, but it will be applied to calculate the reliability of rules.

2) To Get the Simplified Attributes Set by Applying the Method Based on Rough Set  Before applying the method to simplify the decision table, some pre-work must be done, firstly, some attributes? values need to be transformed, e.g.

transforming continue values to discrete values; secondly, from existed methods based on rough set such as the simplification method for continues valued decision table, the simplification method for fuzzy decision table, the simplification method for lattice valued decision table etc., a right method must be chosen to simplify the decision table; thirdly, according to the decision table, the vindicable attributes matrix is generated; lastly, the vindicable attributes is further transformed, then the set of simplified attributes is obtained[6].

3) To Generate the Secondary Case Revising Rules Based on the Set of Simplified Attributes Set  After the set of simplified attributes is gained, the case secondary revising rules can be obtained according to definition 2, and the reliability of rule can be made by the following definition.

Definition 4 Reliability of Case Secondary Revising Rule The Reliability of Case Secondary Revising Rule is the ratio of the number of cases satisfying  }:))(,{( Aaxfa lll ??  to the number of cases satisfying Sdxgd kkk ?)),(,(  and  }:))(,{( Aaxfa lll ??  in decision table.

3. The Primary Case Revising Rules and Its Discovery   Based on the experiences, the decision maker revises the schemes of the new problems and the revising can be put as some basic operations, so the detailed revising can be recorded as a set of operations, which is called case revising transaction set. Association rule mining techniques can be applied to mining the primary revising rules. Since the primary revising rules are mined from the case revising transaction set, the Primary Revising rules can be taken as a kind of dynamic rules.

Suppose },...,,{ 21 miiiT =  is the set of all operations, where li  is an operation.

Definition 5 Primary Case Revising Rule The Primary Case Revising Rule is the rule with the form of  BA ? , where TA ??? , TB ???  and 1=B , ?=BA? .

Definition 6 Support Degree of Primary Case Revising Rule The Support Degree of Primary Case Revising Rule is the ratio of the number of transactions     including A  and B  to the number of transactions in transaction set, which is expressed as Supp( BA ? ), i.e.

Supp( BA ? ) ||/|,:| DDYYBAY ??? .

Definition 7 Reliability of Primary Case Revising  Rule The Reliability of Primary Case Revising Rule is the ratio of the number of transactions including A  and B to the number of transactions including A  in transaction set, which is expressed as Rel( BA ? ), i.e.

)(Re BAl ? = |,:|/|,:| DYYAYDYYBAY ????? .

As the most important and popular one of data- mining methods, association rule method was firstly put forward by Agrawal R in 1993[7]. Agrawal R used the Apriori algorithm to mine the association rules. Apriori algorithm involves two steps: first, it finds the frequent item sets with the support degree being more than the threshold; second, it generates the association rules based on the frequent item sets. Apriori algorithm is Anti- monotone, i.e. if an item sets is not a frequent item sets, then all of its supper sets are not frequent item sets, thus the ( k +1) candidates can be generated based on the k frequent item sets, which narrows down the search range of algorithm. Many researchers do much work to improve the algorithm, and many extended algorithms were advanced, such as AprioriTid algorithm presented in reference [8], Pruning algorithm presented in reference [9], Hash table technique presented in reference [10], Partition based association rules mining algorithm presented in reference [11], sampling algorithm presented in reference [12], and the DIC(Dynamic Item set Counting) presented in reference [13].Different from the extended algorithms, there are other algorithms based on different theories and data expression for discovering association rule. The Tree Projection algorithm[14], the FP-growth algorithm, put forward by Han in reference [15], the algorithm based on Diffset[16] etc..

To discover the primary case revising rules by applying the association rule mining algorithm, the steps are described as follows:  (1)To get the transactions table by recording the revising operations that decision makers make on schemes;  (2)To get the frequent items set by applying the association rules mining algorithm;  (3)According to the revising operations that decision maker has made on scheme, the corresponded frequent items set is matched, further the primary case revising rules are formed.

In addition, the primary case revising rules are not saved in the form of ? BA ? ?, and only the frequent items sets are saved in the system. While the scheme is being revised, the frequent items sets matched with the revising operations set made by the decision maker can be retrieved, and they are further applied to generate the primary case revising rules, so the generation of the primary case revising rules is dynamic.

4. The Procedure of Case Revising   The most similar case to the new problem is retrieved according to the CBR theory, but its scheme is not very suitable to the new problem, so some revisions need to be done. In our system, before the decision maker revises scheme of the new problem, he can get the suggestions from the secondary case revising rules. After the decision maker makes one or more revising operations, some frequent items sets can be matched, so the primary case revising rules can be obtained. Then the primary and the secondary case revising rules are combined together, which support the decision maker in revising the schemes dynamically. The details of the case revising are showed in figure 1 and the steps are described as follows:    Figure 1 The procedure of case revising    Frequent Items  Decision Maker  Case Scheme  Case Revisin g  Revising Operations List  Case Revising Support  Revising Suggestio  The Secondary Case Revising Rules Base  New Problem  Case Knowledge base     1) To evaluate the scheme of the most similar case of problem retrieved from case base, we are not supposed to revise it if it is suitable for the new problem, otherwise we turn to the next step;  2) The secondary case revising rules can be applied to help the decision maker make the first revision on the scheme;  3) The decision maker has made one or more revising operations, if some frequent items sets match with these operations, then they can be applied to generate the primary case revising rules;  4) The last suggestion is generated by combining the primary case revising rules with the secondary case revising rules, which can support the decision maker to further revise the scheme, and then the new revising operations can be applied to match the frequent items sets, so the new primary case revising rules can be generated and combined with the secondary case revising rules again.

5. An Example   Scientific traffic management entails the identification & compensation for road traffic accident, in which the technical examination of vehicles in accident plays a pivotal role. Through the technical examination, we can get a general picture of how the vehicle acts in the traffic accident, thus objectively analyzing the reasons behind the accident so as to identify the party?s liability.

Nowadays vehicles are numerous, and the number of road traffic accidents is on the rise, which calls for more experts as well as more scientific examinations indeed.

For technical examination to be more efficient, an intelligent system for technical examination of vehicles in accident is developed, in which the CBR method is applied to choose the scheme of the most similar one as the scheme of the new problem from the history case, then, the scheme revising rules is applied to help decision maker modify the scheme of the new problem, and more importantly, the algorithms put forward in this paper is applied to get the scheme revising rules.

The scheme?s structure in the system is showed in table 1, from which we can see that a scheme is composed of some examination items. And to modify the scheme means deleting or adding some examination items from it.

Table 1 The scheme?s structure  Field name  Field type Field length  Memo  jddbh Char 18 Scheme  number jdxmbh Char 10 Item number jdxmmc Char 24 Item number  jdbz Char 100 Standard jdjg Char 20 Result  In this system, the secondary case revising rules are  discovered by the method based on rough set theory, and the primary case revising rules are discovered by the association rule mining algorithm, they are combined together to support decision maker making revising operations. Figure 2 shows us there is certain scheme being revised, and there are two examination items in the initial scheme: A1.4(Brakes) and A1.5(Hand Brakes), now decision maker adds an examination item A1.1(Energy Supply Devices), so according to the problem description and the revising operation made by decision maker, the secondary and primary case revising rules are discovered.  Two types of rules are combined together, and at last, the suggestions are Add(A1.3) and Add(A1.2) with the Reliabilities being 1.00 and 0.50 respectively.

Figure 2 The Interface of Case Revising   Conclusion   The most similar case is retrieved according to the CBR theory, but its scheme is not very suitable for the new problem, so some revisions must be done for it. For the case revising is related to the domain of problems, it is difficult to find a regular way to help decision maker  Suggestion Scheme  All Examination Items  Detailed Examination Items     revise the case?s scheme. In this paper, an intelligent way to discover the case revising rules is put forward, and the case revising rules are of two types: one is the secondary case revising rule, which is discovered by the method based on the rough set theory, the other is the primary case revising rule, which is discovered by the association rules mining algorithm. As an example, this method is applied to the intelligent system for technical examination of vehicles in accident. It proves to be feasible and effective.

Acknowledgements   This paper is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of P.R. China (Grant no. 60474022), the specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China under Grant No.

20060613007, and the Youth Sci. & Tech. Found in Sichuan Province, P.R. China (Grant no. 08ZQ026-009).

