The Determination of Optimal Excess Air Coefficient Based on Data Mining  in Power Plant

Abstract   Coal-fired boiler combustion system in power plant is a complex multi-input and multi-output plant with strong nonlinear and large time-delay. The determination of the optimal excess air coefficient is very important for economical analysis and operation optimization and it is a difficulty and bottleneck for operation optimization in power plants. Based on the association characteristic in electric industrial data, this paper proposes the operation optimization based on data mining in power plant. The improved fuzzy association rule mining algorithm is proposed and introduced to find the operation optimization values to guide the operation in power plant.

Based on the actual history data in 300MW unit, the optimization values in typical load ranges are found out by data mining to provide better guidance. Experiment results show that the operation optimization value determined by the improved fuzzy association rule mining algorithm can improve the efficiency and can be used to guide the operation online.

1. Introduction   The study on operation optimization in power plant industry process is very active in recent years. The controllable factors that affect the thermal efficiency were analyzed to optimize the running process by considering the safety and economy. In this course, the difficulty is to decide the optimal values of the important controllable parameters [1]. The quantitative values of these parameters can provide the decision-making for optimizing the system. Coal-fired boiler is a typical complex multi-input and multi-output plant with strong nonlinear and having no self-balance ability. Combustion process can be affected directly by parameter changes such as main steam pressure, feed water temperature, flue gas temperature, excess air coefficient, etc. So the problems of determining optimization values rationally have not been solved completely till now.

With the development of information technology, electric industry accumulated a mass of data. Many important information and knowledge which can guide the decision-making are hidden in the mass data. Data  mining has been recognized by many researchers as a key research topic in database systems and machine learning and by many industrial companies as an important area with an opportunity of major revenues. The association rule mining is an important task of data mining. Given a transaction database, it is desirable to discover the important association among items such that the presence of some item in a transaction will imply that of other items in the same transaction. Data mining provided a novel method for deciding the optimization values.

2. Combustion optimization based on data mining   Main influential parameters of boiler combustion process are oxygen content in flue gas, furnace pressure, main steam pressure and main steam flow. Oxygen content in flue gas embodies boiler?s thermal efficiency.

And main steam flow (is also called load) is random variable that the combustion process must adapt to.

Regulating method is air flow and the quantity of coal- feed. So the combustion optimizing process in power plant unit is a synthesized question [2]. The key is to decide the optimization values for the industrial process parameters [3,4]. The operation optimization in combustion process is to get the optimal point where the thermal efficiency is highest. The problems of deciding optimization values have not been solved till now due to the complex of combustion process.

Quantitative association rules were defined over quantitative and categorical attributes. The value of categorical attributes was mapped to a set of contiguous integers. While the domain of quantitative attributes was discretized into intervals by fine-partitioning the values of the attributes and combing the adjacent partitions as necessary, the intervals were then mapped to contiguous integers. As a result, each attribute had a form of <attribute, value>, where value was the mapped integer of an interval for quantitative attributes or a single value for categorical attributes. Then the algorithm for finding Boolean association rules can be used on the transformed database to discover quantitative association rules [5].

Because distinct intervals will exclude those potential elements which are neighbouring the boundary, the data   DOI 10.1109/FSKD.2008.508     which are close the boundary and contribute to both intervals will have to partial to one interval. To solve this problem, the fuzzy sets theory was introduced into the association mining process to soften the partition boundary of the domain and generalize and abstract the data. The fuzzy concept is better than the partition method because fuzzy sets provide a smooth transition between member and non-member of a set.

This paper proposed the improved fuzzy association rule mining algorithm to decide the optimization values from the history data in electric industry. The algorithm is very effective in mining Boolean association rules problem. The fuzzy association rules is in the form of ?If X is A and Y is B then Z is C? where X, Y and Z were sets of attributes, A, B and C were fuzzy sets which described X, Y and Z respectively. The process of mining fuzzy association rules can be divided into the following four steps:  (1) The transaction data is standardized and is transform-ed into fuzzy sets by using the membership functions.

(2) Generate large fuzzy patterns by scanning the data- base.

(3) Get fuzzy association rules. Having gotten large fuzzy patterns, the desired fuzzy association rules with the minimum confidence are generated.

(4) The quantitative association rules are achieved by anti the fuzzy association rules. These quantitative association rules are verified and the correct rules can be used to guide the industrial process online.

The architecture of operation optimization based on the improved data mining includes off-line and on-line process as shown in Figure 1. The operation state is represented by several running models which are attained by data mining process. A set of dynamic models are established and the reasoning rules are formed too. The operation optimization models are attained to guide the operation optimization from results of data mining according to the real-time data.

Figure 1. The basic structure of operation optimization based on  the improved data mining in power plant  3. Improved fuzzy association mining algorithm   In this paper the fuzzy sets theory was introduced into the association mining from quantitative data. The proposed improved fuzzy association rule mining algorithm first transforms each quantitative value into a fuzzy set with linguistic terms using membership functions. The algorithm then calculates the scalar cardinality of each linguistic term on all the transaction data using the temporary set. The mining process based on fuzzy counts is then performed to find fuzzy association rules. The improved fuzzy association rule mining algorithm is described as follows.

Input: A body of n transaction data, each with m attribute values, a set of membership functions, a predefined minimum support value and a predefined confidence. The j-th (i=1, 2, ?m) attribute in the i-th (i=1, 2, ?n) transaction can be described by k membership function ( ) ( 1,2,..., )i jsR s k? = , where ( 1, 2,..., )jsR s k= is the fuzzy sets of the j-th attribute.

Output: A set of fuzzy association rules.

Step 1: Transform the quantitative value ( 1, 2,..., )jit j m=  of each transaction ( 1, 2,..., )iT i n=  in  D into a fuzzy set jif .

j  it  is described by fuzzy sets as:  1 2 1 2  ( ) ( ) ( ) ...i j i j i jkji  j j jk  R R R f  R R R ? ? ?  = + + +         (1)  where jlR  is l-th fuzzy region of attribute j  it  in D.

Setp 2: Calculate the scalar cardinality for all  transactions in the transaction data ( 1, 2,..., )iT i n= :   1 ( ) n  js i js i  weight R n  ? =  = ?                          (2) Step 3: Check whether the jsweight  of each fuzzy  region (1 , 1 )jsR j m s k? ? ? ?  is larger or equal to the predefined minimum support. If jsweight  is equal to or greater than the minimum support, put it into the set of large 1-itemsets ( 1L ). That is,  1 { | , 1 , 1 }js jsL R weight minsupport j m s k= ? ? ? ? ?  (3) Step 4: Set r=1, where r is used to represent the  number of items kept in the current large itemsets.

Step 5: Generate the candidate set 1rC +  from rL  in a  similar method to that of the Apriori algorithm. Restated, the algorithm joins rL  and rL  under the condition that  1r ?  items in the two itemsets are the same and the other one is different. The itemsets which have all their sub-r- itemsets in rL  are put into 1rC + .

Step 6: Do the following substeps for each newly formed (r+1)-itemset 1 2 1( , ,..., )rt t t t += in 1rC + :  a.  For each transaction iT , calculate its fuzzy value on t as:   1 2 1  ( ) ( ) ... ( ) rit i t i t i t  R R R? ? ? ? +  = ? ? ?              (4)     where ( ) ji t  R?  is the membership value of iT  in region  jt R . If the minimum operator is used for the intersection, then    ( )  r  it i tjj Min R? ?  +  = =                              (5)  b.  Calculate  1 n t it  i weight  n ?  =  = ?  by using 1rC + .

c. If tweight  is larger than or equal to the predefined  minsupport, put 1 2 1( , ,..., )rt t t t +=  into 1rL + .

Step 7: If 1rL +  is null, then do the next step; otherwise,  set r= r+1 and repeat Step 5 to 7.

Step 8: Construct the association rules for all large q-  itemset t with items 1 2( , ,..., )qt t t , 2q ?  using the following substeps:  a.  Form all possible association rules as follows: 1 1 1... ... , 1, 2,...,k k q kt t t t t k q? +? ? ? ? ? ? =   (6) b. Calculate the confidence values of all association  rules using:    1 1 1   ( ... ... )  k k q  n  it i  n  it it it it i  ?  ? ? ? ? ? +  =  =  ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ? (7)  Step 9: Output the rules with confidence value larger than or equal to the predefined minimum confidence.

Step 10: The quantitative association rules are achieved by clearing the fuzzy association rules.

After Step 10, the quantitative association rules are output and can act as the meta-knowledge for the given transaction. It is based on reasoning and easy to be understood and applied in industrial process.

4. The determination of optimal excess air coefficient based on the improved fuzzy association rule mining  4.1. Determination of optimal excess air coefficient based on data mining   Based on the history data of a 300MW power plant unit whose type is N300-16.7/537/537-3, the typical parameters which are related to combustion process are analyzed. Those parameters include load, excess air coefficient ? , the carbon content in fly ash, flue gas temperature and thermal efficiency, etc [6]. The quantitative association rules are acquired by analyzing the history data. For example, Load ( 1... nL L ), Parameters ( 1... nP P ), Parameters ( 1... mT T ) ? Coal consumption ( 1...g gnB B ). In a given typical load range, the parameters related to low coal consumption rate are chosen as optimization values to optimize the electric industrial  process. The rule to determine the optimal parameter values is expressed as:  1 1 1( ... ) ( ... ), ( ... )n n nLoad L L Parameter P P Parameter T T? .

By this way the optimal operation parameters are  decided according to load and the other related conditions.

Take a data set with 10 transaction as an example to illustrate the mining process with the improved fuzzy association rule mining algorithm. The data mining process with large items are similar to that of this mining process. The data set includes 10 transactions which are gotten by sampling in the database, as shown in Table 1.

Each case consists of five course parameters: Load (denoted Ld), Excess air coefficient ?  (denoted Ear), Unburned carbon in flue dust (denoted Ucd), Flue gas temperature (denoted Fgt) and thermal efficiency (denoted Effi). The minimum support is set at 0.30 and the minimum confident is set at 0.75.

Table 1.  The industrial process parameters of a 300MW unit in  typical running state     Each course is thought as an attribute in the mining process and each attribute has three fuzzy regions: Low, Middle and High. Thus three fuzzy membership values are produced for each course according to the predefined membership functions. The membership function of load is shown in Figure 2. The membership functions of other parameters are similar to that of load.

290 294 296 300286284280  ? 1 Low Middle High  MW Figure 2. The membership function of load  The transaction data in Table 1 are first transformed into fuzzy sets, with the results shown in Table 2.

Table 2. The fuzzy sets transformed from the industrial process  parameters in table 1.

The  large 1-itemsets ( 1L ) is built as shown in Table 3.

Table 3. L1 Large 1-itemsets   The candidate 2-itemsets 2C  is built base on 1L  as  shown in Table 4.

Table 4. 2C  candidate 2-itemsets   The large 2-itemsets 2L  is built based on 2C  according  to minsupport=3.

Table 5. 2L  large 2-itemsets   The candidate 3-itemsets 3C  is built based on 2C  according to minsupport=3.

Table 6. 3C  candidate 3-itemsets   The support of sup( H, M, i H)=0.30Ld Ear Eff  is  larger or equal to minsupport, So 3L  is built. So the fuzzy association rule H, M HLd Ear Effi?  is obtained according to Step 9. The confidence of this rule is as follows:  confidence( H, M H)= sup( H, M, H) 3.0 81.1%  sup( H, M) 3.7  Ld Ear Effi Ld Ear Effi  Ld Ear  ?  = =   The confidence of this rule is larger than minconfidence (75%). From the results of the data mining we can conclude that the combustion thermal efficiency reaches maximum value (no less than 92%) when the excess air coefficient ?  is set between 1.34 and 1.43 at full load range (296MW~300MW). The middle value or the weighted average of intervals can be adopted to decide the optimization point. The optimization value of excess air coefficient ?  is 1.42 when the load is 300MW (100%) by using the weighted average method. In a given typical load range, the excess air coefficient related to low coal consumption are chosen as optimization value to guide the operation. The optimal values obtained from data mining and designed values are listed in Table 7.

Table 7. The comparison of designed value and optimal values  of excess air coefficient    4.2. The optimal curve of excess air coefficient and its application in operation optimization   According to the method mentioned above, by utilizing the fuzzy association mining to mine the important parameters when the typical load range of 75%, 90% and 100%, etc, a set of optimization values is obtained. The optimal curve of excess air coefficient can be obtained by regression analysis of the optimal values determined by data mining. The coefficients and the significant tests of the regression curve are presented in Table 8. The t-test is used and the unstandardized coefficients and standardized coefficients are also given. The coefficients in regression equation are statistically significant. The regression equation between load and optimal excess air coefficient is established. The optimal excess air coefficient in certain load and corresponding operation conditions can be calculated using formula (8).

21.589 0.0004 0.000004839y x x= + ?            (8) Table 8. The coefficients of regression equation and significance  test for regression coefficients       The process parameters are optimized based on the results of data mining to examine the effects of the optimization in ZhangJiaKou power plant. The average boiler efficiency improved about 0.28% and the coal consumption reduced about 1.6g/kW.h. The optimal curve of excess air coefficient at different load level is shown in Figure 3. The Y axis is for load and Y? axis is for the optimal excess air coefficient. The relationship between optimal excess air coefficient and boiler efficiency is shown in Figure 4. The Y axis is for boiler efficiency and Y? axis is for the optimal excess air coefficient. The operation optimization based on data mining is an effective method to improve the efficiency in power plant and the optimization values from data mining can be used to guide the operation online.

Figure 3. The optimal curve of excess air coefficient with load   Figure 4. The optimal curve of excess air coefficient with boiler  efficiency  5. Conclusion   This paper proposed an improved fuzzy data mining algorithm and applied the improved algorithm to determined the optimization values in power plant combustion process. The fuzzy data mining method has the following virtues: (1) The rules of deciding the target values are straightforward and easy to guide operation. (2) Based on the actual data in industrial process, the rules can reflect the actual status. (3) The target values can be dynamically regulated to reflect the variety of the unit status. (4) The target value is presented in an interval, so the operator can have more choices in the interval to  optimizing the running course according the actual state of the unit. The rules mined out exhibit quantitative regularity in large history database and can be used to provide guides and suggestions to the appropriate operator. Experimental results with the data in a 300MW power plant show that the improved algorithm based on fuzzy sets operation performs very well and can be used to guide the operating process to achieve a good performance.

