The Influence of Volume and Volatility on Predicting Shanghai  Stock Exchange Trends

Abstract   Most of the previous studies concerning mining association rules from stock time series simply use confidence and support thresholds.  In this paper we introduce two new thresholds ? trading volume and stock volatility- that suit stock time series behaviour better.

In this study, we test the influence of volatility and volume on share price weekly trends. Various experimental results yield the strong correlation between trading volume and classifying accuracy.  We use the mined rules to classify and predict future trends.  A new method, namely weighted confidence, is proposed for carrying out associative classification/prediction. Its accuracy is equivalent to other traditional measures.

Keywords: Stock Data Mining, Time Series forecasting, Associative Rule Mining, Associative Classification  1. Introduction   Along with the expansion of available data, Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD)[1] has become necessary to mine useful and pertinent information.

Mining time series and especially its applications to predict stock time series evolution have already been studied extensively. Predicting future market trends and price movements usually rely on technical analysis, i.e.

are only based on past price data. By studying trading volume and price evolution, we may obtain suggestions on investment decisions [2].

Traditionally regressive models, which had the drawback to only discover linear pattern, have been used at this purpose. But more recently, lots of works rely on computational intelligence (CI)[10], large field that encompasses neural, fuzzy and genetic approaches to data analysis. Neural networks[11],[12], which also address the nonlinear behaviour of stocks, have become a dominant technique to predict stock evolution. Some other works [13]  also build hybrid predictive systems combining neural networks, fuzzy logic, and fractal theory.

Rule inductions, which provide highly understandable association rules, have been already intensively studied.

[3,4]. Jiawei Han & al [5] developed a way to find rules between events occurring in different time periods: this is called inter-transaction association rule mining. More novel works include application of these association rules to stock prediction. [6]  In this paper we focus on association rule mining, but contrary to past work that mostly relied on support and confidence values, we want to test the influence of trading volume and stock volatility on weekly trends.

When we mine stock data, support isn?t sufficient, because a high support and a low volume would mean that one trend yet appears frequently, but each time involves few people.  If trading volume is low, either supply or demand is low, thus the rule usefulness is questionable.

Even if we make the assumption that markets are predictable, it isn?t reasonable to completely disregard the behavioral aspect of stock data. In fact, stock prices strongly depend on the company?s credibility, besides its lack may cause a sudden share price decrease. We introduce volume threshold at this purpose in Section 3.

Another specific aspect of stock data relies in its near- random walk behavior: it can be modeled using Brownian motions [9]. Stock markets uncertainty lets us think, that confidence may not be sufficient to mine stock data. A high confidence with a high volatility would be paradoxical: according to the confidence our rule certainty is high, according to the volatility, we are not sure if our rule is reliable, because daily variations are important.

This is why we introduce volatility in Section 3.

After having obtained our association rules, we?ll do associative clustering[7] in order to predict future trends.

In the next section we?ll explain the Data preprocessing step necessary for association rule mining of numeric stock data. In Section 3, we?ll define how to generate rules and how we use the rules we obtain.  In   DOI 10.1109/FSKD.2008.88    DOI 10.1109/FSKD.2008.88     Section 4 we?ll expose our experimental results, and in the last section we?ll conclude on the influence of volume and volatility on the classifying accuracy.

2. Data preprocessing   Stock data is originally numeric. Instead of predicting future closing prices, we aim at rather finding weekly trends. Our motivation is the near random walk stock data behaviour and early work assuming the existence of economic cycles.

Because we want to predict the future decrease or increase of stock price, we?ll have to convert numeric data into symbols. We first compute numeric trends:     ,                         (1)  We can choose different levels of granularity.  But we?re looking for weekly trends, thus in our study Current Price represents Friday?s closing price, Last Price being Monday?s closing price, in the same week.

Then we?ll create the classes, namely up, down and stable corresponding to the following definition based on an ? threshold:  Symbol Definition Up Trend>?>0  Stable - ? ?Trend? ? Down Trend< -?  In most of this publication, we?ll assume ?=1%.

Another parameter we need to fix is the time span in  which we produce our rules, in other words an appropriate number of symbols. A too big number would lead to a low support. A too small number wouldn?t be flexible enough to fit different time series and lead to a low confidence. Experimental results imply the choice of the price movement in a 2 or 3 weeks span.

Traditionally we mine rules with items from the same transaction, such in the so called basket analysis. In our study, one transaction refers to one week and items refer to trends. But our objective is to predict future evolutions.

Therefore we?re not interested in finding relations in the same time period. Thus we need to transform our data before producing rules.

After numeric to symbolic conversion, we obtain a transaction database as shown in Table 1.

In order to perform association mining with transaction ID referencing to the week number, we need to do a transformation by using a sliding window. Let w be the sliding window size. For example, if w=3 weeks, the  database shown in Table 1 can be transformed to the one described in Table 2.

Table 1: A sample transaction database  Company Week Trend 600001 10 Up 600001 11 Down 600001 12 Up  ?? ?. ? 600002 10 Down  ?? ?. ?   Table 2: Inter-transaction database with w=3 weeks ID 2 weeks before Last Week Current Week 8   600001Up3  600002Down3 9  600001Up2  600002Down2 600001Down3  10 600001Up1 600002Down1  600001Down2 600001Up3  11 600001Down1 600001Up2 12 600001Up1   We prune rules in order to keep only predictive rules  (rules like 600001 , 600002 , , where j>i).

We obtain either inter-transactional rules like 600001 1 600002 2  or intra-transactional rules like 600001 1 600001 3.

3. Mining and using rules  3.1 Generating rules  3.1.1 General measures. We use the association rule module in SAS to mine a complete set of association rules.

The support, proportion of transactions that contain both itemsets A and B, reflects the usefulness of the discovered rules. In this paper we?ll use mostly min(support)=10%  Traditionally we also use confidence measure to prune obtained rules. The confidence, ratio of the number of transactions containing A and B on the number of transactions containing A. reflects the certainty of a rule.

In this paper we?ll use mostly min(confidence)=50%  But even if these measures have been used a lot in data mining, they have some drawbacks that encourage us to use different ones, such as cosine. For instance if the data base is huge, because the support is in inverse proportion to the total number of transactions, the support is likely to be low. This is why we use cosine measure:  A                           (2)     3.1.2 More adapted measures.  But even if all of these measures provide us with information to decide whether a rule is interesting or not, they don?t capture the specificity of stock data.

Because of the stock market behavioral aspect, we want to introduce the volume measure, which is the weekly mean of the percentage of shares exchanged, in other words the weekly means of the daily percentage of exchanged shares as shown by the following formula: ? _                                (3)   It?s important to divide by the company?s total amount of tradable shares; otherwise small companies wouldn?t be taken into consideration.

If the volume is low, you may not easily make trading transactions, so we can expect the share price won?t change too drastically. On the other hand, high volume may yield to dangerous mass movements. This is why we should be more concerned about high volume.

Because we feel the need to account for the stock market uncertainty, we compute the volatility, which accounts for the daily variations. Moreover it is necessary to take into account the daily variations if we study weekly trends that only depend on Friday?s and Monday?s values. The slope followed by the stock price during the week may not be disregarded.

Let log   , ?  Y ?                       (4) Where ? is the standard deviation  The higher the volatility, the higher the uncertainty.

Even if speculators may play on these unpredictable variations, it?s clear that a low volatility is better for long- term financial investors, because the risk taken is lower.

3.2 Using rules for prediction  After having obtained the rules on the training set, we need to test their prediction accuracy on the test set. And before we can evaluate this accuracy, we have to predict future trends on the basis of the rules obtained.

At this purpose, we can first use two different methods already described in a previous paper[6], namely Best Confidence and Majority Voting.

The Best Confidence method only takes into account the rule with the highest confidence, disregarding all the other rules. We suggest if two different rules have the same confidence to select the one with higher cosine.

Majority voting consists in computing for each class the sum of the transactions where the rules occur, then to select the higher score. For class Up, we would obtain:  Up ?      (5)  Though it has the advantage of getting cooperation between different rules, but doesn?t take into account the rules? respective confidence.

This is why we propose a new classifying method, namely Weighted Confidence which is given in the following formula (6). The idea is to take all interesting rules into account and to weight their influence by their confidence.  ? ? //? | , ,   (6)  We predict the trend according to the weighted confidence as shown in Table 3.

Table 3 Trend prediction based on weighted confidence  Prediction Definition Up  0  Stable Down In this paper we?ll use mostly ?=0.5.

Let?s take an example to explain this formula. Suppose we have obtained the following rules in Table 4.

Table 4 Rules  Rule Confidence 600001up?600001up 33% 600002down?600001up 40% 600003stable?600001stable 20% 600024up?600001up 25% 600034down?600001down 15%  In this case, we would predict 600001up, because the weighted confidence is far away from zero:  600001  33% 40% 25% 15%33% 40% 20% 25% 15% 62%  But we have to be careful if the weighted confidence is close to zero. The reason behind may be that positive and negative trends cancel each other out. In fact in this case we should rather output ?No prediction?. On the other     hand a value far away from zero should indicate a strong rule certainty.

4. Experimental results   For all our experiments, we used 8 years of Shanghai Stock Exchange data (years 1997 to 2004) for 512 companies randomly selected. We divided the full data into training set (the first 7 years) and test set (year 2004).

Because handling hundreds of companies is computationally expensive, we decided to cluster the close price time series of these 512 companies. We chose 25 companies low correlated together from different clusters in order to keep the diversity of original data.

First we had to perform numeric-to-symbolic conversion on both data sets, then we pruned the weeks that don?t respect the volume or volatility threshold and we generated rules on the training set with the association rule module of SAS Enterprise Miner. Finally we compared the predictions, made with the 3 measures described above, with the test sets real trends.

In order to quantify the prediction/classification accuracy, we used the formula (7):         (7)  4.1 The influence of volatility    Figure 1.  Accuracy versus Volatility threshold   As we can see from Figure 1, pruning the database with a maximum volatility value (like volatility  1%) brings low accuracy: it is very close to 33%, the one given by a random prediction. Furthermore changing this threshold doesn?t have any impact on the classifying accuracy.

We should rather think of volatility as uncertainty.

Thanks to Shannon?s information theory, we can understand that limiting volatility implies losing information.

4.2 The influence of Volume  On the other hand, trading volume is correlated with the prediction accuracy, as we can observe from Figure 2.

Figure 2. Accuracy Versus volume threshold   While we raise the weekly trading volume threshold,  the prediction accuracy is increasing. Moreover the observed maxima, 64,8%, is much higher than the best predicting accuracy obtained on the database without using volume pruning, 59%.  Thus pruning our data with a well suited volume threshold not only reduces the amount of information we need to process, but also let us make more accurate predictions. Furthermore, if we take a company?s daily trading volume and share close price, we clearly see their correlation as shown in Figure 3. We can see that an abnormally high volume leads to a radical change of stock price.

Figure 3. Daily volume and daily Close price     4.3 The choice of measures In our experiments, we have noticed, these three  measures have a similar accuracy, according to Figure 1, 2 and Table 5.

Table 5. Mean prediction Accuracy Method Mean Accuracy  Best Confidence 42.5% Majority Voting 41.7% Weighted Confidence 41.7%  But even if we observe a very close accuracy value, we  notice that Best Confidence is slightly better, as shown in Figure 4. In several different experiments for different volume and volatility thresholds, we have registered the prediction accuracy of the three above mentioned methods and have counted the number of experiments, where each measure provides better prediction.

Figure 4. Best Classification Method Count   5. Conclusions   In this paper we have mined association rules between stock weekly trends, focusing on the influence of volume and volatility. We have found that volatility cannot help us to mine association rules on stock data, but on the contrary trading volumes can let us increase our prediction accuracy and reduce the amount of data as well.

We have used a new accuracy measure, namely Weighted Confidence, which showed up as accurate as traditional measures.

As we have observed in this article, many different factors may influence share prices. We have to keep in mind the importance of information and human behavior.

Future work should try to get closer and closer to the real market?s complexity. We should study the influence of volume variation on stock price, as shown in Figure 3, a big increase of volume may lead to a higher share price, while its decrease may lead to a lower share price.

6. Acknowledgments We thank Tsinghua Financial Database for providing the Shanghai Stock Exchange data. This work was supported  in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 70471006 and 70621061.

7. References  [1] J. M. Zytkow, ?The KDD land of plenty ?, AAI Workshop Notes ? Knowledge Discovery Databases, Anaheim, CA, pp iii-vi, July 14, 1991 [2] G. L. Morris, Candlestick Charting Explained, CandlePower, 1992 [3] Agrawal, Imielinski & Swami, ?Mining association rules between sets of items in large databases?, SIGMOD [4] Agrawal & Srikant, ?Fast algorithms for mining association rules?, VLDB 1994 [5] Jiawei Han, Hongjun Lu, Ling Feng, ?Stock movement prediction and n-dimensional inter-transaction association rules?, 1998 [6] Jo Ting, Tak-Chung Fu & Fu-Lai Chung, ?Mining of stock data: intra- and inter-stock pattern associative classification?, DMIN 2006 [7] B. Liu, W. Hsu, and Y. Ma, ?Integrating classification and association rule mining?,  Proceeding of the KDD, New York, pp 80-86, 1998 [8] J. Han and M. Kamber, Data Mining: Concept and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann, 2001 [9] Heston, ?A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with applications to bonds and currency options?, The review of financial studies, Vol. 6, No 2 (1993).

[10] L.P. Wang, Fu, X.J.: Data Mining with Computational Intelligence, Springer, Berlin, 2005.

