Correlation analysis of operation data and its application in operation  optimization in power plant

Abstract   The equipments in power plant are closely related and interacted, and the relationships among the equipments are manifested by operation data. According to the actual operation data, the potential associations can be found and applied to guide the operation optimization in power plant. The characteristics of operation data and the methods of correlation analysis were discussed in detail to estimate the related degree between operation parameters. The correlation analysis and correlation computing method of operation data were proposed.

Based on the correlation of operation data, the fuzzy association rule mining was introduce to find the operation optimization values to guide the operation in power plants. The optimal excess air coefficients is obtained and the regression equation is established, which can be provided to optimize the operation. It is benefit for guiding the operation optimization and economical operation in power plant.

1. Introduction   As the development of automation the distributed control system and the supervisory information system provided more useful operation data for operation optimization in power plant [1]. The operation parameters among power plant equipments are very complicated and numerous. The equipments are related closely and interacted in power plant and the relationships among the equipments are obviously manifested by operation data [2]. According to the actual operation data, the potential associations can be found and applied to guide the operation optimization in power plant.

Accurate operation data is the foundation of system identification and system analysis. According to characteristic of parameters in power plant, the methods of data analysis and data processing were discussed in detail to improved the economic efficiency based on the operation data in electric power industry. The correlation analysis of the operation parameters was introduce into the operation optimization and the computing method of correlation was proposed to find the association among operation data. It provided a helpful reference for learning  more about the operation state of equipments and the association rule achieved from operation data can be used to guide operation optimization in power plant.

2. The characteristic of electric operation data   The operation data is very complicated and numerous in power plant and the equipments are related closely and interacted. The complexity of operation data makes the data processing and data analysis more difficult [3].

Learning more about the characteristic of operation data is in favor of data analysis. The characteristic of operation data in power plant is as follows. (1) Large quantity of operation data is stored and processed. So it is hard to find and summarize by traditional methods. (2) The operation data in electric power industry is more easily affected by disturbance of electricity and magnetism from industry surroundings. So the original data must be verified and processed to guarantee the accurateness. (3) The operation data varies with time frequently due to the dynamical stability of the electric power industry. The data type is also various. (4)  The high dimension and strong correlation exists among the operation data. So the methods of data analysis and processing should be properly chosen according to the characteristic of the operation data.

3. Correlation analysis of operation data   The industry process in power plant is a process of energy transformation and energy transmission, which makes the operation parameters related closely and interacted greatly. The operation data is the reflection of relation between the substance balance and energy balance in this procedure. The relationships among the equipments are obviously manifested by operation data [2]. For example, the increase of load demand will definitely increase the fuel in boiler. The excess air coefficient reflects the relationship between fuel and air.

The potential associations can be found and applied to guide the operation optimization in power plant.

The operation data in power plant can be classified into two major kinds based on the load. One is the   DOI 10.1109/FSKD.2008.504     parameters which is influenced greatly by load, such as coal quantity, main steam pressure, main steam flow and condenser vacuum etc., as is shown in Figure 1. The other is the parameters which is almost not influenced by load, such as furnace negative pressure, main steam temperature, boiler drum water level and boiler wall temperature etc, as is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 1. Relationship between load and coal quantity   Figure 2. Relationship between load and furnace negative  pressure Figure 1 shows that the changing trend of main steam  pressure is in accordance with load. The main steam pressure is strongly correlated with load. Figure 2 shows that the furnace negative pressure is almost not correlated with load. Based on the correlation analysis, the uncorrelated and weak correlation parameters can be eliminated from data analysis. To learn more about the correlation among operation data can provide guide for data analysis and data processing in power plant, which is the foundation of data mining.

4. Computing method of data correlation   The correlation exists among operation parameters in power plant. But not all of the parameters correlate closely with others. The correlation coefficient among parameters can be calculated through operation data. The computing of data correlation can be helpful to learn about the related degree between parameters in power plant. So the uncorrelated and weak correlation parameters can be eliminated from the operation data during the procedure of data analysis and data processing, which avoids the blindness in data analysis and improve the efficiency of data mining.

Correlations measure how variables or rank orders are related. The correlation degree of variables is often described by correlation coefficient. The definition of correlation coefficient is as follows.

( , ) ( ) ( )  Cov X Y Var X Var Y  ? =                       (1)  Where X and Y are the variables to be analyzed.

( , )Cov X Y  is the covariance of  variables. ( , )Cov X Y =  (( ( ))( ( )) ( ) ( ) ( )E X E X Y E Y E XY E X E Y? ? = ? . ( )Var X and ( )Var Y  are the variances of variables X and Y, respectively.

Correlation coefficients range in value from -1 and +1.

A value of -1 represents a perfect negative relationship and a value of +1 represents a perfect positive relationship.

A value of 0 indicates no linear relationship.

For certain sample from the operation data in electric power industry, the calculation formula of the correlation coefficients is as follows.

__ __   __ __  1 1  ( )( )  ( ) ( )  n  i i i  n n  i i i i  x x y y r  x x y y  =  = =  ? ? =  ? ?  ?  ? ? (2)  The correlation coefficient of sample data is obtained from sample of the operation data. The value of correlation coefficient will differ according to certain detailed sampling of the operation data. The correlation coefficient of the sample data is the consistent estimator of the correlation coefficient of the whole operation data.

The correlation coefficient is often calculated by sample data in practice. The random and uncertainty exist in the calculation procedure. The smaller the size of the sample, the less the reliability of the calculation results. So the significance test should be performed during data analysis.

The significance test was made using t-test and the 5% level was chosen for statistical significance [4]. The correlation coefficient t-test is as follows.

rt r  n  = ? ?  (3)  The critical coefficient /2t?  or p-value is found out under the conditions of significance level ?  and sample capacity n. If t  is greater than /2t?  or  p-value is less than significance level ? , then r is statistic significant, or else r is not statistic significant.

The correlation among operation data can be calculated by the formula of correlation coefficients and expressed by the correlation coefficient matrix. The operation data in stable state should be selected and analyzed by data correlation calculation. The data correlation algorithm is described as follows.

(1) The stable state data is selected out and the sample data set to be analyzed is constructed. The sample data set is  1 2X { , ,..., }r px x x=                             (4) Where ( 1,2,..., )ix i p=  is the variable from operation data.

(2) The operation conditions corresponding to variable Xr  is  1 2O { , ,..., }r mz z z=                             (5) (3) The stable state data to be analyzed is  D={(X ,O ( )) | 1,2,..., }i r i i n=             (6) Where X ( 1,2,..., )i i n=  is the i-th record of stable state operation data set. O ( ) ( 1,2,..., )r i i n=  is the operation conditions corresponding.

(4) The correlation coefficients are calculated by __ __   __ __  1 1  ( )( )  ( ) ( )  n  i i i  n n  i i i i  x x y y r  x x y y  =  = =  ? ? =  ? ?  ?  ? ? (7)  The correlation coefficients matrix is presented after calculation by this formula. The correlation coefficients matrix shows the related degree between operation data.

(5) The correlation coefficients t-test is as follows.

rt r  n  = ? ?  (8)  The significance test was made using t-test and the 5% level was chosen for statistical significance.

Based on the historical data of the 300MW unit in Zhangjiakou Power Plant, the operation data which are related to process optimization are analyzed. These parameters include load, coal quantity, main steam pressure, main steam flow, secondary air flow, furnace negative pressure, condenser vacuum and excess air coefficient and so on. The main parameters to be analyzed are listed in Table 1.

Table 1. Main parameters to be analyzed  3knm /h  ?   The correlation coefficients are calculated to estimate  the related degree of those operation data by the data correlation algorithm. The operation data set includes 4320 records. The t-test is used for significance test of the results. The correlation analysis result is shown in Table 2.

Table 2. Correlation coefficients of the operation data   The correlation coefficients between operation data are  represented by the result matrix. Each cell in Table 2 contains two items, which are the correlation analysis results of operation data in this row with corresponding list. The data in each cell are correlation coefficient and p- value, respectively. ** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). As shown in Table 2, the correlation coefficient between load and main steam flow is 0.998.

( , ) 0.998Correlation load main steam flow = The correlation coefficient between load and main steam pressure is 0.988.

( , ) 0.988Correlation load main steam pressure = From Table 2, We can see that the correlation  coefficients between load and coal quantity, main steam pressure, main steam flow, secondary air flow, condenser vacuum, excess air coefficient are all higher than 0.95 and the correlation is statistically significant (p<0.01). The load is strong correlation with coal quantity, main steam pressure, main steam flow, secondary air, condenser vacuum and excess air coefficient from the results in Table 2. So the conclusion can be obtained that the coal quantity, main steam pressure, main steam flow, secondary air, condenser vacuum and excess air coefficient vary closely with load.

While the correlation coefficient between load and main steam temperature is 0.368.

( , ) 0.368Correlation load main steam temperature = The correlation coefficient between load and furnace negative pressure is -0.016.

( , ) 0.016Correlation load furnace negative pressure = ? The load is less correlation with main steam  temperature and furnace negative pressure from the results in Table 2.

The correlation analysis is helpful to learning the operation data and the industry process in power plant.

The correlation coefficients is used to estimate the related degree between operation data, which is the foundation of data analysis and data mining.

5. Operation optimization based on correla- tion analysis      The rational determination of operation optimization values is very important to the economical analysis and operation optimization in power plant [5]. Based on the correlation of operation data, the quantitative association rule mining is introduce to acquire the optimal value of important parameters. The operation optimization values are determined by the fuzzy association rule mining algorithm. This method can avoid the hard partition boundary in traditional quantitative association rule mining [6-8]. The main steps of fuzzy association rule mining algorithm are described as follows [8].

(1) Transform the quantitative value ( 1,2,..., )jit j m= of each transaction ( 1,2,..., )iT i n=  in D into a fuzzy set  j if .

j it  is described by fuzzy sets as  1 2  1 2  ( ) ( ) ( ) ...i j i j i jkji  j j jk  R R R f  R R R ? ? ?  = + + +                (9)  where ( 1, 2,..., )jsR s k=  is s-th fuzzy region of attribute ( 1,2,..., )iT i n= , and iT  is i-th transaction in D.

(2) For each region jsR  stored in 1C  calculate it scalar  cardinality for all transactions.

( )  1 n js i js  i weight R  n ?  =  == ?                        (10) Check whether the jsweight  of each ( 1,2,..., )jsR j m=  is larger than or equal to the predefined minimum support.

Generate the candidate set 1rC +  from frequent itemsets  rL .

(3) Based on the frequent itemsets. Construct the  association rules for all large q-itemset t with items 1 2( , ,..., ), 2qt t t q ? . Form all possible association rules as  follows: 1 1 1... ... , 1, 2,...,k k q kt t t t t k q? +? ? ? ? ? ? =      (11)  (4) Calculate the confidence values of all association rules with:  1 1 1   ( ... ... )  k k q  n  it i  n  it it it it i  ?  ? ? ? ? ? +  =  =  ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ? (12)  The association rules are derived with confidence value larger than or equal to the predefined minimum confidence.

The excess air coefficient is one of the most important factor for economical combustion of the boiler. The unit efficiency is higher in lower excess air coefficient under the condition of stabilized combustion. When excess air coefficient  is too high, flue gas loss 2q  will increase and high excess air coefficient is not good for burning stability. But when excess air coefficient is too low, unburned carbon loss 3q  and 4q  will increase. Therefore, an optimal value of excess air coefficient exists at a certain load. The fuzzy association rule mining is proposed to acquire the optimal target values of excess air  coefficient based on the correlation analysis. In a given typical load range, the excess air coefficient related to low coal consumption are chosen as optimization value to guide the operation. The optimal values obtained from data mining and designed values are listed in Table 3.

Table 3. The comparison of designed value and optimal values of excess air coefficient   The optimal curve of excess air coefficient can be  obtained by regression analysis of the optimal values determined by data mining. The coefficients and the significant tests of the regression curve are presented in Table 4. The t-test is used and the unstandardized coefficients and standardized coefficients are also given.

The coefficients in regression equation are statistically significant. The regression equation between load and optimal excess air coefficient is established. The optimal excess air coefficient in certain load and corresponding operation conditions can be calculated using formula (13).

21.589 0.0004 0.000004839y x x= + ?          (13)  Table 4. The coefficients of regression equation and significance test for regression coefficients   Based on the optimal regression curve, the optimal  value of excess air coefficient can be calculated and provided to optimize the operation. The excess air coefficient is optimized based on the results of the association rule mining. The average boiler efficiency improved greatly and the coal consumption reduced by about 1.6g/kW.h.

The optimal values from actual operation data can reflect the reachable optimal status under a certain load and corresponding conditions. It reflects the actual operating state and can be used to guide the operating process to achieve an efficient performance. Acquiring the optimization value from operation data by data analysis and data mining provides a novel and efficient method for operation optimization in power plant.

6. Conclusion   The equipments are closely related and interacted in power plant and the relationships among the equipments are manifested by operation data. The characteristics of     operation data and the methods of correlation analysis were discussed to estimate the related degree between operation parameters in power plant. The computing method of data correlation was proposed, which can provide guide for data processing and data mining. Based on the correlation of operation data, the fuzzy association rule mining was introduced to find the operation optimization values. The optimal values of excess air coefficient is achieved by this method and the optimal curve is obtained by regression analysis. The excess air coefficient is optimized based on the regression curve of optimal values. Experimental results in a 300MW unit show that the optimization value based on data analysis and data mining performs very well and can be used to guide the operation to achieve an efficient performance.

