Prediction and Early Warning Method for Flea Beetle Based on Semi-supervised  Learning Algorithm

Abstract  The prediction and early warning for vegetable crop diseases and insect pests commonly based on experts? knowledge of plant protection while math modeling methods are used to analyze the associated data quantitatively scarcely. This paper takes advantage of labeled historical data to extract association rules as the supervised information, and combining with the use of the unsupervised learning method iterative self- organizing data analysis techniques algorithm (ISODATA) to establish the model semi-supervised learning algorithm for predicting and early warning vegetable pest flea beetle. Semi-supervised learning algorithm not only obtains a high accuracy of supervised learning method, but also takes advantage of the flexibility of unsupervised learning method, which is significative for both research and practice. The experimental results of Guangdong vegetable pest flea beetle show the prediction and early warning accuracy of semi-supervised learning method provides a higher accuracy rate than that of k-mean clustering, support vector machine and RBF neural network in the same condition.

Key words: Prediction and Early Warning; Flea Beetle; Semi-supervised Learning; Association Rules; ISODATA  1. Introduction   In recent years, infection area of crop diseases and insect pests spread larger and larger, as well as the serious generation degree, which caused enormous economic losses to the peasants. The irrational use of chemical pesticides has caused a series of environmental and social issues that are difficult to resolve and avoid such as agricultural costs rising, declining quality, and environmental pollution [1]. Therefore, effective prediction and early warning for crop diseases and insect pests is necessary, and it would provide the dependable basis for prevention and treatment at the same time. At  present, computer information technology and GIS technology for crop diseases and insect pests prediction and early warning developed rapidly, Hao and Chen used technology to establish a prediction GIS for pests of wheat in 1995; Wang etc designed and built GIS database for analyzing the Chilo suppressalis population spatio- temporal dynamics in 2001[2]; Liu etc developed wheat and corn integrated pest control GIS in 2002 based on GIS technology, artificial intelligence technology plant protection knowledge,  occurrence regularity of crop diseases and insect pests, meteorological information. It could provide service including prediction, decision- making and consultation. Zhejiang agricultural expert system is jointly developed and designed by Chinese Academy of Sciences and Hangzhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences in 2005, including the information of fruits, vegetables and other crops in the diagnosis and treatment of crop diseases and insect pests.

The key technology of crop diseases and insect pest prediction system is prediction model and prediction algorithm. Various prediction algorithm proposed by researchers, Li and Peng developed a model for the classified prediction of agricultural crop diseases and insect pests using BP artificial neural network with factors related to agricultural plant diseases and insect pests as input features of sample [3]; Zhang and Zhu put forward the idea of producing fuzzy rules by genetic algorithms based on Takagi-Sugeno Fuzzy Logic System, and established the fuzzy model to forecast diseases and pests [4];  Hu etc developed a BP neural network prediction system concerning plant diseases and pests, and the prediction system was used to predict the severity of wheat stripe rust in Hanzhong,Shaanxi province [5]; Xiong etc proposed a hybrid neural network based on parametric feed forward neural networks with fuzzy inputs configured by a genetic algorithm (PFNNFG) [6]; Ren and Li improved and adjusted model of genetic programming based on traditional fitness function,   DOI    DOI    DOI 10.1109/ICNC.2008.371    DOI 10.1109/ICNC.2008.371     performance of accuracy in pest forecasting is improved by the algorithm [7].

Previous prediction systems and the application of the algorithm have achieved certain effect. Growth cycle in different insect pests and crop diseases, morbidity in different characteristics, different pests and diseases should establish their own prediction model. However, in the past all kinds of crop diseases and insect pests prediction and early warning systems often use the same algorithm and model, which limits the accuracy of the prediction. Combining association rules with ISODATA, vegetable crop diseases and insect pests of flea beetle early warning model is established in this paper, which has been the accession to the model-based early warning WebGIS crops biological disasters monitoring and early warning system.

2. Fuzzy association rules   Apriori algorithm is one of most influential and classical algorithm that mines Boolean association rules and frequent itemsets [8, 9]. However, this association rules are single-dimension and single-layer Boolean association rules, the generation of which bases on such a reality: each item in the transaction is independent and simultaneous. Nevertheless, there exists such a case frequently: in one transaction, some items are independent, but some can not occur simultaneously. The case is relevant to multidimensional association rules mining, which is applied to extract classification association rules in the following text. Multidimensional association rules involve multi-attribute or multi- predication rules. In mining process, different attributes in the same transaction is independent, and each value or range belonging to the same attribute must emerge, but not simultaneously.

If the form of multidimensional association rule is conditionset=>y, where conditionset denotes itemset, and y denotes class label, then this association rule is defined as classification association rule. The attribute in database might be categorical attribute or quantitative attribute. If there are quantitative attributes in data samples, it is necessary to discretize the data samples. In nature, the classification association rules including quantitative attributes is fuzzy classification association rules.

Supposing an attribute set 1 2{ , , , }nI I I I= L  and a fuzzy transaction database 1 2{ , , , }mD D D D= L , the discovered rules are of the form: A B? , where  (1 )iD i m? ?  is a transaction of D , ,A I B I? ? , ,A B ?? =  and A B?  do not contain any two items  that are associated with the same attribute. The minimal  Support and the minimal Confidence of fuzzy classification association rules could be defined as [10]:   ( ) ( ) Support (A B)=  n  i  A x B y  D =  ? ?  ?   ( ) ( )  Confidence (A B)= ( )  n  i A x B y  A x =  ? ?  ?    Where D  is the total number of transactions in D ,  which is equal m , the number of transactions in the quantitative database D . ( )A x  and ( )B y  denote the degree of membership of the element x  and y  with respect to the fuzzy set A  and B  respectively, ?  is a t- norm [11].

3. ISODATA clustering algorithm   Iterative Self?Organizing Data Analysis Techniques Algorithm(ISODATA) can automatically agglomerate and divide the classes of the samples, then the reasonable number of the classes would be got through the process.

The calculation steps are:  Step 1: Giving n  samples, set 1J = (iterative times), select c initial clustering centers ( )jZ J , 1, 2,...,j c= .

Step2: Calculate the distance between each sample with the clustering centers ( , ( ))k jD x Z J . If  1,2,..., ( , ( )) min { ( , ( )), 1, 2,..., }k j k jj cD x Z J D x Z J k n== =  , then k ix w? , all the samples are compartmentalized into c sets, and jn denotes the number of samples for the subsets jX .

Step 3:  If j nn ?< , 1, 2,...,j c= , then eliminate the subset jX ? 1c c= ? , calculate the distance again through the method in Step 2, where n?  is the minimum number of samples of each cluster, if number of samples less than it that will not be able to be an independent cluster.

Step 4:  Calculate the adjusted clustering centers:  ( )   1( ) jn  j j k  kj  Z J x n =  = ? , 1, 2,...,j c= .

Calculate the mean distance jD  between cluster centers:     ( )   1 ( , ( )) jn  j j k j  kj  D D x Z J n =  = ? ? 1,2,...,j c=  Calculate the mean distance D  among the samples of clusters:   1 c j j  j D n D  n = = ??  Step 5: Distinguish agglomerative, divisive and iterative calculation.

If iterative calculation of the total number has reached I , or the last iteration, set 0c? = , go to Step 7, then end computing, where I  is the maximum number of iterations, c?  is minimum distance between the two clustering centers, if less than it, agglomerate the two clusters.

If / 2c K? , then go to Step 6, and divide the clustering centers, where K  is the expected number of cluster centers.

Step 6: Divisive process.

Calculate standard deviation vector of each sets  1 2( , ,..., ) T  j j j jd? ? ? ?= : The components:  21 ( ( )) j  ji i ji x Xj  x Z J n  ? ?  = ?? , 1, 2,...,i d= ,  1, 2,...,j c=  , where ix  denotes the i th component of x , jiZ  denotes the i th component of jZ , d is the dimension number.

Find largest standard deviation of the component maxj? :  max 1,2,..., max { }j jii d? ?== , 1, 2,...,j c= .

If maxj c? ?> , then divide the clustering center into  two new clustering centers:  ( ) ( )j j jZ J Z J r + = +  , ( ) ( )j j jZ J Z J r  ? = ? .

Where j jr k?= or max[0,0,..., ,0,...,0] T  j jr k ?= ,  0 1k< ? . Set 1c c= + , 1J J= + , go to Step 2.

Step 7: Agglomerative process.

Calculate the distance ijD  between every two  clustering centers:  ( ( ), ( ))ij i jD D Z J Z J= , 1, 2,..., 1i c= ? ,  1,....,j i c= +  Compare ijD  with c? , sort ijD in ascending order by  the distance of clustering centers less than c? :  1 1 2 2 ....i j i j iLjLD D D< < < , where L  denotes largest  agglomerative number of cluster.

There are two homologous clustering centers iLZ  and  jLZ every iLjLD belongs to.  The agglomerative  clustering center can be obtained by:  1( ) [ ( ) ( )]L iL iL jL jL iL jL  Z J n Z J n Z J n n  = ? + ? +  .

Set 1c c= + .

If J I< , then 1J J= + .

If parameters is needed to adjusting the, go to Step 1, if  not, go to Step 2.

4. Semi-supervised learning algorithm   The two categories algorithms of pattern classification are mainly supervised learning and unsupervised learning.

Training samples needed to be labeled in supervised learning algorithm. Supervised learning algorithm structures the optimal model so as to get the minimum error between the known knowledge. It's a process optimization with the single exact goal and high accuracy.

Supervised learning algorithms couldn't operate without training samples or labels. Unsupervised learning algorithms haven't got precise targets, in the condition of the samples without labeled, it could find out the significative model in accordance with the characteristics of their own targets, but accuracy is relatively low. Semi- supervised learning method combines the virtue of supervised learning and unsupervised learning algorithms.

It can be flexible learning, and enhance accuracy under certain condition. Flea beetle prediction and early warning model is constructed by semi-supervised learning method based on the supervised learning information from association rules combining with unsupervised learning method ISODATA.

Specifically, flea beetle samples are provided with a number of different data attributes, homologous,      Table 1 Vegetable pest in the main classification criteria  early warning classification I II III IV V number of insects per 100 vegetable 0-100 100-200 200-500 500-1000 >1000   Table 2 Results of prediction and early warning samples from 2007.1 to 2008.2 of flea beetle under different  algorithms Algorithms Quantity of predicted and  early warned accurately Accuracy rate of  predicted and early warned accurately  Support Vector Machine (SVM) 427 67.56% k-mean clustering 328 51.90%  RBF Neural Network 381 60.28% Semi-supervised Learning Algorithm 483 76.42%  multidimensional eigenvector which performs for a point at coordinates system. The shorter the distance between points eigenvector performs for, the corresponding model will be more similar, and the feasibility of corresponding model belong to the same class will be much more likely.

In a densely distributed region, the models are similar, and then the same class could be formed by the polymerization. Set the points with labels mined by association rules as clustering centers, agglomerate or divide the association rules by ISODATA, and then calculate the distance between unlabeled samples with agglomerative or divisive centers. Unlabeled samples with minimum distance to agglomerative or divisive centers will be labeled the same class. Assume the flea beetle pest databases of all the samples are independent, and each is a subset of samples the calculation steps are as follows: Step 1: Select a period of time of flea beetle as a training samples as the training samples, excavated association rules as the initial clustering centers.

Step 2: Agglomerate or divide the association rules by ISODATA, the new clustering centers are got.

Step 3: Compare with the clustering centers, find out the minimum distance. The warning class of unlabeled samples categorize to the corresponding clustering center.

5. Experiment and result analysis 5.1 Experimental data The data mainly from Guangdong Province vegetables crop diseases and insect pests flea beetle database.

According to Guangdong Province's climate and crop growth characteristics, five factors including types of vegetables, the growth phase of vegetables, the growth phase of flea beetle, and the weather conditions is  selected. Flea beetle database contains data from 2004.1 to 2008.2, a total of 2,356 records. The data from 2004.1 to 2006.12 contains a total of 1,724 records. The data from 2007.1 to 2008.2 contains a total of 632 records.

According to the "Vegetable pests in the main classification criteria"[12], flea beetle prediction and early warning classification standards is shown as Table 1.

5.2 Experiment result   Select the data from 2004 to 2006 as training samples of 1,724 records, 1, 2007 to February 29, 2008 record of 632 samples as prediction and early warning samples. In order to compare with the general supervised learning methods and unsupervised learning methods, Table 2 lists flea beetle results of the prediction and early warning using Support Vector Machine (SVM), k-mean clustering algorithms and RBF Neural Network.  In the second row of Table 2, "Quantity of predicted and early warned accurately" denotes the quantity of prediction and early warning samples from 2007.1 to 2008.2 of flea beetle data that predicted and early warned accurately.

"Accuracy rate of predicted and early warned accurately" denotes the accuracy rate of prediction and early warning samples from 2007.1 to 2008.2 of flea beetle data that predicted and early warned accurately. For instance, while selecting algorithm is SVM, 433 prediction and early warning samples from 2007.1 to 2008.2 of flea beetle data predicted and early warned accurately, take 68.51% accuracy rate of total quantity.

As shown in Table 2, when the algorithms are Support Vector Machine (SVM), k-mean clustering, RBF Neural Network, 67.56%, 51.90%, 60.28%, accuracy rate of prediction and early warning samples from 2007.1 to 2008.2 of flea beetle data that predicted and early warned accurately, while 76.42% accuracy rate could be obtained by the Semi-supervised Learning Algorithm, which provided a higher precision with the accuracy improved  by 8.86%, 24.52% and 16.14% in comparison with the results in the same condition. A satisfactory prediction and early warning accuracy could be obtained by semi- supervised learning algorithm.

Conclusion   This paper presents a semi-supervised learning  algorithm based on the supervised learning information from association rules combining with unsupervised learning method ISODATA in prediction and early warning for flea beetle. Semi-supervised learning algorithm takes advantage of virtue of supervised learning with high accuracy rate and unsupervised learning needn't training samples, according to past data successful predicted and early warned for vegetable crop diseases and insect pest flea beetle.

Semi-supervised learning algorithm can effectively improve the accuracy and efficiency of prediction and early warning for vegetable crop diseases and insect pest flea beetle. Prediction and early warning for flea beetle commonly depends on the knowledge of plant protection expert in previous. This paper constructed mathematical methods to establish prediction and early warning model have made certain significance and a high accuracy for prediction and early warning.

Semi-supervised learning algorithm is effective, but the use of plant protection expert knowledge is also lacking.

In fact, the influential factors of the flea beetle number includes environmental factors, such as soil, but the quantitative research of flea beetle breeding environment is still in the rough, whose data including survival, reproduction, and other environmental data of flea beetle is one of the research direction of the future research.

Acknowledgements  Project supported by the South China Agricultural University Principal Foundation Projects, China (No.

2007K017).

