Semi-supervised Learning Algorithm Based on Simplified Association Rules  Combining with k-mean and Its Application in Land Evaluation

Abstract   In order to construct intelligible and effective land evaluation classifier, a semi-supervised learning algorithm constructed by utilizing simplified association rules combining with k-mean clustering algorithm is proposed in this paper. To reduce the complexity of the land evaluation models and improve the efficiency and intelligibility of association rules further, an algorithm to eliminate redundant rules for obtaining the simplified association rules is presented. Experimental results of Guangdong Province land resource demonstrate that, by only using 500 training samples chosen randomly, 89.5143% correct area rate of land evaluation could be obtained by the semi-supervised learning algorithm. It provides a higher precision with the accuracy improved by 14.3484%, comparing with the results of the method k- mean and 7.1159% comparing with the results of the method support vector machine in the same condition.

Keywords: Simplified Association rules; k-mean?Semi- supervised Learning; Fuzzy decision; Land evaluation  1. Introduction  The classification and gradation evaluation of agricultural land developed from such low-level researches on natural soil condition investigation for estimating yield, soil nature and basic soil fertility, etc. to management and evaluation of resource value integrated with land and human being [1]. In order to overcome the shortage of the traditional land evaluation methods affected by human factors, probe into a better scientific land evaluation method, make evaluation result reflect the natural law and change of land-use, afford better quality of service for land use and land layout consequently, some land evaluation algorithms are proposed by researchers. Hu etc. took Zhejiang Province as the study area of red soil, applied red soil resources information system to classify the RSR types [2]. Shen etc. selected data of hectare silage field at Hayes, Northern Ireland, UK, as samples, designed several sampling distributions  based on the whole training sample distribution to study the spatial variety of soil properties by BP neural network ensemble [3]. Damjan etc. used machine learning methods for inducing regression and model trees, and produce empirical models able to predict the soil quality from agricultural measures in terms of quantities describing the soil microarthropod community [4]. Other methods include Decision Trees [5], ANN [5], Support Vector Machines [5], Decision Support System [6], Immune Algorithm[7] etc.

Although these impersonal methods are effective, the knowledge representation of land evaluation is limited.

The algorithms of extracting rules, which could improve the intelligibility and efficiency of the land evaluation knowledge, are represented. Moreover, the intelligible and effective classifier can be constructed by utilizing association rules combining with k-mean clustering algorithms.

Generally speaking, association rules between sets of items in large databases can be mined by data mining technique such as Apriori Algorithm. Algorithms are proposed by researchers for mining or extracting rules.

Hisao Ishibuchi etc. described the extraction of linguistic association rules [8], illustrated the two measures of fuzzy rules for function approximation [9] and pattern classification problems and the fuzzy association rules for pattern classification problems [10]. The methods Hisao Ishibuchi etc. [8, 9, 10] extended demonstrated that the generalization ability of linguistic rules is less sensitive than the choice of a discretization method and the number of rules than that of standard association rules.

In order to improve the intelligibility and efficiency of the land evaluation knowledge further, an algorithm to eliminate redundant rules for obtaining the simplified association rules is presented. Besides, In order to construct intelligible and effective classifier by utilizing association rules combining with k-mean clustering algorithms, a land evaluation method based on semi- supervised learning algorithm is proposed in this paper.

Experimental results of Guangdong Province land   DOI    DOI    DOI 10.1109/ICNC.2008.370    DOI 10.1109/ICNC.2008.370     resource showed that satisfactory classification was obtained.

2. Evaluation factors  Traditional Apriori algorithm can only deal with the problems with transactions, but the land evaluation factors often contain the continuous-valued, discrete-valued, miss-valued and nominal-valued attributes. A method was proposed in this paper. Concretely, the factors that contain continuous-valued, discrete-valued and nominal-valued attributes could be represented by fuzzy subsets [12]. For instance, one of the continuous-valued input parameters altitude(EL) can be classified into 5 sets: low, mostly low, medium, mostly high, high, then the fuzzy subsets AB EL 1B, AB EL 2B, AB EL 3B, AB EL 4B, AB EL 5B can be represented as I, II, III, IV,V, respectively. Nominal-valued inputs parameters land utilization type(LU) including plow land, garden plot, woodland, grassland, tidal flat and unemployed land, can be classified into 6 sets: A BLU 1B, A BLU2B, AB LU 3B, A BLU 4B, A BLU5B, ABLU6B, which can be represented as I, II, III, IV,V, VI, respectively. The miss-valued factor, which could not be ignored, can be represented as NA.

Based on experts? advise, assume classification of soil resource can be mainly classified into 6 subsets, the Class1, Class2, Class3, Class4, Class5, Class7 can be represented as Class I, Class II, Class III, Class IV, Class V, Class VII, respectively. For the reason Class V and Class VII are in the minority, which with sum of the quantity and sum of the area less than 1% and 1%, respectively, Class V and Class VII are ignored in this paper.

The influence factors EL, SL, pH, OM, TE and LU can be classified the parameters into five fuzzy sets. The classes of evaluation factors are shown as Table 1, and classification of soil resource that can be mainly classified into 4 subsets, Class I, Class II, Class III and Class IV.

3. Parameters for mining algorithm  Parameters for mining algorithm include Support and Confidence.

Suppose an attribute  set 1 2{ , , , }mI A A A= ?   and a transaction database 1 2{ , , , }nD d d d= ? ,the expression for Support and Confidence of fuzzy association rules  A B?  could be defined as [11]: Support ratio of fizzy association rule:  ( ( ) ( ) ) Support (A B)=  A B A B d D  d d  D  ? ? ?? ? ?  ? ?  ? (1)  Confidence ratio of fuzzy association rule: ( ( ) ( ) )  Confidence (A B)= ( ( ) ( ) )  A B A B d D  A A d D  d d  d d  ? ? ?  ? ? ?  ? ? ?  ?  ? ?  ?  ? ?  (2)  Where ?  is a user-prescribed threshold,  | |D  denotes the number of transaction in D , x? is the membership class denoting how much it belongs to x ,  ( ) min{ ( ) | } ix x i  d d x X? ?= ? , ( ( ) ( ) )x x  d D d d? ? ?  ?  ??  is the sum of set   belongs to x bigger than denoted ?  .

The weights, which are calculated by land evaluation experts, can be utilized directly.

4. Simplify supervised information  Redundant items exist in the frequent items potentially; redundant rules exist in the association rules at the same time. The redundant rules increase complexity of land evaluation models and decrease efficiency and intelligibility of association rules.

To make a premise that guarantee the accuracy of fuzzy decision can not be reduced, the rule simplifying method of is to check the self-accuracy of the rules, the process of simplifying is:  Table 1 Grades of evaluation factors Altitude ?m?  Ground Slope ???  Land texture Land organic substance  content?%?  PH Value Land Utilization  Type  Grades  <200 <3 Light soil >4 6.5~7.5 plow land I 200~500 3~6 Sandy soil?  Medium soil 3~4 5.5~6.5 or 7.5~8.5 garden plot II  500~800 6~15 Heavy soil?Light clay  1.0~3.0 8.5~9 woodland III  800~1000 15~25 Medium clay 0.6~1 4.5~5.5 grassland IV >1000 >25 Sand soil <0.6 <4.5 tidal flat and  unemployed land V       Step1: Sort association rules in ascending order by the principle of Support, and define threshold of the removable rules;  Step2: Eliminate the first fuzzy classification association rule from the repository, and the new repository is formed. Make a fuzzy decision of all the test samples by using the new repository eliminated the first fuzzy classification association rule.

Fuzzy decision based on the theory of concept fuzzy matching degree and the method fuzzy inference.

Gaussian curve membership function is selected as the membership function in this paper. The membership of fuzzy subsets F   for the element of universe is shown as:  2( ) exp[ ( ) ]F x cx? ? ?= ?   (3)  In which ?   is variance, c  is value of center.

For the reason it?s simple and effective to calculate by  using maximum membership function criterion multiplication-product method, the method is selected to calculate the fuzzy degree of the test samples matching to the association rules. In the process of fuzzy matching, the mathematics expression of fuzzy matching for the j th rule is shown as:  1 1  ( ) ( ) exp[ ( ) ] k k  i Fji  i i  x cFd j x? ?= = ?= = ?? ?   (4)  In which k  is the quantity of factors, Fji?  is the membership of the test samples based on the  j th rule and  i th factor, ?  is variance, c  is value of center,  ( )Fd j   is multiplication-product of  i th factors based on the j th rule.

Find the maximum fuzzy matching degree and select which rule corresponding to; the classification of the rule is the result of the test samples. The mathematics expression of maximum membership of l  association rules is:  max ( )  j l FD Fd j  < < =   (5)  If the accuracy of fuzzy decision is not decrease or less than the threshold of the removable rules, the rule can be eliminated, and the new repository is preserved. If the accuracy of fuzzy decision is decrease or more than the threshold of the removable rules, the rule must be preserved, and the repository is restored by the repository before eliminating the first fuzzy classification association rule.

Step3: Eliminate the second fuzzy classification association rule from the initial repository. Notice, in despite of the first fuzzy classification association rule is eliminated or not, the repository contains the first fuzzy classification association rule. Then, estimate the second fuzzy classification association rule is eliminated or not in the manner of Step2.

Step4: Go to Step2 and Step3, in this manner, until the last fuzzy classification association rule is estimated.

5 k-mean algorithm combining with supervised information  Clustering analysis is an unsupervised learning method, which is a process that physical or nonfigurative patterns are grouped as multiple classes composed by similar patterns. k-mean algorithm is an algorithm by using dynamic pattern in clustering . The k-mean algorithm takes the input parameter k and partitions a set of n objects into k clusters so that the resulting intracluster similarity is high but the intercluster similarity is low [13]. The proceeds of  k-mean algorithm as follows.

Step 1: randomly selects k of objects, each of which initially represents a cluster mean or center;  Step 2: for each of the remaining objects, assign to the cluster to which is the most similar based on the distance between the object and the cluster mean;  Step 3: computes the new mean for each cluster again; Step 4: iterates until the criterion function converges.

Typically, the squared-error criterion is defined as[13]:   1 i  k ii p C  E p m = ?  = ?? ?     (6) Where E  is the sum of square-error for all objects, p  is the point in space representing a given object, and  im is the mean of cluster iC (both p and im  are multidimensional).

In clustering process, if the accurate information or approximate scope of cluster centers could be obtained, it would enhance greatly the accuracy and efficient of clustering. In above paragraphs, the association rules mining algorithm provides us with useful information, labeled clusters with frequent emergence and high reliability. With the labeled clusters as supervised information in clustering, we could take full advantage of high accuracy of supervised learning classification and the superiority of k-mean algorithm which is able to deal with tremendous amount of unlabeled samples. Therefore, we select k-mean algorithm combining with association rules mining algorithm to extract classification association rules as supervised information to establish dynamic classification model on land evaluation data. Concretely, each pattern sample corresponds with a point in feature vector. If the points corresponding to some patterns have an intensive distribution in an area, we could consider that these points are homogeneous. We cluster those samples with high similarity as a class, and the samples take up a partial area in feature space. Each partial area generates a cluster center, which denotes corresponding class. Thus select the center of densely distributed points in each area, calculate the distances between the center and those points corresponding to unknown feature. If the distance between that point and the center varies in the area range,     the point is attributed to the class corresponding to the area. The distance denoting the difference between the unknown-feature point and the center point in an area, could be used as similarity measurement. The less the distance is, the more similarity is and the more possibility of attributing to the same class is. Suppose all the samples are independent, that is each sample itself is a cluster (or subset), the calculation steps are:  Step 1: A small amount of labeled samples chosen randomly, generate classification association rules as labeled clusters by using association rules mining algorithm.

Step 2: With relative interconnectivity and comparability as the measurement of k-mean algorithm, compare the labeled clusters with unlabeled clusters and aggregate the subsets according to the measurement.

Step 3: In the course of comparison between the labeled clusters with unlabeled clusters, select the land quality grade (or class) corresponding to the labeled cluster according with the minimal distance and the maximal interconnectivity, as the result to output.

In the calculation process, k-mean algorithm is a agglomerative procedure clustering a great number of comparative smaller subsets and sub clusters, and semi- supervised learning algorithm is a procedure that firstly obtain the labeled cluster as cluster center by using association rule mining algorithm, secondly calculate the relative interconnectivity and comparability among all the subsets or sub clusters, and decide the class attributes of all the subsets or sub cluster, finally agglomerate.

6. Experiment and Results  The data source came from the database of Secondly General Soil Survey Database of Guangdong Province [14], and 16652 records of samples were selected, which were related to the agricultural resources. According to  the characters of land resource of Guangdong province and based on other scholars? achievement [14], we  selected six evaluation factors: altitude (EL), slope gradient (SL), soil pH (pH), organic matter content (OM), soil texture (TE), and land utilization type (LU), where EL, SL, pH and OM are quantitative attributes, and LU and TE are nominal attributes which are also called categorical attributes. In addition, classification of soil resource quality was used as class label attribute.

According to the actual circumstance of soil resource of Guangdong province, the total area is 1.736540E+5 km2. Since the evaluation results of fuzzy variable weight method have better accordance with actual conditions through actual surveys and validations [14, 15], we utilize the evaluation results as corresponding soil quality grades of the soil resource samples. According to the evaluation method, Classification of soil resource quality could be mainly classified, from high quality to low quality, into 4 subsets: Class ?, Class ?, Class ?, Class ?. Table 1 describes the number of records and area distribution of all the classification subsets.

Results of land evaluation method combining simplified association rules with k-mean are shown as Table 2. In order to compare the results with different algorithms, the correct rate of quantity and area is collected statistics. In the first line of Table 2, ?The amount of training samples? denotes the amount of training samples chosen randomly in the soil resource database; "Algorithm" denotes the algorithm which selected to train the training samples; "Quantity" denotes the quantity evaluated correctly of the classes; "Area" denotes the area evaluated correctly of the classes; "Accuracy of quantity" and "Accuracy of area" denote percentage of corresponding quantity and area to the database. For instance, while setting the amount of training samples is 100, k-mean algorithm is selected, 11194 samples and 1.179501E+5 kmP2P are evaluated  correctly, take 67.2231% and 67.9225% percentage of total quantity and total area respectively.

Table 2 The results of Guangdong Province land resource evaluation using three algorithms with different amount of  training samples chosen randomly The amount of training samples  Algorithm Quantity Accuracy of quantity  Area?km2? Accuracy of area    k-mean 11194 67.2231% 1.179501E+5 67.9225% Support vector machine 12378 74.3334% 1.291219E+5 74.3558%  Semi-supervised learning algorithm 13434 80.6750% 1.398731E+5 80.5470%   k-mean 12173 73.1023% 1.274823E+5 73.4116%  Support vector machine 12821 76.9938% 1.405123E+5 80.9451% Semi-supervised learning algorithm 13890 83.4143% 1.520165E+5 87.5399%    k-mean 12162 73.0363% 1.305287E+5 75.1659% Support vector machine 13606 81.7079% 1.430882E+5 82.3984%  Semi-supervised learning algorithm 14508 87.1247% 1.554453E+5 89.5143%      The experimental results of Table 2 indicate that while setting amount of training samples  are equal to 100, 200 and 300, total samples are tested by the algorithm of semi-supervised learning algorithm , the accuracy of area are 80.5470%, 87.5399% and 89.5143%, respectively.

The quantity of training samples increases with increasing the accuracy of semi-supervised learning algorithm, which is logical to the truth. The experimental results also indicate that the semi-supervised learning algorithm based on simplified association rules combining with k-mean is resultful to improve the efficiency and intelligibility of association rules, reduce dependence on experience of land evaluation domain, and a satisfactory accuracy can be obtained.

Conclusion  This paper presents a semi-supervised learning algorithm based on simplified association rules combining with k-mean and its application in land evaluation.

The method of extracting association rules which contains continuous-valued, discrete-valued, miss-valued and nominal-valued attributes is proposed, and the method of simplifying the association rules, too.

Semi-supervised learning algorithm provides a high precision of accuracy; experimental results of Guangdong Province land resource demonstrate that, by only using 500 training samples chosen randomly, 89.5143% correct area rate of land evaluation could be obtained by the semi-supervised learning algorithm. It provides a higher precision with the accuracy improved by 14.3484%, comparing with the results of the method k-mean and 7.1159% comparing with the results of the method support vector machine in the same condition.

Acknowledgements  Project supported by the South China Agricultural University Principal Foundation Projects, China (No.

2007K017).

