

Abstract? An important task in data analysis is the understanding of unexpected or atypical behaviors in a group of individuals. Which categories of individuals earn the higher salaries or, on the contrary, which ones earn the lower salaries?

We present the problem of how data concerning atypical groups can be mined compared with a target quantitative attribute, like for instance the attribute "salary", and in particular for the high and low values of a user-defined interval. Our search therefore focuses on conjunctions of attributes whose distribution differs significantly from the learning set for the interval?s high and low values of the target attribute. Such atypical groups can be found by adapting an existing measure, the intensity of inclination. This measure frees us from the transformation step of quantitative attributes, that is to say the step of discretization followed by a complete disjunctive coding. Thus, we propose an algorithm for mining such groups using pruning rules in order to reduce the complexity of the problem. This algorithm has been developed and integrated into the WEKA software for knowledge extraction. Finally we give an example of data extraction from the American census database IPUMS.

Keywords? Quantitative associations, interestingness measures, negative and positive associations.



I.  INTRODUCTION An important task in data analysis is the understanding of  unexpected or atypical behaviors in a group of individuals.

Which categories of individuals earn the higher salaries or, on the contrary, which ones earn the lower salaries?

Our purpose is to detect automatically each group of individuals that stand out significantly from the behavior of the learning set for a quantitative attribute and in particular for the interval?s high and low values given by the user. Our search therefore focuses on conjunctions of attributes whose distribution differs significantly from the learning set for the interval?s high and low values of the target attribute.

A closely related area to our work is association rule mining [1]. Association rules are relations between attributes of the form X?Y. In market basket data, X and Y are items such as cider or pancakes and in categorical data, X and Y are attribute- value pairs such as income>20K? or occupation=?manager?.

The problem of discovering association rules can be broken down into two subproblems : (1) finding all sets of items (itemsets) or attribute-value pairs that have transaction support  above a given minimum. These sets are called frequent itemsets. (2) generating for each frequent itemset, all rules that have minimum confidence. To detect these atypical groups, we look not for only frequent itemsets (in order to extract interestingness groups) but also for itemsets whose support is statistically surprising that is to say significantly low or, on the contrary, significantly high compared to what could be expected. In so doing, we add a new semantics to our associations : we seek itemsets whose support is significantly different from that of the learning set (i.e.  groups of individuals that stand out significantly from the behaviour of the learning set). We propose a new objective measure for extracting surprising itemsets based on an existing measure : the intensity of inclination [2] used for mining ordinal association rules. This measure prunes out the transformation step of quantitative attributes (i.e. the discretization step followed by the step of complete disjunctive coding). Most of the extensions of association rules to quantitative data require a discretization of the quantitative attributes [3] [4] [5]. Srikant and Agrawal in [3] have proposed a technique for automatic discretization and for merging narrow intervals into wider ones.

Zhang et. al. in [4] use clustering methods to improve the partitioning of quantitative attributes. However, these methods can only approximate the best rules and cannot decide with certainty which rules are true associations and which are just artefacts of discretization. Ludl and Widmer in [6] and Bay in [7] have proved that a discretization without taking the context into account i.e. their association with the other attributes can lead us to non-optimal solutions. Thus, Mehta and Parthasarathy in [8] have proposed a contextual discretization.

We present a novel approach that works directly on quantitative attributes, without the need for any discretization.

A weight will be attributed for each transaction, and the closer the transaction corresponds to the given criterion, the higher this weight will be, as in the case for example of, high wage earners. Another approach that has similarities with our method is the technique of fuzzy sets because the attribution of a weight to each transaction can be compared with a degree of membership. Kuok et. al. in [9], Zhang in [10] and Subramanyam and Goswami in [11] uses the technique of fuzzy sets for mining quantitative rules. This technique also requires partitioning the set of values of quantitative attributes into intervals. However, a transaction can belong to more than      one interval thanks to a membership function valued in the real unit interval [0,1]. Our method doesn?t require discretization and uses the quantitative attribute as a whole. It allows us to obtain a global and synthetic view of the behavior of attributes without going into greater detail. It is a fact that not all the mined associations are of equal interest for the user and we think that a general search is sufficient at first. This can then be followed by a closer examination of the association if the user so decides [12].

The proposed measure for discovering atypical groups is a statistical measure, which makes a comparaison with the expected situation and then evaluates whether this difference is significant. Brin et. al. in [13] have introduced a variation of categorical association rules based on relating to associations as statistically interesting correlations. They have used the chi- square test of independence. The difference between using the intensity of inclination test and a chi-square test of independence is that the chi-square test evaluates the mean of differences between observed and expected situations for each value of the attribute, whereas the intensity of inclination test focuses on a given zone of the attribute as for example the high values.

The main contributions of our paper are as follows : 1. We propose an algorithm to mine a new semantics of  itemsets : conjunctions of attributes verifying a significantly high support or, on the contrary, significantly low for a zone- defined by the user discarding the discretization and complete disjunctive coding steps for quantitative variables.

2. We propose a new interestingness measure for sets of qualitative and quantitative attributes which is an adaptation form of the intensity of inclination.

3. We present an evaluation of our proposed solutions on IPUMS to show their feasibility. Federal Census data is a difficult data set for most mining algorithms because there are many frequent and long itemsets.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we define precisely the meaning of these atypical groups and in section 3, we present the interestingness measure and its adaptation which allows us to extract these groups. In section 4, we introduce two criteria which allow us to extract interestingness atypical groups, criteria which are then used for decreasing the complexity of the problem as described in section 5 where we expose the algorithm. In section 6, our technique is evaluated using the American census database IPUMS and we conclude with a summary and further work.



II. ATYPICAL GROUPS In this section, we define the meaning of atypical groups,  that is to say groups which are significantly over-represented or, on the contrary, significantly under-represented for a zone of the user-defined target attribute.

It seemed interesting to us to give the user the possibility of studying this quantitative attribute over a particular interval for several reasons. First, it permits us to remove the undefined values associated with this attribute, due to typing errors or to indicate that the value can not be filled in. Then, it permits us to remove the exceptional people that present very high or very  low values for the target variable and whose presence might bias the results. For instance, if doing a study concerning salaries, it is preferable to remove the extremely wealthy individuals, like for example the author of the tales of a famous young wizard. Finally, it enables us to study a particular segment of the learning set, as for instance a study about average wage earners.

Then, our study focuses on a quantitative target attribute Z and more particularly on the zone of interest Z = [z1, z2].

Let M be a conjunction of attributes called itemsets. Two kinds of itemsets are of interest : (1) qualitative itemsets X, that is to say itemsets only composed of attributes where a complete disjunctive coding step has been successfully completed (i.e. attribute-value pairs such as occupation = ?manager?) and (2) quantitative itemsets XY, that is to say qualitative itemsets X associated with a conjunction of quantitative attributes Y, quantitative attributes where no transformation step has been carried out. We also assimilate quantitative attributes Y (quantitative attributes where no transformation step has been carried out) with quantitative itemsets. In this paper, we are interested in associations between itemsets M and our target attribute Z = [z1, z2]. We call targeted association, the conjunction between itemset M and our target interval Z = [z1, z2]. We note this targeted association as : ZM in order to simplify its writing. When the itemset M=X is qualitative, we will say that the targeted association ZX is qualitative, and when the itemset M=XY is quantitative, we will say that the targeted association ZXY is quantitative.

When we calculate the support of an itemset M [14], each transaction verifying the itemset has the same importance. We are interested in targeted associations ZM, where no transformation step has been carried out with the attribute Z.

We would like to discover categories of subjects that have a significantly high support or, on the contrary, a significantly low support, for the two zones of the interval of Z : the high and low values of this interval. To reach this goal, a weight has been attributed to each transaction : the closer the transaction corresponds to the expected criterion, the greater the weight is. For example in the case of ?earn a high income? the closer individuals are to verifying a high value for the attribute ?wage?, the greater the weight will be. Thus, we propose two new support measures : a positive support which is interesting for the high values of the interval of Z and a negative support which is interesting for the low values of the interval of Z.

Let ? be the learning set and ei be a transaction (or individual) of the learning set. Let ( ) ??== iezzZC ],[ 21  be the set  of transactions verifying a value for the attribute Z between z1 and z2 and ( ) ??ieX  be the set of transactions verifying the qualitative itemset X. Let zi be the value taken by the transaction ei for the target attribute Z and xi be the value taken by the transaction ei for the qualitative attribute X (xi = 1 if the transaction ei verifies the itemset X, xi = 0 otherwise).

Definition 1. The positive support ),(supAbs 2zZX  of targeted qualitative association ZX is the weighted absolute      support of the itemset X in the set C where the closer the value for transactions in Z to z2, the greater the weight is.

?? ???  ?== ?? Ce  ii XCe  i iiei  xzz)-z(zzZX )(),(supAbs 1 )(    Definition 2. The negative support ),(supAbs 1zZX  of targeted qualitative association ZX is the weighted absolute support of the itemset X in the set C where the closer the value for transactions in Z to z1, the greater the weight is.

?? ???  ?== ?? Ce  ii XCe  i iiei  xzz)-z(zzZX )(),(supAbs 2 )(    In the case of a targeted quantitative association ZXY, we have additional information : values taken by transactions of the set ( ) CX  ie ?  ??  for this quantitative attribute Y. We are also  interested in the high and low values taken by this attribute Y because we are not seeking to perform a transformation step on quantitative attributes. These concepts of negative and positive support lead us respectively to two new notions : support (positive or negative) for the low values of Y and support (positive or negative) for the high values of Y. Unlike the target attribute Z where the user can specify an interest zone [z1, z2], we cannot define a study area for the other quantitative attributes Y associated with Z.

Definition 3. The positive support of a targeted  quantitative association ZXY is the weighted absolute support of itemset XY in the set C where greater weight is given not only to transactions which have a value for Z close to z2 but also to those which have  - a high value for Y (targeted association ZXY+), - a low value for Y (targeted association ZXY-).

)()(),(supAbs min )(  12 yyzzzZXY i XCe  i iei  ??=+ ? ????    )()(),(supAbs max )(  12 i XCe  i yyzzzZXY iei  ??=? ? ????    with yi being the value taken by transaction ei for attribute Y. In the case where Y is a conjunction Y1..Yj..Yh of quantitative attributes, yi is equal to the sum of normalized values taken by each quantitative attribute Yj (see definition of intensity of inclination in section 3).

Definition 4. The negative support of targeted quantitative association ZXY is the weighted absolute support of itemset XY in the set C where greater weight is given not only to transactions which have a value for Z close to z1 but also to those which have  - a high value for Y (targeted association ZXY+), - a low value for Y (targeted association ZXY-).

)()(),(supAbs min )(  21 yyzzzZXY i XCe  i iei  ??=+ ? ????    )()(),(supAbs max )(  21 i XCe  i yyzzzZXY iei  ??=? ? ????     Our goal is to find all G groups (qualitative and  quantitative) where one absolute supports s0 = supAbs(ZM,z) (see definitions 1 to 4) differs significantly from the expected support that is to say from the calculated support under an  assumption of independence between itemset M and the interest zone of the target attribute Z. By atypical group we mean, any group which has an absolute support that differs significantly from the expected one.

Let S be the random variable whose s0 is an absolute support and ? be the type I error (also known as an error of the first kind, which is the error of rejecting a null hypothesis when it is actually true).

Definition 5. A group G (qualitative or quantitative) is atypical if one of its absolute supports s0 differs significantly from the expected one, that is to say when one of these two conditions is verified : condition 1 : Pr(S ? s0) ? 1 - ? condition 2 : Pr(S ? s0) ? ?   According to the verified condition, we will speak of  positive atypical group (condition 1) or negative atypical group (condition 2).

Now, we will define the measure for extracting these atypical groups. It is a new measure based on an existing measure : intensity of inclination.



III. MEASURE In this section we first remind the reader of the definition  of intensity of inclination, a measure allowing implications between conjunctions of quantitative variables to be mined [2] and then we show how this measure has been adapted and extended to detect atypical groups.

A. Intensity of Inclination In this section we give a more general definition to the  attribute Z : it is a conjunction of quantitative attributes. Let Z and Y be respectively two conjunctions of p and q quantitative attributes. We suppose that Z = Z1 , .. , Zp and Y = Y1 , .. , Yq, where Z1 , .. , Zp , Y1 , .. , Yq are quantitative attributes taking values  i1 z , .. ,  ip z ,  i1 y , .. ,  iq y  (i?{1..N}) respectively in  intervals ]..[ maxmin 11  zz , .. , ]..[ maxmin pp zz , ]..[ maxmin 11 yy , .. ,  ]..[ maxmin qq  yy .

Intensity of inclination evaluates whether the number of  transactions not strongly verifying the rule Z?Y (i.e. the number of transactions verifying simultaneously a high value for each attribute Z1, .., Zp and a low value for each attribute Y1, .., Yq) is significantly small compared to the expected number of transactions under the assumption that Z and Y are independent. These transactions that do not strongly verify the rule are called negative transactions.

Let zi and yi be respectively values taken by attributes Z and Y in the database ? for transaction ei (ei?? ) and let zmin and ymax be respectively the minimum and maximum values taken by variables Z and Y.

The number t0 of negative transactions, or raw measure of non-inclination, is defined by:  ? =  = N  i iio )-y)(y-z(zt  maxmin  with      ? =  = p  j ji i  zz  ' , ? =  = p  j jzz  min min  ' , ? =  = q  k ki iyy  ' , ?  =  = q  k kyy  max max  ' ,  j  ji  i Z  Zj j  z z  ? ??  =' (j?{1..p}),  k  ki  i Y  Yk k  y y  ? ??  ='  (k?{1..q})  Let jZ?  and kY?  be respectively the means of attributes Zj  (j?{1, .., ,p}) and Yk (k?{1, .., ,q}) and let jZ?  and kY?  be respectively the standard deviations of Zj and Yk.

The random variable T, whose t0 is an observed value, can be approximated asymptotically by a normal distribution  N (?,? ) with ? = N (?Z  - zmin )(ymax - ?Y ) and ? ? = N [vZ vY  + vY (?Z - zmin)? + vZ (ymax - ?Y )?].

The means and variances of attributes Z and Y are given by the following expressions :  ? =  = p  j ZZ j   ?? , ? =  = q  k YY k  ?? , ? ??  ?  = +==  +=  1 1' '  ),cov(2  p  j  p  jj jj  p  j ZZ ZZvv j  and  ? ?? ?  = +==  +=  1 1' '   ),cov(2 q  k  q  kk kk  q  k YY YYvv k  with ''),cov( ' iiii ZZZZii ZZ ??? ?= .

If the probability Pr( T ? to ) of having a number inferior or equal to to is high, we can say that to is not significantly small because this occurrence can happen fairly frequently and then this implication Z ? Y is not relevant.

To evaluate this implication in increasing order, the measure ? ( Z ? Y )= 1- F(to) = Pr(T > to)  has been retained where F is the cumulative distribution of T. Then, the implication Z ? Y can be admitted with a level of confidence (1-? ) if and only if Pr(T ? to) ? ?  or Pr(T > to) ? 1-?.

The intensity of inclination is given by : ( )  ? +? ??  =?     t  ? t  dte ?  Y)(Z ? ?  ? ?  Thus the intensity of inclination evaluates the ?smallness? of the number of negative transactions as compared with independence. To do this, the measure calculates the sum of weights for all transactions in the database, weight being given by the raw measure of non-inclination. This weight is greatest for transactions verifying Z = zmax and Y = ymin (corresponding perfectly to the concept of negative transactions) and decreases until it is equal to zero for transactions verifying Z = zmin or Y = ymax.

B. Mining Atypical Groups First, in this section we show how the intensity of  inclination has been used in a straightforward way for extracting qualitative atypical groups. However, for mining quantitative atypical groups, it is necessary to carry out a further measure.

Mining Qualitative Atypical Groups.

The intensity of inclination evaluates the ?smallness? of the value t0 as compared to what could be expected under the assumption that Z and Y are independent. Thus, we can use this measure to directly detect if the support supAbs(ZX,z1) is significantly low with the set C as learning set. The  ?smallness? of the support will be significant if ?(X?Z) ? (1- ?).

Now to know if this absolute support supAbs(ZX,z1) is significantly high, we must verify that the complement to 1 of the value of the intensity of inclination ?(X?Z) can be admitted with a level of confidence (1-? ). A high support supAbs(ZX,z1) will be significant if 1-?(X?Z) ? (1-?).

Table 1 summarizes formulas of the intensity of inclination for detecting qualitative atypical groups.

TABLE I.  ADAPTATION OF THE INTENSITY OF INCLINATION FOR EXTRACTING QUALITATIVE ATYPICAL GROUPS  Negative atypical Positive atypical supAbs(ZX,z1) ?(X?Z) ? (1-?) 1-?(X?Z) ? (1-?) supAbs(ZX,z2) ?(Z?1-X) ? (1-?) 1-?(Z?1-X) ? (1-?)   Mining Quantitative Atypical Groups.

The use of the intensity of inclination for mining  quantitative atypical groups is not straightforward because we have an extra attribute : the qualitative attribute X. Thus, we have to extend the definition of the intensity of inclination in order to use it.

Extension of the intensity of inclination Let Y and Z be two conjunctions of quantitative attributes  that take their values respectively in intervals [ymin, ymax] and [zmin, zmax]. Let X be a qualitative attribute. Let xi, yi and zi be respectively values taken by transaction ei for attributes X, Y and Z. Let N be the number of transactions in the learning set ?. Let ?X, ?Y and ?Z be respectively the means of attributes X, Y and Z and let vX, vY and vZ be respectively the standard deviations of attributes X, Y and Z.

The raw measure is defined by:  i  N  i ii  N  i ii u)-z(zx)-y)(y-z(zt ??  == ==  min  maxmin0'    The random variable T?, whose t?0 is an observed value, can be approximated asymptotically by a normal distribution N (??,?? ) with ?? = N (?Z  - zmin )?U  and ?? ? = N [vZ vU  + vU (?Z - zmin)? + vZ (?U )?].

with ?U = (ymax - ?Y )?X and vU = [vX vY  + vX (ymax - ?Y)? + vY (?X )?].

If the probability Pr( T? ? t?o ) of having a number inferior or equal to t?o is high, we can say that t?o is not significantly small because this occurrence can happen fairly frequently.

In order to evaluate the ?smallness? of this difference in increasing order, the measure ??(Z?XY) = Pr(T? > t?o) can be used. Thus, the ?smallness? of this difference can be admitted with a level of confidence (1-? ) if and only if Pr(T? ? t?o) ? ? or Pr(T? > t?o) ? 1-?.

Thus, the extended intensity of inclination is given by :  ( )  ? +? ??  =?   '   1'  t  ? t  dte ?  XY)(Z ? ?  ? ?  and the ?smallness? of this difference is significant if ??(Z?XY) ? 1-?.

Application of the extension of the intensity of inclination We can use this extension of the measure to directly detect if the support supAbs(ZXY-,z2) is significantly low with the set C as learning set.

ii Ce  i xyyzzzZXY i  )()(),(supAbs max12 ??=? ? ?    The ?smallness? of this support is significant if ??(Z?XY) ? (1-?).

In the same way as for qualitative atypical groups, this support will be significantly high if the complement to 1 of the value of the intensity of inclination ??(Z?XY) can be admitted with a level of confidence (1-? ). A high support supAbs(ZXY-,z2) will be significant if 1-??(X?Z) ? (1-?).

Table 2 summarizes formulas of the extension of the intensity of inclination for detecting quantitative atypical groups.

TABLE II.  FORMULAS OF THE EXTENSION OF THE INTENSITY OF INCLINATION FOR DETECTING QUANTITATIVE ATYPICAL GROUPS  Negative atypical Positive atypical supAbs(ZXY-,z2) ??(Z?XY) 1-??(Z?XY) supAbs(ZXY+,z2) ??(Z?X(ymax+ymin-Y)) 1-??(Z?X(ymax+ymin-Y)) supAbs(ZXY-,z1) ??(X(ymax+ymin-Y)?Z) 1-??(X(ymax+ymin-Y) ?Z) supAbs(ZXY+,z1) ??(XY?Z) 1-??(XY?Z)

IV. INTERESTINGNESS ATYPICAL GROUPS We have exposed the concept of atypical groups and how  we have adapted and extended the intensity of inclination to extract them. Now we define two criteria that allow us to discover interestingness atypical groups.

The first criterion allows us to extract noteworthy atypical groups (frequent atypical groups) and the second one ensures that each extracted atypical group brings new information (informative atypical groups).

Frequent atypical groups.

The first criterion, criterion 1, ensures that the atypical group is noteworthy that is to say composed of a minimum number of transactions. By analogy with the definition of frequent itemsets (Agrawal et al., 1996), we call these groups, frequent atypical groups.

Criterion 1. Let s1 be the user-defined threshold called the minimum support. An atypical group G is said to be frequent when, the associated qualitative itemset X is frequent, that is to say if Pr(X/Z) ? s1.

Informative atypical groups.

The second criterion, criterion 2, ensures that each extracted atypical group is informative that is to say it gives new information that may not occur with a more general atypical group.

In order to define this criterion, we need to introduce the concept of general or super-group.

Definition 6. Let M and M? be respectively the associated itemsets with groups G and G?. Group G is a super-group of group G? if M ? M? that is to say if the itemset M is included  in the itemset M?. We also can say that group G? is a subgroup of G.

Thus, for instance, the itemset M=(sex=?female?) is included in the itemset M?=(sex=?female?)?(occupation=?manager?).

From now on, each name of a group followed by an apostrophe means that it is a subgroup, i.e. a group whose associated itemset is composed of at least two attributes.

Extracting uninteresting positive atypical groups G? (respectively negative) can occur when one of its super-groups is highly over-represented (respectively highly under- represented) for the studied zone of the target attribute. We give the example of professional people, who have studied for many years, and therefore are highly over-represented in the zone of high values of the attribute ?education?. Any itemset associated with the itemset occupation=?professional?, as for instance the itemset sex=?female?, will add no new information because this new group G? (professional women) is a subset of professional people. We can formalize the discovery of informative atypical groups as follows :  Definition 7. Let s2 be a user-defined maximum support.

The positive atypical group (respectively negative) G? is  informative as compared with a zone z of the target attribute Z if none of its positive G super-groups (respectively negative) are highly over-represented (respectively highly under- represented) in this same zone, that is to say don?t have a support which is superior (respectively inferior) to a given threshold s2 :  Positive group : ? M ? M? supAbs(ZM, z) ? s2 Negative group : ? M ? M? supAbs(ZM, z) ? s2  According to the studied zone, we have two possible  supports : supAbs(ZM,z1) for the zone of low values of the target interval and supAbs(ZM,z2) for the zone of high values.

When itemset M is a quantitative itemset (M=XY), we have two new supports : the support supAbs(ZXY+, z) for high values for Y and the support supAbs(ZXY-, z) for low values for Y.

After defining these two criteria which allow us to extract interestingness groups, we expose how we have used them for pruning the search area for itemsets.



V. ALGORITHM In this section, we present our algorithm for mining  positive interestingness atypical groups for the interval?s high values of the target attribute. We can easily transpose this search to the following: (1) mining positive interestingness atypical groups for the interval?s low values and (2) mining negative interestingness atypical groups for the interval?s high and low values.

Figure 1 shows our algorithm for mining positive interestingness atypical groups. The algorithm is based on the Apriori algorithm [14] and more particularly on the first step : extraction of frequent itemsets. The input for our algorithm is : the database where a complete disjunctive coding has been      realized on the qualitative attributes, the target quantitative attribute Z, the interval [z1, z2], the type I error ?, the minimum and maximum support. The algorithm returns the set of positive interestingness atypical groups for the user-defined zone.

We use an Apriori-like algorithm [14] and our algorithm visits the lattice of itemsets in a level-wise fashion and uses the anti-monotone property of support and property 1 described below to eliminate large portions of the search area.

Like the Apriori algorithm, the complexity of our algorithm has linear complexity with the same number of multiple passes on the database but exponential complexity with respect to the number of attributes.

This property 1 uses criterion 2 presented in section 4, which tells us that if itemset M is highly frequent (respectively highly unfrequent) for a given zone z then each group G? associated with an over-itemset M? will be not informative.

Algorithm Input : data, target quantitative attribute Z, interval [z1, z2],  type I error ?, minimum support s1 and maximum support s2.

Output : set of positive interestingness atypical groups or set of itemsets associated with groups.

BEGIN //(1) Calculation of frequent qualitative itemsets Xi of level 1 LC1={Xi / support(Xi) ? s1 and |Xi|=1} //(2) Calculation of itemsets M whose associated G(M) group is a positive atypical group LAC1={Xi / Xi?LC1 and 1-?(Z? 1-Xi,) ? (1-?)} LAQ1={Yi(+/-) / 1-?(Z? Yi) ? (1-?) or  1-?(Z?(ymax+ymin-Yi)) ? (1-?)} //(3) Detection of highly frequent itemsets Xi and Yi(+/-) LPC1={Xi / Xi? LAC1 and supAbs(ZXi, z2) ? s2} LPQ1={Yi(+/-) / Yi(+/-)? LAQ1 and supAbs(ZYi(+/-), z2) ? s2} k=2 While LCk-1 < > ? do  //(4) Generation of candidate level k itemsets CCk={Xi / |Xi|=k} from LCk-1 \ LPCk-1 LQk={XiYi(+/-) / |Xi| ? k-1, 1 ? |Yi(+/-)| ? k and | XiYi(+/-) | = k} from LCm-1 \ LPCm-1 (m ? k) and LACn \ LPQn (n ? k) //(5) Calculation of frequent qualitative level k itemsets LCk={Xi / Xi?CCk and support(Xi) ? s1} //(6) Calculation of itemsets M whose associated G(M)  group is a positive atypical group LACk={Xi / Xi?LCk and 1-?(Z? 1-Xi,) ? (1-?)} LAQk={XiYi(+/-) / XiYi(+/-)?LQk and 1-??(Z? XiYi) ? (1-?) or 1-??(Z? Xi(ymax+ymin-Yi)) ? (1-?)} //(7) Detection of highly frequent itemsets LPCk={Xi / Xi?LACk and supAbs(ZXi,+) ? s2} k=k+1  End While Return )(..1 iiki LAQLAC ?=? END  Figure 1.  Algorithm for mining positive interestingness atypical groups for the interval?s high values of the target quantitative attribute Z.

Property 1.

Positive group : if supAbs(ZM, z) ? s2 then ? M? M ? M? G?(M?) is not informative Negative group : if supAbs(ZM, z) ? s2 then ? M? M ? M? G?(M?) is not informative   First, the algorithm searches for more general positive  atypical groups that is to say groups whose associated itemset is composed of one attribute (see steps 1 to 3). Step 1 extracts frequent qualitative itemsets. Step 2 mines positive atypical groups from frequent qualitative and quantitative attributes.

Step 3 detects highly frequent itemsets (see criterion 2 in section 4) which will then be discarded from the set of frequent itemsets used for generating candidate itemsets.

Then, steps 4 to 7 extract interestingness positive atypical subgroups and these four steps will be repeated for each k level (a k level represents the searching for itemsets composed of k attributes) until the set of lower level frequent qualitative itemsets is equal to the empty set (because we will not be  able to generate candidat itemsets). Step 4 generates simustaneously : (1) candidate qualitative itemsets (as in the Apriori algorithm) from lower level frequent itemsets deprived of highly frequent itemsets, and (2) candidate quantitative itemsets composed of at least one quantitative attribute not highly frequent and one frequent qualitative itemset also not highly frequent. Step 5 calculates frequent qualitative itemsets from candidate itemsets found in step 4. Step 6 extracts interestingness positive atypical groups from frequent qualitative itemsets found in step 5 and from candidate quantitative itemsets found in step 4. Step 7 detects highly frequent itemsets in the set of qualitative itemsets in order to discard them from the set of frequent qualitative itemsets which generate upper level candidate itemsets.

Our algorithm has been implemented in Java and integrated into the WEKA (Waikato Environnement for Knowledge Analysis) software for knowledge extraction [15].



VI. EXPERIMENTATIONS Our technique is evaluated using the American census  database IPUMS 99 (Integrated Public Use Microdata Series).

Federal Census data is a difficult data set for most mining algorithms because there are many frequent and long itemsets.

The IPUMS data is available from the UCI KDD archive [16].

The IPUMS data consists of 88 443 transactions described by 61 attributes including 29 quantitative attributes. The complete disjunctive coding step of qualitative attributes has returned 772 attributes. We have focused our study on the target quantitative attribute : ?wage?. Values taken by this attribute are in the interval [0, 999 999]. However 23,98% of transactions verify the value 999 999. This percentage doesn?t reflect reality : it is a value by default for transactions where this attribute ?wage? has no significance. That is why, we have choosen the following interval [0, 195 516] to identify atypical groups : 195 516 is the value immediately inferior to 999 999.

The parameters were set as follows : type I error was equal to 0.05 and the minimum support was equal to 0.01.

These associations reveal that atypical groups in the class of persons earning a high wage are as follows : Qualitative atypical groups : - Men are over-represented, on the contrary, women are under- represented.

- However, men who belong to the following three occupational categories : ?truck and tractor drivers? and ?operative and kindred workers? are under-represented, whereas women who belong to the following three occupational categories : ?teachers?, ?managers, officials and proprietors? and ?stenographers, typists and secretaries? are over-represented.

- We also learn that men who are divorced and born in either ?California? or ?Central America? are under-represented whereas women who are divorced and born in ?California? are over-represented.

- ?never married? men, born in ?Mexico? and living in ?California? are under-represented.

- Individuals whose educational attainment is ?1 to 3 years of college? or ?4+ years of college? are over-represented whereas the other levels (?none or preschool?, ?grade 1-4?, ?grade 5- 8?, ?grade 9?, ?grade 10? and ?grade 11?) are under- represented.

- However, we learn that individuals whose educational attainment is ?1 to 3 years of college? and either ?widowed? or ?single? or born in ?Mexico? are under-represented whereas individuals whose the educational attainment is ?grade 11? and either ?veteran status= yes? or ?labor force status = yes? or ?employement status = employed? are , on the contrary, over-represented.

Quantitative atypical groups : - The higher the ?total personal income?, the higher the wage.

- The higher the ?number of own siblings in household?, the lower the wage.

- Households with a ?number of children under age 5? near to 5 are over-represented.

- The older the head of the family, the higher the wage when he was born in ?Missouri?, whereas the older the head of the family, the lower the wage when he was born in ?Central America?.

- If  the household is a home-owner, and the head of the family was born in ?Mexico?, and if the ?total personal income? of the household is either low, or high, in both cases, the two corresponding groups (low and high total income) are under- represented.



VII. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK In this paper, we have proposed a technique for extracting  interestingness atypical groups for a target quantitative attribute, and in particular for the high and low values of a user-defined interval. This method reveals a new semantics of itemsets : conjunctions of attributes verifying a significantly high support or, on the contrary, significantly low for a user- defined zone that is to say, conjunctions of attributes having a  behavior which is different from the learning set. The proposed measure for mining these associations discards the discretization and complete disjunctive coding steps for quantitative variables and has the following advantages : (1) it eliminates errors associated with a priori discretization and (2) it provides a global view of associations and thus the generated knowledge for this kind of attribute is not parsed.

The user defines a study interval for the target quantitative attribute and it could be interesting to propose a technique which automatically detects the best zones where the group is particularly atypical. Also, another input parameter could be proposed : a reference set, not necessary the learning set, and all groups having a similar or different behavior could be mined.

