Association Rule Mining on Spatio-temporal

Abstract?Entities in the real world evolve along the time-line  from the start time point to the future in multi-dimensions space.

The spatio-temporal process composed of meta-spatio-temporal  processes, is bought out and used to describe this change process.

The traditional association rule mining is extended to spatio-  temporal processes, generating spatio-temporal process  association rule mining which is used to extract association  knowledge among spatio-temporal process data. Change  processes of the western Pacific Ocean warm pool and rainfall of  southeast area of China are the typical spatio-temporal processes,  and relation between them is a remote relation. Based on spatio-  temporal process association rule mining, we obtain some  interesting association rules between change processes of them.

Finally, it is concluded that spatio-temporal association rule  mining can extract valuable association knowledge from spatio-  temporal processes, and change trend of one entity or  phenomenon can be forecasted through varying trend of others based on those association rules.

Keywords-GIS; data mining; association rule; spatio-temporal  process; spatio-temporal process association rule

I. INTRODUCTION  A spatial association rule is a rule which describes the implication of one or a set of features by another set of features in a spatial database [1]. Spatial association rule mining is a fundamental mission of the spatial data mining [2]. Applying the spatial association rules, however, people find that they are correct in some certain time ranges, but conflict with real rules or phenomenon in other time ranges. Time is a significant factor which affects the correct ratio of spatial association rules. So, it is introduced into spatial association rule mining, then generating spatio-temporal association rule mining. Both the temporal and spatial dimensions add substantial complexity to association rule mining [3]. There are a few of research libraries on this topic at home and abroad at present [4, 5].

The attribute items involved in spatio-temporal association rule are static states of geographical objects such as location, area and so on, at some specific time points. But in the real world, geographical objects or phenomenon which are composed of the spatial states and non-spatial states existing at a serious time points, always varying along the time dimension.

A case in point, the warm pool center always moves between the southern hemisphere and the northern hemisphere along  ling or curve routes within one year. A spatio-temporal process which describes evolvements of a geographical object or spatial distribution patterns can reflect change trends of objects more systematically and detailedly. The overall goal of this paper is to bring out the spatio-temporal process and spatio- temporal process association rule improved from the spatial association rules which can find the unknown association knowledge among spatio-temporal process data.

Remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces basic concepts of spatio-temporal process and spatio-temporal process association rule. Section 3 presents spatio-temporal process of the western Pacific Ocean warm pool and rainfall of southeast areas of China and calculation approach of spatio-temporal process of them. Results and discussions are introduced in section 4. Finally, conclusions and future work are discussed.



II. SPATIO-TRMPORAL PROCESS ASSOCIATION RULES  A. Spatio-temporal process  Time and space, a pair of category, describe existence and change patterns of matter and energy. A spatio-temporal process is a certain multi-dimensions space in which characters of spatial objects or spatial phenomenon including states, spatial distribution patterns, spatial and non-spatial attributes, relation patterns between each other vary continually along the time dimension from the start time point to the end time point. The state of object or phenomenon at a specific time point is called spaio-temporal state. In another word, it reflects state information of the spatial objects or the real world at a time split in multi-dimensions space. Time in a spatio-temporal process has the direction and range. The evolution of a spatial object in multi-dimensions space along time dimension is a continuous process, which are composed of some spatio-temporal states at each time point, a division of time. The number of spatio-temporal state of a process depends on the size of time granularity and time step of a process. If the time granularity is small, change of the process is detail, but the volume of data is large; if time granularity is large, the volume of data is small, that loses the detail of change. So, the size of time granularity should be defined, according to application fields and the final purpose.

Figure 1. Spatio-temporal states and process  The figure 1 shows spatio-temporal states and change process of a spatial object in a multi-dimensions space. The A is spatial object. This process has three spatio-temporal states whose time points are T1, T2 and T2 respectively and T1 is the start time point, T3 is the end time point. Based on spatio- temporal process, we can discover continuous change and evolution trend of the object A in certain time range, instead of some discrete spatial and non-spatial attributes on some time points. The size of a spatio-temporal process which is described by space range and time range can be defined by change patterns of spatial and non-spatial attributes.

B. Basic concepts of spatio-temporal process  The spatio-temporal process is used to describe change of geographical object or phenomenon in a time range. Generally, we discriminates the object through spatial attributes, non- spatial attributes, relations with other objects and others indexes, meaning that an object can be measured using those indexes. Here, we describe the spatio-temporal process from bottom to top. The concept of meta-spatio-temporal process will be introduced as follow, firstly.

Definition1.  Mp is a meta-spatio-temporal process is made up of three components, vt, start time point, and length of time step.

Mp (vt, start-time, time-step)  The vt describes the change trend of a index from start time point to end time point (start time + time step). For example, the rainfall of Guangdong province increases from March to May in 2004. Except discrete value, continuous value also can be used to describe the change trend of the indexes. The price of commercial residential buildings in center of Beijing decreases 10% from May to June in 2007.

Definition2. Go is a spatio-temporal process which is composed of one or more meta-spatio-temporal processes and  all meta-spatio-temporal processes own the same start time  point and the same length of time step.

Go (Mp1, Mp2?Mpk-1, Mpk) Because the start time point and the length of time step of all meta-processes are the same, so it also can be replaced by the  follow definition, Go (vt1, vt2?vtk-1, vtk, start-time, time-step).

The change trend of a meta-spatio-temporal process is  general description of all spatio-temporal states in a time range.

The complexity of change trend depends on the number of spatio-temporal states and the final application target. Concept hierarchies [6] are used in previous work on spatial association [2] to facilitate presentation of knowledge at different levels.

Though we ascend the change trend more and more general, but it remains consistent with ones on the lower change level.

For example, rainfall of a region increases from March to April, decreases from April to May, increases from May to June, that is complex change process. However, if we only consider the rainfall in March and June, it becomes very simple, rainfall increases or decreases from March to June.

The change trend hierarchies can be explicitly given by the experts or they can be generated automatically by data analysis in some cases. At the same time, the data integrity and the application targets are also significant influencing factors of the choice of change trend hierarchies. So the spatio-temporal process also owns the different change trend hierarchies.

C. Spatio-temporal process associatin rule  The traditional association rule mining is improved and expanded to spatio-temporal process data mining, generating spatio-temporal process association rule mining which is used to extract spatio-temporal relations and coupling patterns. A spatio-temporal process association rule can be expression as follow.

Definition3. Spatio-temporal process association rule:  E F (t, c%, s %) Where E and F are sets of predicates composed of spatio-  temporal processes and meta-spatio-temporal processes. The intersection of E and F is null, s% and c% are the support and confidence of the rule, E F, respectively. The t is the time step. All the meta-spatio-temporal processes of a spatio- temporal object must be synchronization. The support,  denoted as P ( ), reflects coverage ratio of a rule in D, a mining database. The confidence, denoted as P (F/E), is the possibility that F is satisfied by a member of D when E is satisfied by the same member of D. A conjunction of k single spatio-temporal predicates is called a k-predicate, k >=1.

The spatio-temporal predicate implicates spatio-temporal relations which are conjunction of the spatial relations including the spatial topological relations, spatial direction relations and spatial distance relations, and the temporal relations including before, after, and synchronization. All predicates in a spatio-temporal association rule may own different start time point, but must have the same time step. For introduce of spatial and temporal relations, the predicate computation becomes very complex. In practical application, we should select the different spatio-temporal hierarchies according to the application field and final target.

This paper adds time factors into the traditional spatial relations forms a hierarchical structure for spatio-temporal relations. Through computing spatio-temporal processes predicates, we can gain spatio-temporal process transactions.

Then the normal association rule mining approaches can be used to extract spatio-temporal process association rules from those transaction data.



III. SPATIO-TEMPORAL PROCESS ASSOCIATION RULE MINING?S APPLICATION TO GEOGRAPHICAL PROCESSES  A. Westen PacificOcean warm pool and rainall of souhteast area of China  Now, there has not been any unified definition of the indexes for the warm pool. However the sea surface temperature (SST) is an important basic thermodynamic indicator to the warm pool. In this research, the western Pacific Ocean warm pool which distributes in the western and central  Pacific region in an area of about 20?1014  with SST at over  29 (in some research literatures, 28 )[7]. Because it is the warmest sea area, the energy change and interaction between the ocean and atmosphere is very strong at the warm pool area.

As shown in some studies, the general circulation and short- term climatic changes all are seriously affected thermodynamic condition changes in waters.

The Western pacific Subtropical High assuming an ellipse shape, whose long axis basically parallels with latitude circle, is warm dynamical systems, and locates over the western Pacific Ocean. Its location and strong degree affect the water vapour transport of southwest air current from the Indian Ocean and southeast air current from the Pacific Ocean, which are significant influencing factors of rainfall of southeast areas of China. At the same time, with north movement of the Western pacific Subtropical High, intersection of the north moving warm-wet air and south moving cold air flow brings rainfall weather. So, the western pacific Subtropical High is an important weather system influencing the weather of China, especially the southeast area of China.

The change of the western Pacific Ocean warm pool affects atmospheric motion and the Western Pacific Subtropical High, and they affect the rainfall of southeast areas of China. The relation between the western Pacific Ocean warm pool and rainfall of southeast areas of China is a sptio-temporal remote relation that is very complex and illegible. Because warm pool and rainfall change, both spatio-temporal processes, do not satisfy statistical independence hypothesis, it is very difficult to use conventional regress analyzing approaches explore the relation patterns between them. Guangdong province which locates at center of southeast area of China can reflect rainfall characters of that area, so it is used as indicator for the rainfall of southeast area of China.

B. Data source  The data sets used in this study are as follows:  ? (1) The monthly averaged reanalysis SST data at 1 1 resolution in the Pacific Ocean from 1951 to  1999 from Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research and others from 2000 to 2005 are from National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP).

? (2) The daily rainfall of each weather station in Guangdong province from 1951 to 2005 is from National Meteorological Information Center of China.

C. Measure indexes of the warm pool  In this research, the western Pacific Ocean warm pool is  defined sea area whose SST is over 29  in the western Pacific  Ocean with range from 120 E to 240 E, 25 S to 28 N. If the area of the warm pool exceeds this region in some specific months, only sea cells locating in the region are considered.

The area, geometric center, warm pool intensity and location of the hottest point are selected as indexes to describe changes of the warm pool. For the simpleness of calculation,  we use the number of sea cell whose SST is over 29  in the warm pool area as the warm pool area. The location of the hottest sea cell which reflect warm pool heat energy spatial distribution pattern.

The geometric center is calculated using the simple equation 1:  NyYNxX N  i  ic  N  i  ic  == ==   ;               (1)  The Xc and Yc are longitude and latitude coordinates of the warm pool geometric center. N is the number of the sea cell  whose SST is over 29 in the warm pool area. The xi and yi are longitude and latitude coordinates of ith sea cell.

The warm pool intensity is calculated using the simple equation 2:  == =  N  i  i  N  i  ii AATI  (2)  Ai is the area of sea cell i, Ti is average SST of cell i.

D. Spatio-temporal process calculation  The minimum time granularity of data is one month, so the time step of a spatio-temporal process is one or more months.

For brevity, we only use initial state and final state of a process to describe the change trend of a meta-spatio-temporal process, and detail change of each temporal interval between any adjacent time points in the process will be neglected. The change processes of rainfall, warm pool intensity and warm pool area main include, increasing process, decreasing process and invariant process. The change process of the warm pool center and the location of the hottest sea cell include northward movement, southward movement and static state.



IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS  As pointed out in the previous section, rich background knowledge and full understanding to the final mining target are very significant for a knowledge extraction project. In this research, we want to extract association knowledge between spatio-temporal processes of the western Pacific Ocean warm pool and rainfall of Guangdong province. The minimum time granularity is 1 month, meaning that the time range of a spatio- temporal process is only 1 or more months. And the spatio- temporal relation is the conjunction of the remote spatial and temporal relations which including different time delay. The final interesting spatio-temporal process association rules are shown in following table 1.

TABLE I. STRONG SPATIO-TEMPORAL PROCESS ASSOCIATION RULES  Antecedent predicates Consequent  predicates  Support  (%)  Confident  (%)  H_L_P = 0 RF_P(3) = 1 14.5 71.3  AREA_P = -1 and  WP_C_P = 1 RF_P(10) = 1  21.2 73.0  H_L_P = 1 and  WP_INTENSITY_P = 1  and WP_C_P = 1  RF_P(9) = 1 14.2 75.0  WP_INTENSITY_P = 1  and WP_C_P = 1 RF_P(9) = 1  24.3 69.4  H_L_P is the spatio-temporal process of location of the hottest sea cell; AREA_P is the process o f the area of the western Pacific Ocean warm pool; WP_C_P is the process of the geometric cent  er of the warm pool; WP_INTENSITY_P is the process of the warm pool intensity; RF_P (n) is t  he process of the rainfall of Guangdong province of China, k is the number of delay months. 1, t he index increases; 0, the index keeps static state, -1, the index decreases.

Here, we obtain four spatio-temporal process association rules whose consequent predicates are processes of rainfall with different time delay. Their correct and cover ration all are over 69% and 14% respectively. The second association rule is to be read as ?If the area of the western Pacific Ocean warm pool decreases and the center of the warm pool moves northward in one month, the rainfall of Guangdong province will increase after ten months with 73% confident and 21.2% support?.

All entities in the real world always evolve along the time- line which is left-bounded by 0(a past time point) and open to  the future, with the symbol  used to denote a time point that is later than any other, in multi-dimensions space. The traditional spatio-temporal data only describes the entity through some discrete spatial states at some specific time points, can not reflect its continuous change processes, holistically. The spaio-temporal process composed of many spaio-temporal states at different time points in a time range can describe detail change of an entity in multi-dimensions space. Sometimes, we process the initial spatio-temporal data using interpolation arithmetic to obtain more spatio-temporal states, which are used to describe more detail change trend of a process. A spatio-temporal process is embodied by the change process of the attributes of the object in defined time range, however, not all attributes vary in that process.

Association rule describing association relations among the attribute items in a database is very simple. However, the relations among the spatio-temporal processes are very complex, which can not be reflected fully through the some discrete spatio-temporal states. The spatio-temporal process association rule mining is used to extract association relations among spaio-temporal processes. Usually, the relation between geographical objects in a time range is a continuous change process which can not be described clearly through the discrete static spatial relations. For example, association relations between the western Pacific Ocean warm pool and the rainfall of southeast area of China are spatio-temporal process relations.

As the table 1 shown, we can forecast the change of rainfall of Guangdong province through varying process of the warm pool based on the extracted spatio-temporal process association rules.

In order to describe detail change of a complex process, we need more spatio-temporal states and change trends of each time interval which compose of the process. However, for the  complex change trend of processes, the interesting association rules may be rejected under the defined support and confidence.

If the process is too general, they can not reflect detail change of a spatio-temporal process. So, time step and detail degree of a process have a significant on final mining results.



V. CONCLUTIONS AND FUTURE WORK  Based on the previous studies on spatio-temporal data mining, topological relations and temporal relations, we analysed change process of a geographical object in multi- dimensions space and proposed the meta-spatio-temporal process and spatio-temporal process, and the formers are basic components of the later. The spatio-temporal process association rule mining which is brought out based on the spatial association rule mining can be used to extract association relations among spatio-temporal processes. The relation between spatio-temporal processes of the western Pacific Ocean warm pool and the rainfall of Guangdong province is a remote correlation. Spatio-temporal process association rules extracted from those data can reflect clearly relations between them which may be used to forecast changes of rainfall according to changes of the warm pool.

The spatio-temporal processes include change processes of single object and spatial distribution pattern. The spatio- temporal relation is the core of spaio-temporal predicates? calculation. Our future work includes describing spatio- temporal relations and mining association rules of change processes of spatial distribution patterns.

