An ANP Model for Service Policy Decision in SCM Lina Zhou, Xiaofei Xu, Shengchun Deng

Abstract?One of the main objectives of supply chain man- agement (SCM) is to provide better services. Having a clearly identified service policy is the essential precondition of supply chain design, operation and optimization. The service policy is market oriented due to the diversity of service requirements in different markets. To date, although many market segmentation methods have been proposed, the problem of service policy mak- ing for different segmented markets is still not well addressed. In this paper, the service policy making problem is first modeled as a multi-criteria decision problem and then an analytic network process (ANP) based method is proposed to solve the problem.

Finally, a case study is provided to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model and method.



I. INTRODUCTION  Customers in today?s marketplace are more demanding, not just of product quality, but also of service [1]. The companies have to offer better customer service to remain competitive and profitable. One focus of supply chain management (SCM) is increasingly turning towards to provide better services. A clear service policy is of primary importance in supply chain design, operation and optimization.

Service is a multi-faceted concept, which consists of many factors. The diversity of customer requirements has driven the enterprises to provide versatile services. As a result, it is cursory to provide standard service to all the customers.

However, it is impossible and unadvisable to meet all the customers? service demands. An effective way is to segment the customers and adopt different service policies for each market segment. Jonker presents a Markov decision model to determine the optimal mailing policy for each segment [2].

Based on the data mining results, Lin discusses the electronic catalog design policy for each market [3]. Yu proposes a hybrid mining approach, and the classification and association rules are used to design returns policies and marketing strategies [4]. Most of the researches concentrate on making market policies, and the problem of service policy making for different segmented markets is still not well addressed.

With the increased importance of customer service, many researchers have proposed new methods to study supply chain optimization using service level as constraint [5]. Most of these methods consider service policy as increasing the ?order fill rate?, while ignore the multivariate nature of service and the market differentiation. This excessive simplification can not give an exact description to the real situation.

Overall, the service policy research is very important in SCM. In this paper, we model customer service policy making  problem as a multi-criteria decision problem on the basis of the segmented markets. Our formulation incorporates many many factors of service such as the trade-off between service and cost. The priorities of each service elements and the proportions of different service costs are assigned as the decision objects. To handle the complicated relations between service elements and other factors in service process, we employ the Analytic Network Process (ANP) to build the decision model.

ANP extends Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) to cases of dependence and feedbacks recently introduced [6]. Although AHP has been extensively investigated, ANP has not been fully studied yet. Some examples of ANP applications include re-engineering [7], supply chain performance [8], logistics [9], business forecasting [10], supplier selection [11], and project selection decisions [12]. The ANP method provides a more generalized model for decision-making. It does not require the assumption on the independency between elements at different levels or the dependency between elements at the same level, which is more suitable to the real situation. In this paper, we first analyze the customer service elements and the relations between these elements and other factors in supply chain operation. Then, we propose an ANP model of service policy decision and develop its decision steps. Through the operations of supermatrix, we obtain the decision objects.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the relations between service and other factors are indicated, and the service elements are summarized. In Section 3, the ANP model for service policy decision and the decision steps are proposed. In Section 4, an application example in Auto Supply Chain is provided. Conclusion is given in Section 5.



II. CUSTOMER SERVICE ANALYSIS IN SCM  SCM can be defined as a set of approaches used to ef- ficiently integrate suppliers, manufacturers, warehouses, and retail stores so that merchandise is produced and distributed in the right quantities, to the right location, at the right time, and at optimal cost [13]. Obviously, product, quantity, customer, time, and cost are the five main factors in the service process.

The relations between these factors are shown in Fig.1.

The goal of customer service is to meet the customers? multi-faceted demands. In SCM, ?customer? and ?product? are the key components of service since customers initiated     Goal of SCM  Cost Time Quantity Product Customer  Five main factors of service process in SCM  Two important  dimensions of service The core of service  The foundation of service  Service differentiation  To provide right products, to the right product, in the right quantity, at the right time,  and at optimal cost  Changed with different service  Fig. 1. Relations between the five main factors in service process  demands for products. Each service is associated with a combination of customer and product.

?Quantity? and ?Time? are two basic service dimensions, each of which consists of many service elements. According to the demand variety and the 80/20 rule, the service should be different in ?Quantity? and ?Time? dimensions for different combinations of customer and product. For example, the combination of ?VIP customer? and ?key product?, the service requires high level in both ?Quantity? and ?Time? dimensions, while the combination of ?small customer? and ?general product?, ?Quantity? service may places more priorities on ?Quantity? than ?Time?.

The aim of SCM is to maximize the revenue by keeping the supply chain costs low. There are several fixed opera- tional costs associated with a supply chain, such as materials, inventories, transportation, facilities, technology, and labor.

All the costs are used to provide service and make profit.

?Cost? is the foundation of service, and the proportions of the cost elements change with different service. For example, to meet an important emergent demand, products will be transported by air, so the transportation cost will account for a large proportion of the total service costs, while for general demands, the inventory cost are the majority of service costs.

Thus, the enterprises must optimize the service cost structure to provide better services for different demands with less cost.

Obviously, service can not be isolated from the other factors.

The relations and interactions must be considered in service policy making process.

In this study, the five factors form the basis of customer service analysis. Considering the increasing importance of maintenance service, the ?Spare part? is also included as a special ?Product?. As a result, six clusters related to customer service in SCM are defined, and the elements of each cluster are listed in Table I. According to the ABC taxonomy, three categories are used to differentiate the importance of different customers, products, and spare parts. In ?Time service? cluster, the elements are the main service facets related to time, and in ?Quantity service?, the elements are the main service facets related to quantity. Due to the demand uncertainty, emergent service elements are considered in both ?time? and ?quantity? clusters. The cost elements which have very close relations  TABLE I CLUSTERS AND ELEMENTS  Cluster Element Abbreviation  Customer Customers in ?A? category D1  Customers in ?B? category D2  Customers in ?C? category D3  Product Products in ?A? category P1  Products in ?B? category P2  Products in ?C? category P3  Spare part Spare parts in ?A? category S1  Spare parts in ?B? category S2  Spare parts in ?C? category S3  Time service Proportion of on-time delivery for general product demands  T1  Proportion of on-time delivery for general spare part demands  T2  Proportion of on-time delivery for emergent product demands  T3  Proportion of on-time delivery for emergent spare part demands  T4  Sale cycle T5  Maintenance cycle T6  Exchange cycle T7  Return cycle T8  Quantity service General product demand fill rate Q1  General spare part demand fill rate Q2  Emergent product demand fill rate Q3  Emergent spare part demand fill rate  Q4  Service Cost Product inventory cost C1  Spare part inventory cost C2  Product transportation cost C3  Spare part transportation cost C4  Product OOS cost C5  Spare part OOS cost C6  with service are listed in ?Cost? cluster.

It must be pointed out that only the main elements in each  cluster are listed to avoid that the primary elements is diluted by too many unimportant elements in decision process.

Making service policy for a certain market is to decide the priorities of each service elements and the proportions of different service costs. Using the six clusters, we can describe the characteristics of each market and the relations between the market and the customer service. Such characteristics and relations provide a solid foundation for the service policy making. The decision process is shown in Fig. 2.

According to Fig. 2, the characteristics of service policy making problem include:  1) The decisions are multi-objective.

2) The decision objects related to many elements, which  have complexity interactions.

3) The history business data, the customers? opinion and  the business strategies should be consulted in the deci- sion process.

Thus, it is a human-involved, multi-cluster, multi-criteria,     The service policy  Statistic or Data Mining  Identification of the relations within the six clusters  Select a segmented market  Identification of the interaction degree of  each relations  Synthesis of the interactions  The priorities of the service elements  Business strategy  The proportions of the service costs  History business data  Questionnaires  Fig. 2. The decision process of customer service policy making  and multi-objective decision problem.



III. THE ANP MODEL FOR SERVICE POLICY DECISION  ANP is the generalization of the AHP, which allows inter- dependency among the decision levels and elements. It allows for more complex interrelationships among decision elements by replacing a hierarchy in the AHP with a network [14]. The ANP process of our problem is shown in Fig. 3. The process consists of 4 steps, which will be described in detail in the consequent sub-sections.

A. Step1:Network construction  Based on the analysis in Section 2, the clusters and elements are achieved. According to the interaction within the elements and the dependencies of the clusters, the interdependencies are formulated, and the ANP model is given in Fig. 4.

As shown in Fig. 4, interdependencies are represented by straight arrows among the clusters, and the directions of the arcs signify dependences.

Customer service analysis in SCM  Clusters Elements  Identification of the network structure  Interdependencies  Making the pairwise comparisons  Supermatrix formation and transformation  Finding the limiting priorities  Fig. 3. The ANP process of customer service policy decision in SCM  Service Cost  Service  Quantity Service  Customer  Product  Spare part  Goal: Service policy decision Object  Network  D1  D2 D3  P1  P2 P3  S1  S2 S3  T1 T2 T3  T4 T5 T6  T7 T8  Q1 Q2  Q3 Q4  C1 C2 C3  C4 C5 C6  Time Service  Fig. 4. The ANP model for customer service policy decion in SCM  TABLE II PAIRED COMPARISON RESULTS WITH RESPECT TO ?D1?  D1 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Priorities  Q1 1 1/2 1/2 1/3 0.116282  Q2 2 1 2 1/3 0.240380  Q3 2 1/2 1 1/2 0.185122  Q4 3 3 2 1 0.458216  B. Step2:Paired comparisons  After the network structure is built, pairwise comparisons of the elements in each cluster that belong to a parent element are carried out for all the parent elements. The paired comparisons integrate both the experts? opinion and the results of statistic or data mining. Saaty comparison scale [6] is used to indicate how many times an element dominates another with respect to the criterion. For example, with respect to ?D1?, the comparison results of the elements in ?Quantity service? cluster are illustrated in Table II.

The derived priorities in the last column are computed by raising the reciprocal matrix to arbitrarily large powers and then normalizing their row sums. Each priority vector entries sum to one and represent the relative importance of the elements in ?Quantity service? cluster.

C. Step3:Supermatrix formation  When all the comparisons have been down, we can get some matrixes as shown in (1).

Wij =  ? ?????  w (j1) i1  w (j2) i1  . . . w (jn) i1  w (j1) i2  w (j2) i2  . . . w (jn) i2  ...

...

. . .

...

w (j1) im  w (j2) im  . . . w (jn) im  ? ?????  (1)     Wij indicates that cluster i depends on cluster j, and each column is the priority vector derived from an above compari- son. For example, the first column shows that with respect to element j1 in cluster j, the elements in cluster i have been compared, and the priority vector is Vij1 , shown in (2).

Vij1 =  ? ?????  w (j1) i1  w (j1) i2 ...

w (j1) im  ? ?????  (2)  All the Wij compose the supermatrix W of the model, and the supermatrix structure is shown in (3).

W =  ? ????  W11 W12 . . . W1N W21 W22 . . . W2N  ...

...

. . .

...

WN1 WN2 . . . WNN  ? ???? (3)  Because the supermatrix?s each column is composed of several eigenvectors, and each eigenvector sums to one, the supermatrix is not stochastic. To get meaningful limiting priorities, with respect to the goal, the clusters comparisons are performed to determine their relative importance, and the derived weights matrix A is used to weight the corresponding cluster elements in the unweighted supermatrix. The weighted supermatrix is calculated as (4).

W? = A ?W =  ? ????  a11W11 a12W12 . . . a1N W1N a21W21 a22W22 . . . a2N W2N  ...

...

. . .

...

aN1WN1 aN2WN2 . . . aNN WNN  ? ???? (4)  The meaning of our problem?s weighted supermatrix is shown in Fig. 5.

The effect ranks of different customer/product/spare part to each cost element  The effect ranks of different service elements to each cost element  The service preference ranks of different customer category  The product/spare part preference ranks of different customer category  The service cost structure of different product/spare part category  The importance ranks of the service elements to different product/spare part category  The customer  preference ranks of different product/spare part category  The importance ranks of different spare part category to each product  category  The proportions of different kind of spare parts for each product category  The importance ranks of different customer/ product/ spare part to each service element  Fig. 5. The meaning of the supermatrix  D. Step4: Calculation of the limiting priorities  The elements of the weighted supermatrix W? show the interactions of the elements in different clusters, the elements of W? 2 are the indirect effects within the cluster elements, and by analogy, the elements of W? k are the k-times indirect effects within the cluster elements. Thus, the synthesis of the interactions can be calculated as (5), and the row elements of the limited supermatrix W? are the final priorities.

W? = lim k??  N  N? k=1  W? k (5)  Applying the four steps to analyze a selected segmented market, the priorities of service elements and the proportions of different service costs can be achieved.



IV. CASE STUDY  The proposed model and decision steps are implemented in an Auto Supply Chain in China. The supply chain is composed of an automobile manufactory and it has more than 3000 partners (including suppliers, distributors and sales offices etc.) The cars are sold all over the country, and the markets are segmented by area.

Three selected markets are analyzed respectively, which are simply denoted as market A, B and C. The decision is performed by a team consisting of 10 persons under the coor- dination of sales department of the automobile manufactory, and the decision preparations are conducted as follows:  1) The history business data of each market are collected, including sales, cost, profit, and maintenance data.

2) Based on the ?Time? and ?Quantity? service elements discussed in Section 2, questionnaires are edited, and delivered to the existing and potential customers in each market.

3) Statistical and data mining techniques are applied to different business data combinations to find the relations within elements of the six clusters.

4) More than 1600 filled questionnaires are collected, and the statistical results show the customers? service pref- erence.

The statistical and data mining results achieved above are provided to the sales experts. Integrated the experts? opinions, and followed the decision steps, the paired comparisons were carried out by the experts, and the supermatrixes are formu- lated. The calculations of the supermatrixes are performed in Super Decisions 1.6.0, and the final priorities of the decision objects are illustrated in Fig. 6, Fig. 7, and Fig. 8.

The results show the market differentiation, and the service policies can be made based on the achieved priorities. Accord- ing to the service elements? priorities, the service emphasis is adjusted for each market. The cost elements? priorities give support to service cost budget. For example, market A is maintenance-oriented, and the inventory investment of spare parts should be increased. Market B is sales-oriented, so the product inventory should keep a high level, and the inventory cost should be increased. Market C give a high emphasis     Fig. 6. Results of market A  Fig. 7. Results of market B  on the ?Proportion of on-time delivery for emergent product demand?, thus the transport cost should been increased.

Four months later, an additional investigation shows that the customers? satisfaction has been raised without increasing the service cost.



V. CONCLUSION  Nowadays, customer service has been paid more and more attention in SCM. To provide better service, the market dif- ferentiation can not be ignored. In this study, the relations between service and other factors are analyzed, the ANP model for service policy making is proposed, and the decision steps are developed. Applying the model to a certain segmented market, the market-oriented service policy can be made.

