Knowledge Discovery in Enterprise Information

Abstract?Consumer demand information is very important for  enterprises development, and also be the source of capture  business opportunities. How to obtain Consumers information  and further find its potential link is enterprise information  systems major issues resolved. This paper applies data mining  technique to Enterprise, process the Enterprise collected data by  SPSS crosstab and correlation analysis, then find the immanent  rule of people need so that can supply the enterprise with the better support decision.

Keywords-component; Information System, Date Mining, SPSS,  Correlation

I. INTRODUCTION  Consumer demand is the leader of enterprise development, if enterprises want to improve their competitiveness, in addition to their own enterprises should pay attention to the technical and management levels, there should be more focus on the present and future market demand. Collect the information, many enterprises now has realized the needs of the consumer feedback information systems management by the web technology, but many enterprises did not realize the intrinsic link between the information tap, so can bring greater support for enterprises decision-making.

Data mining, also known as knowledge discovery in the database, refers to extract implicit potential useful information and knowledge from a large quantity of incomplete, noise, and blurring, random data which people do not know in advance [1].

Data mining method can usually be divided into two categories: The first category is statistical, and its? technology used probability analysis, relevance, cluster analysis and discriminated analysis; the other is machine learning in the artificial intelligence-based, through training and learning a large number of samples that need to set the mode or parameters.



II. ISSUES RAISED  As a new way to provide information, one of the characteristics of the consumer service of enterprise is guided by consumer demand. The services provided by the enterprise is not to allow the consumer to adapt, but information services should be the maximum from the needs of the consumer, based on "the interests of the consumer as the center" design services,  and improve service efficiency, reduce service costs, improve service quality, providing the consumer with the largest service efficiency. Therefore, the enterprise service is not just changes to the mode of service, but more important is information services awareness heightened and the concept of service innovation. Information consumer services need to attach importance to the principle of demand-oriented and then carry out all system construction and services work. To achieve this goal, information departments and the consumer must be interactive information on the consumer information needs, study the real need of consumer.  At present this study has follows perspective [2]:  ?  Establish consumer opinion collection mechanism.

First establishes the network system of collection consumer opinion. Uses the computer technology fully, enables the different opinion of each aspect to reflect to the production consumer product department prompt and accurately. Secondly, each main body of consumer should establish information system, allocate specialized personnel to work professionally, so different views from the consumer can be reflected in different categories for policy-makers with timely and accurate decision-making signal. Final collection consumer views should be finalized as a management system.

?  Uses the information architecture (IA) way to carry on the investigation and analysis.

Architecture of information act is to organize information and design information environment, information space and information architecture to meet the information needs of users art and a science. The current method has been successfully applied to various construction sites, as a blueprint for the building site, whether the site solution with the organization's business objectives, whether to meet the information needs of users, and other practical issues, such as in a series of indicators weighted analysis IA Information websites can be drawn after the customer satisfaction rankings.

?  Data warehouse and data mining technology. For example, on the basis of analysis and study of the association rules and decision tree two commonly used data mining technology, apply the Apriori Algorithm     of association rules and Decision Tree ID3 algorithm to enterprise data analysis, establish an Enterprise data analysis system based on data mining.

This article mainly discusses the application question of data mining in information computerization consumer service.



III. DATA MINING RESEARCH TECHNIQUE  A. Multi-dimensional cross-table analysis  Multi-dimensional cross-table analysis showed that two or more variables joint frequency distribution table. It belongs to the scope of discrete multivariate analysis, cross-generation multi-dimensional or two-dimensional form, mainly used for the analysis of each thing and phenomenon?s differences identify the inspection variables whether have relation. For example, to understand the different age levels and qualifications are concerned about the relationship between the content of the Information, the process can be used to form a two-dimensional tables. To show that different age groups, all education levels are concerned about the number of different frequency content distribution, correlation, and to choose suitable way to carry out inspection. Multi-dimensional cross- table analysis of the selected output variables can choose between the correlation coefficient table below on the related analysis and correlation coefficients brief.

B. Correlation analysis method  Between the objective things are interrelated and mutual influence and mutual restraint. Reflect the interconnected between things to a quantity, that is correlation between variables. For instance height and body weight, income and expense. The correlation analysis will find the latent rule that is valuable and description variable relates mutually from the data. Through several descriptions correlational dependence statistics may determine between the variable?s connection close degree and linear correlation direction. Most commonly use is Pearson correlation coefficient, usually indicated with R.

If variables X and y carries on the observation, obtains a group of data: xi, yi (i=l, 2, ?, n), X and between Y the correlation coefficient formula is  2 2  ( )( )  ( ) ( )  i i  i i  xy  x x y y  x x y y  R ? ?  ? ? ? =  x, y respectively is the xi, yi (i=1,2,?, n) Arithmetic average value.

Where | Rxy |  1.0 <Rxy <1, x and y that is right relevant; if -1 <Rxy <0, that negative correlation between X and Y; and | Rxy | closer to the 1, between the variables X and Y variables linear relationship is more remarkable. If Rxy closer to the 0, X and Y does not claimed related. When |Rxy | = 1, say X and Y completely related.



IV. EXAMPLE OF DATA MINING TECHNOLOGY IN ENTERPRISE INFORMATION SERVICE APPLICATION  Enterprise information management based on web improve its competitiveness and transparency greatly, also accumulated massive data, but it is far from decision-making, and forecast, has not displayed effectiveness fully which its should have. For example each information website has similar nearly ?consumer opinion investigation? column, it is a very good way of understanding the consumer ?s demand, but looked from the website announcement investigation result, the conclusion also pauses in calculation the total to the single question, and the proportion and so on in the simple isolation analysis. Take one enterprise information net investigation as an example, investigates this enterprise products some indicators which consumer be concerned (being possible to elect), and mainly understands the populace demand and surveyor's basic document (including age level, degree level, occupation and so on)  The website has made the simple statistics to the questionnaire, for example the voting result of the age level, the school record level and likes tour site shown in Table 1.

TABLE 1 ONE ENTERPRISE NET INVESTIGATION  No Problem Name Number       Product quality  Product Price  Product Brand  Cost  Service quality       It is not difficult to see that above analysis methods still remain in the surface of the problem, it did not reveal the intrinsic link of all factors. For example, we can?t get the conclusions of the relationship between a certain age levels and corresponding choice, or whether different degree levels will affect their choice. Therefore, we study the information collected in-depth with the method of data mining, in a certain age conditions, analysis different degree and concerned problem intrinsic link by multi-dimensional cross-table, specific steps are as follows:  ?  Analysis the data, define variables. For multiple- choice questions, define a variable for each topic.

Variables defined in table 2.

TABLE 2 VARIABLES AND VARIABLE VALUE TRANSFORMATION COMPARATIVE TABLES  Age Degree Care Problem  Under 18?1  18~30?2  30~50?3  above 50?4  Primary School?1  Junior School?2  High School?3  University?4  Product quality?1  Product Price?2  Product Brand?3  Cost?4  Service quality?5  Establish data file after transformation, lists the partial data, as shown in Table 3.

TABLE 3 AFTER TRANSFORMATION DATA FORMS (PART)  Age Degree Care                       ?  Multi-dimensional cross-table analysis. Used the analysis of SPSS cross-table, select 20 samples randomly, the results as shown in Figure 1  Symmetric Measures  .516 .246 1.414 .157  .500 .354 1.414 .157  1.000 .000 1.414 .157  .544 .261 .918 .456c  .522 .255 .866 .478c  .d   -.324 .262 -1.261 .207  -.306 .243 -1.261 .207  -.455 .355 -1.261 .207  -.376 .306 -.907 .406c  -.283 .229 -.660 .538c  .d   .740 .168 2.376 .017  .667 .281 2.376 .017  1.000 .000 2.376 .017  .783 .174 2.521 .065c  .841 .127 3.109 .036c  .d   .500 .306 1.225 .221  .444 .363 1.225 .221  1.000 .000 1.225 .221  .500 .306 .577 .667c  .500 .306 .577 .667c  .d   Kendall's tau-b  Kendall's tau-c  Gamma  Spearman Correlatio  Ordinal by Ordinal  Pearson's RInterval by Interval  KappaMeasure of Agreemen  N of Valid Cases  Kendall's tau-b  Kendall's tau-c  Gamma  Spearman Correlatio  Ordinal by Ordinal  Pearson's RInterval by Interval  KappaMeasure of Agreemen  N of Valid Cases  Kendall's tau-b  Kendall's tau-c  Gamma  Spearman Correlatio  Ordinal by Ordinal  Pearson's RInterval by Interval  KappaMeasure of Agreemen  N of Valid Cases  Kendall's tau-b  Kendall's tau-c  Gamma  Spearman Correlatio  Ordinal by Ordinal  Pearson's RInterval by Interval  KappaMeasure of Agreemen  N of Valid Cases  age      Value  Asymp.

Std. Error a  Approx. T b  Approx. Sig.

Not assuming the null hypothesis.a.

Using the asymptotic standard error assuming the null hypothesis.b.

Based on normal approximation.c.

Kappa statistics cannot be computed.They require a symmetric 2-way table in which the values  first variable match the values of the second variable.

d.

Figure 1.  Correlation Coefficient table  ?  Conclusions analysis.

From the cross-table, we can see clearly the distribution among different age groups, degrees and concerned problem.

For example in the 18 to 30-year-old age group, a total of seven individuals, degrees for elementary school, junior school, high school and universities, including high school group has one person be interested in brand, one person be interested in quality. In a word, less than 30 years old age group be greater interest in brand and price, the result fits on young people interest. 30 to 50 years old and over the age of 50 are interested mainly concentrated in cost, reflect the adults to be pragmatic.

May see from the correlation coefficient table, in 4 different age levels, the correlation degree between the degree and corresponding concerned problem is high, the Pearson correlation coefficient is 0.067.The analysis result indicates that it has not obvious relevance between degree and its choice, in other words, in identical age level, regardless of the high degree or low degree, their matter of concern is almost the same.

Moreover data mining has the strict with the data preparation, previous data preparation work is very important regarding the data mining success or failure, so request have to pay attention to the collection target comprehensive in collection data time, have to use certain method to cover the flaw data, This paper introduces the application technical mentality of data mining technology in the consumer electronic information affairs, and obtains an analysis result from small sample data, does not represent the actual situation, may expand the sample capacity in the practical application , then obtains a more accurate conclusion.



V. CONCLUSIONS  At present, the application of data mining in the enterprise consumer services is relatively small, this paper through data mining in one enterprise consumer information services application, the question of independence be linked together, demonstrate the nature and potential link of the problem, provide better decision-making information and support to the Information for the actual work, we can understand the actual needs of the consumer by these knowledge, enhance the accuracy and scientific decision-making of departments, better service to the people.

