The Research of Multidimensional

Abstract?Aiming at the frequent occurrence of traffic accidents  in China, we collected the traffic accident data from a specified  freeway, on which we build the multidimensional association rule  model of traffic accidents. The multidimensional association rule  in the field of data mining is applied to develop the analysis  system of association factors in traffic accidents, which could  mine the conditional factors of traffic accidents. Base on these we  present corresponding preventive measures to reduce the traffic  accidents.

Key Words-traffic accident, data mining, multidimensional  association rule

I. INTRODUCTION  As the number of cars and drivers increasing rapidly in  China, the traffic accidents happen frequently, which in some  way affects people?s daily life. To decrease traffic accidents, it  is not enough to just improve the road conditions, but also  needs to control the traffic accidents happening by analyzing  the cause-and-effect regulations. However, only the causes are  recorded as the traffic accident data in China, so when  analyzing the causes and effects of traffic accidents, we used to  apply the mathematical statistics method to calculate the  probability of the accident and analyze the causes of the  accident. This method neither reflects all kinds of conditional  factors in traffic accidents, nor serves the transportation  department to prevent and deal with the traffic accidents.

It is well known that traffic accident is not only related to  drivers but also the roadway circumstances, vehicle conditions,  weather, traffic status, etc. How to find out the issues and  analyze the causes from a large number of traffic accident data  is a multidimensional association problem. Association rule  mining is a method to discover the association rules or  pertinence in the large amount of data, that is to find out the  attributes (predicate or item) which often occur together, then  symbolizes their relations in regular form [1]. As one of the  important techniques in association rule mining, the  multidimensional association rule can decompose the causes of  the traffic accident and gain useful association rule expressions  depending on the analysis of frequent degree conducing traffic  accident. The expression is like this: ?the causes? ?traffic  accident?. In fact, it turns the single factor theory into systemic  cause theory and makes up the defect that only cause is  recorded as the traffic accident data through mining the  conditional factors of the traffic accident deeply.



II. THE TECHNIQUE OF MULTIDIMENSIONAL ASSOCIATION  RULE  A.  Multidimensional association rule  In the research of multidimensional database, dimension  refers to a distinct predicate in the rule. The association rule  which involves two or more dimensions or predicates can be  called as multidimensional association rule, for example, the  association rule involving age, occupation and buys can be  denoted as follow:  )"",()"",()"2920",( laptopXbuysstudentXoccupationXage ?  in which, X is a variable, and the content in the quotation mark  followed by is the value (it  means the students between 20 and  29 tend to buy minicomputers). The deduction above involves     multiple predicates, which makes it a multidimensional  association rule.

B. Support and confidence  X,Y, is itemset .Support is the frequency at which the rule  X Y  appears in transaction set D. Only when the frequency  of the rule X Y is higher than the given threshold, the rule  could be thought to be meaningful. The Support(X Y ) of  X Y is expressed by frequency  P (X ? Y):  ( ) ( )Support X Y Support X Y= ?  Confidence is used as a token of validity or called the  trustworthy degree of association rules, for the association rule  X Y, its confidence Confidence(X Y),is expressed by  frequency P(Y|X):  %100 )(  )( )()( ??==  XSupport YXSupport  XYPYXConfidence  C. Apriori algorithm  The apriori algorithm is one of the most influential methods  which could be used to find out Boolean association rule  frequent itemset. The algorithm adapts an iterative method  which searches level by level[2]. The iterative method creates  itemsets (k+1) based on itemsets k. The specific method is:  first scan the database to find out the frequent itemset-1, noted  as L1. then, link L1 to build C2, find out L2  from C2  by  scanning the database, this is frequent itemset-2 .Repeat the  process until there is no more frequent itemset-k found.

According to the apriori?s character, any subset of frequent  itemsets is frequent itemsets, any superset of infrequent  itemsets is  infrequent itemsets. Instead of scanning the whole  database every time, the apriori algorithm builds the new  frequent itemsets according to the precede one[3].



III. THE MULTIDIMENSIONAL DATA MODEL IN TRAFFIC  ACCIDENTS  The key of the multidimensional association rule technique  is the multidimensional data model. In fact, the data of traffic  accidents are multidimensional, like other large-scale data.

Multidimensional data model aims at describing and analyzing  the multidimensional character of data, in order to create a  multidimensional logic model for simulating the real-life. In  the model, data is regarded as a n-dimensional data cube,  which consists of dimension and fact. Dimension is the view of  human beings observing problems, and it corresponds with a  dimension form. While fact is the measure around the main  subject, it corresponds with a fact form. A fact form usually  contains the name and the measure of the fact, and the key  value of each related dimension form. As to the general data of  traffic accidents, the dimension is the characters of how the  traffic accidents? causes distribute, including vehicle type,  region, driving years, traffic accident grade, traffic accident  forms, causes of traffic accident, weather conditions  month,  day, hour[4]. And the fact is the information which is used to  describe and measure the traffic accidents. Thus, the  multidimensional data model in traffic accidents has been built.

When using 2-dimensional form to express the  multidimensional concept, we can divide the multidimensional  structure into two kinds of forms: one is fact form, which is  used to storage the measure value of the fact and the code value  of each dimension; the other is dimension form. To each  dimension, at least a form will be used to save the metadata,  which is the characterizing information of the dimension,  including the level of the dimension, the division of the  members, etc. In this paper, each dimension of the traffic  accident data has no level, there is only one row of the  dimension form, in which holds all the lawful values of the  dimension. In the related fact form, these values can derive the  column of the dimension. This kind of structure, in which fact  forms associate with dimension forms by the value of each  dimension, is called Star Schema. The Fig. 1 shows the Star  Schema data structure of one freeway traffic accident data.

This structure can be described by relational database, and be  implemented by defining the main key-external key relative  relation between fact forms and dimension forms.

In Fig. 1, traffic accident table is the fact form, in which  holds 10 key codes of dimensions: vehicle type code region  code driving years code traffic accident grade code traffic  accident forms code traffic accident causes code weather  condition code month code day code hour code. These  key codes connect the fact form with the dimension form  together, which comes into being the integrated Star Schema.

Figure 1. Star_schema data structure of traffic accidents  Thus we express the multidimensional concept by 2-  dimension relation. After building up the Star Schema, we can  inquire about the simulating data in the relational database.

We can connect the fact form with the dimension form  through the key codes of the dimension form, and inquire  about them to get the data value and the multidimensional  description of the data.



IV. REALIZATION OF THE MULTIDIMENSIONAL ASSOCIATION  RULE IN TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS  From the traffic accident data model above, we can  conclude that the model is multidimensional. If we regard each  dimension of the data model as a predicate, we could mine  multidimensional association rule. During the mining of the  multidimensional association rule, we search for frequent  itemsets to acquire the traffic accident association rule. The  process in detail is described in Fig. 2.

Base on the apriori algorithm in the paper, we implement  develop the analysis system of traffic accident association  factors in C# language, according to the traffic accident data  records during September,2004 to July,2005 from a freeway.

The output result of the system is association rule. In order to  express the association rule more clearly, we use  causes effect method here[5]. The cause(s) is(are) one or  more dimension(s) of vehicle type, region, driving years, traffic  Figure 2.    Data process of multidimensional apriori algorithm  Figure 3. Association analysis setting  accident grade, traffic accident forms, cause of traffic accident,  weather, month, day and hour. The result includes one of these  10 dimensions when the traffic accidents happen, that is the  selected dimension. Take mining the conditional factors of the  cause in traffic accidents as the example, the parameter setting  dialog is shown in Fig. 3, here we choose the cause of the  traffic accidents and setup the support and confidence of each  rule. The support here is the ratio which the corresponding  conditions and results caused traffic accidents to all the traffic     Figure 4. Result of multidimensional association rule of traffic accidents  accidents; and the confidence is the ratio at which the  conditions dimensions caused the result dimensions when the  traffic accidents happened. Fig. 4 is the mining result of  multidimensional association rule of the traffic accident data  analysis system. From Fig. 4, we can conclude that the results  given by the system are the itemsets of association rules. The  user can find out which combination of objective factors can  cause traffic accidents more easily from this itemsets. In this  itemsets, each element represents an association rule, followed  by the support and the confidence which are greater than their  respective setted figure. This can be used to indicate how  frequently this pattern occurres in the total traffic accidents,  and the possibility that the set of all the objective factors before  the deduction symbol  causes traffic accidents. Now let?s  take the 6th rule of the above result as the example: on the  freeway of JingJinTang, the driver with 2 years? driving  experience, sunny improper measure, the support of this rule  is 0.189369 which indicates that the traffic accidents caused by  a driver with 2 years? driving on freeway of JingJinTang in  sunny day because of improper measure is 18.9369% of total  traffic accidents. Confidence 0.404225 indicates that when the  traffic accidents happened, the driver with 2 years? driving  appeared on the freeway of JingJinTang and with an improper  step in sunny day, the ratio is 40.4225%.



V. CONCLUSION  Base on the analyzing of traffic accidents, if we use the  multidimensional association rule technique in the field of data  mining, we can deal with complex, plentiful and  multidimensional traffic accident data more consummately,  and mine the conditional factors of the traffic accidents and  latent rules of a large number of dataset. Thus, we can provide  intelligent support to the prevention and decision of the traffic  transportation department. Meanwhile, the traffic accident  multidimensional association rule technique presents a new  thinking method for the prevention and analysis of traffic  accidents.

