Research on Flow Object Knowledge Extraction Method

Abstract  This paper in view of flow object, through the research for data mining and knowledge discovery technology, has designed the system structure used for flow object knowledge extraction, and has shown related algorithm used for the flow object knowledge extraction. Take the cement production process for an example, it has extracted operation rule in cement calcinations process, proposed suggestive rule for big operation which can result in bigger fluctuation of key parameter, thus to achieve the goal of control effect improvement and the enhancement of installment running stability.

1. Introduction  The flow industry holds the very great ratio in our country?s industrial production; it?s the important pillar industry in economic development. In flow industrial production process, physical distribution and energy flux are continual, products are relatively stable, the production cycle is long, technical process is basically invariable, through adjusting the technological parameter online can make the production with a certain extent of flexibility[1].There are massive flow process objects in the flow industry, and the flow industry which formed by these objects generally has many problems, such as big energy consumption, bad product quality, backward production technique, low automatization and operation level, etc. Take cement industry for an example, at present in our country the synthesis energy consumption for each ton of cement, the coal consumption for each kilowatt-hour power supply, and the energy consumption for each ton of steel is separately 35% 21% and 11% higher than  international advanced level, In view of the existing production equipment and technique, we can extract the useful knowledge from massive preserved historical data in the enterprise, and improve control and operation level of the process according to these knowledge, it has an important economic and strategic significance in the situation that energy and natural resource are intense today.

In recent years, the research about data mining technology has caused widespread attention from the experts and scholars in the field of international artificial intelligence and database, etc. Mining association rules in business database is a very important research subject in the field of data mining domain. However, its practical application mainly concentrates in the retail industry presently, such as sales and management in the supermarket and has achieved a good application effect, but practical application in the field of industrial processes is still rare [3]. Literature [4], [5] elaborated related techniques about data mining application in the industrial field. And literature [4] proposed for the first time the method that using association rule to make the extraction of fuzzy control rule and applies in the analysis of kiln stove parameter, and literature [5] organically unifies the database and the data mining technology. However, these studies only stay on the base of sole object analysis, and the research and application based on flow characteristic have not been carried out, there is also no elaboration about applying knowledge to control. This paper is aimed to study the flow object knowledge extraction method.

First, takes the entire flow's multi-dimensional data as the study object, makes analysis based on the whole parameter, and extracts the internal association rules and internal knowledge among each dimension, this kind of research method is more in compliance with   DOI 10.1109/ICINIS.2008.33     the characteristics of flow object, and can be more easily extended to practical application of flow industry; Second, studies association rules algorithm based on flow object, and explores rules extraction method suitable for flow object to find a system operation rule that conventional methods difficult to find and sum up.

2. Overall Design The study object about knowledge extraction  method of object-oriented process is historical data set in the flow object, main process includes three stages: historical data set pretreatment, rules extraction and application of rules, system structure is as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. System structure of flow object knowledge extraction and usage  2.1 Data set generation and pretreatment  2.1.1. Data set generation  For multi-data flow objects, due to the continuity and real-time of production process, to a certain extent, ?Information Island? [6] exists in the construction pattern of enterprise data information systems, which will lead to a result that production data can?t be shared effectively and consistency of data can?t be guaranteed. Based on this situation, we should first integrate the scattered data together, in order to guarantee the consistency of data. Data integration is to obtain data from a database or two-dimensional data files, and transmit the data to another data base or two-dimensional data files after an effective processing, which is also called data integration, data fusion[7].In flow objects, data integration is not simply to copy data from one sub system to another. Instead, under the support of service model, make necessary treatment and process of a sub system?s data, and then transmit it according to a certain format to another sub system which will indicate the data, i.e. through three stages [8]: acquisition, transforming and transmitting.

Normally, data integration needs to solve the problems,  such as time matching, scope matching, granularity matching and data combination and filtration, etc.

The data integration process in this paper mainly includes: data acquisition, time matching, edge fuzz and noise processing, etc.

Figure 2. General structure of data integration platform  (1) Data acquisition Acquire the data of production process from  industrial database through standard data interface OPC, which will be stored in a unified database synchronously.

(2) Time matching In flow objects, there is mutual constraint between  different data acquired from different points. Due to the continuity of the process, sample values at the same sampling time will seems not synchronized because of the mutual constraint. In this paper, displacement approach is used to solve the timing matching problem. Displace some data according to the lag time of each sub object. The process of displacement is as follows:  Assuming the number of sub objects in flow object is c, the lag time of each object is T1,T2??Tc-1,the parameter set of each sub object is R1,R2??Rc. First, making lag processing to the sample data in R1, R2??Rc according to sub object lag time, which means to make transform to the time attribute of every data source as follows:  tm=tm+(Tm+Tm+1+??Tc-1),m=1?c     (1)  DCS data acquisition  Data set production, data set pretreatment  Rules extraction  Application of rules  Complex industrial data objects  Industry process data  Data acquisition  OPC  Time matching  Edge noise fuzzing  Database for data mining  D ata integration platform     Then make time equivalent link to sub object attribute set:  R=R1 21 tt =  ? R2 32 tt =  ? ?Ri ji tt =  ? Rj?Rc={ ji rr )  |ri?Ri  ? rj?Rj? ri[T]= rj[T]} i=1 2?c j=1,2?c      (2) T represents the time attribute, relation model R  represents the parameter set of flow object:  R(A1 A2 A3..Am)=     (3)  m represents the total attribute(parameter) number of the whole flow object.

(3) Edge fuzzing and noise processing Because of the complexity and uncertainty of  industrial process, lag parameter acquired from experiences will not be accurate. Data sets acquired in this way can?t indicate the industrial production process precisely, the border between different kinds of data is not clear and they will influence each other, so we need to make edge fuzzing.

Reducing the noise is also a factor that should not be overlooked. The existence of noise greatly reduced the credibility of sampled knowledge. In order to weaken the influence between different kinds of data, reduce the interference of noise and make the data indicate production process relatively accurate, we can make H window sliding for data set R, average data in the window and get a new data set. Namely, we can make following transform for the data attribute (A) of every row (ri):  ri[A]= H 1 ?  +  +?=    ][  Hi  Hij  j Ar   i= 2 H  , H  +1,?(n- H  ) (4)  From the application perspective, this method can form the data used to mining well, but have disadvantage to find abnormal situation in flow object process.

2.1.2. Data set pretreatment  In the database of industrial process, there are a lot of simulation signals, such as temperature, pressure, rotate speed etc, the range sets of these attributes are continuous quantitative, in addition there are also a large number of digital signals, such as electromagnetic valve on / off, open or stop of equipment etc. Now, most calculation methods for machine learning such as Bayesian study, summarized classification, data mining, deal with input variables  that are discrete property values. So studying the continuous attributes in quantitative data set, discreting it to Boolean properties that easier to process for computer is an important issue that must be resolved in machine learning, so is main content of this paper. We want to study the influence that parameter variation makes to other key parameter in flow industry, so the data can be discreted into 1, -1, 0 three values which corresponding parameter rise, drop, invariable three conditions. The concrete operations are as follows: After the data set R production, dealing with data sets R according to the following formula, generating data set D:  D=  dnmdndn dij  mddd mddd  ..21 dim....

2..2221 1..1211  (5)  and, m for the number of attributes, n for the number of rows, dij={1,-1,0},i=1??m, j=1??n 1 express ?rij>0; 0express ?rij=0, -1express ?rij<0  In order to quantitative analysis, we can transform D into a set, each component have two tuples (dij, ?rij).

2.2. Knowledge (Rules) extraction  Association rule proposed early in supermarket shopping basket's analysis [9] [10], it?s one of the most active research directions in data mining domain, it is mainly used to analysis valuable interdependence among different attributes in the database, in basic research of association rules algorithms, Apriori algorithm is the most famous one, which often relies on the generation of effective frequent data items, and it opened the beginning of association rule data mining. Using Apriori algorithm we can effectively generate association rules from the frequent data items.

But there are two defects of this algorithm:  (1) Efficiency defect. The main reason is that it needs to scan the database too many times.

(2) Too many false (redundancy) rules.

In view of above two major defects and the  characteristic of big quantity data in flow industry, this paper puts forward an improved algorithm which can greatly improve the mining efficiency and to a certain extend solved the redundancy problem. When using Apriori mining association rule, in order to assure the count of each candidate item, transaction database needs to be scanned repeatedly. This paper is aimed to reduce the scanning time of transaction database and put forward an improved algorithm to  .

..21 ........

2..2221 1...1211  rnmrnrn  mrrr mrrr     obtain frequent items set, the algorithm is still based on support threshold and confidence threshold. The basis of the algorithm is: (1) all candidate item sets Ck is superset of Ck-1; (2) if a transaction doesn?t include any candidate item sets, then it will not effect the generation of frequent item sets after deleting the transaction.

The thought of the algorithm [13]: a flag bit ?bool? should be added to each item in the transaction database. The initial value is ?false?. In the process of counting the appearing times of the candidate item Ck sets, if a certain item in Ck is not included, then its flag bit value is set as ?true?; otherwise its flag bit value is set as ?false?, and the count of the item increases 1, the flag will never be changed. If the final value of the flag bit is ?true?, that means the transaction doesn?t include any candidate item, it should be deleted from the transaction database. So the record number used in calculating candidate item sets? support will be less than the actual record number of transaction database, with the value of k increasing, the differential value will become bigger gradually. So the method effectively reduces the candidate item sets counting times and greatly improves the efficiency of the whole algorithm.

Improved Apriori algorithm is as follows Input: Transaction database D; Minimum support  threshold value min_sup Output Frequent items L in transaction database  D L1=find-frequent_l_itemsets(D); For(k=2;Lk-1??,k++){ Ck=apriori_gen(Lk-1,min_sup); for each transaction t D{//scan D for count Ct=subset(Ck,t);//get the subsets of t that are  candidates If  t.bool=false then { //set bool sign If  c?Ct  then { t. bool =true; break ;} else  c.count++;} else  if  c Ct  then{ c.count++; bool =false } } if  t. bool =true then delete t from transaction Lk={c Ck|c.count?min_sup}  } return L= kLk;  3. Instance research  This instance takes the process to calcine in the cement production as the object of research, using the method above to extract knowledge and research on knowledge application.

During the process of calcine [15], in order to obtain the cement clinker, it should heat up the crude material powder to more than 1300 degrees high temperatures firstly, making the chemical composition in the crude material to have the chemistry reaction.

This stage is the core stage in the whole process of cement production. The crude material should be preheated in the preheater. The raw meal is preheated by hot exchanging with the exhaust gas in the kiln back end during the time it falling in the preheater.

The raw meal which is preheated enters the calcining furnace in which most of the CaCo3 is decomposed into CaO and it is calcined in rotary kiln finally. The diameter of the large-scale cement production line's rotary kiln is more than 5 meters and the length may surpass 60 meters. Its output is generally above 2500 tons per day, some even maybe ten thousand tons per day! The raw meal which is calcined, becomes cement clinker after cooled in cooler.

This data comes from the DCS of the continuous product process in cement enterprise in august, 2007.

We only choose a part of the data to research because the operating parameters are too many in the calcination process to and we should consider the coupling relation between these parameters at the same time, so we have selected the following parameters by comprehending the craft deeply. The data is shown in Table 1:  Table 1. The main points of measurement Parameter Expression  The amount of raw meal C1 Carbon monoxide content out of  One-stage suspension preheater export C2 The fuel amount of calcining furnace C3 Recoup air temperature C4 The out temperature of calcining furnace      C5 Kiln revolution counter                                 C6 Kiln drive motor                                           C7 High temper blower revolution counter         C8 Secondary air temperature C9 External fuel amount of kiln front                 C10 One-lenth grate cooler revolution counter      C11  The cement production process is a big lag process, calcining furnace, rotary kiln, grate cooler and so on  have a much larger lag time than the sampling period.

In order to ensure that the data object can reflect really     parameter variation's uniformity in the production process, we need to carry on processing the production process data according to the craft lag time, we take three sub-objects in cement production process as a research: calcining furnace, rotary kiln, and grate cooler. Regarding The output of 5000 T / D of the kiln, the lag time from raw meal entering preheater to calcining furnace export is about 5 minutes; the delay  time to firing zone is about 20 minutes; the lag time to grate cooler is about 30 minutes. We carried on delay processing to data collected according to lag time of sub-objects, slided using window, and carried on averaging the data inside window according to window height, obtaining new flow data set R, as shown in table 2.

Table 2. Cement production parameter data sets R NO.  C1(t/h) C2(%)  C3(t/h)  C4(?) C5(?) C6(r/m)  C7(A)  C8(r/m) C9(?) C10(t/h) C11(r/m)  1 181.8645 0.017 7.061 760.9314 891.79 3.3427 496.6204 907.6 845.267 5.3352 3.6094  2 179.2626 0.017 7.0652 760.9301 891.728 3.3427 509.7875 907.2 845.267 5.3251 3.8083  3 177.356 0.017 7.0386 760.6956 891.565 3.3396 495.172 907.2 845.267 5.2745 4.317  4 178.4726 0.017 7.0247 760.5084 891.494 3.3427 508.3392 907.2 844.846 5.3352 4.2092  .. .. .. .. .. .. ..

500 177.809 0.017 7.0652 754.6833 888.486 3.3548  520.1018 907.2 843.455 5.3286 3.4769  Using discrete attributes method as described above, we can process data set R, obtaining new data set D, as shown in Table 3.

Table 3. Discretization processing production data  set D  id     c1   c2    c3   c4   c5   c6   c7  c8  c9   c10   c11  1      -1    0      1     -1     -1    0    1    -1   0     -1      1 2      -1    0     -1     -1     -1   -1   -1    0   0     -1      1 3       1    0     -1     -1     -1     1    1    0  -1      1     -1 4       0   -1     -1     -1      0    -1    0    0  -1      1     -1 ..       ..    ..      ..       ..      ..     ..     ..    ..   ..      ..      ..

499   0    0      0       1      1    -1    0    1    1     1      -1  We applied the an improved association algorithm in flaw industry, Because there are a large amount of data and every record has value in flaw industry, we set a small relatively threshold, the threshold for support S is 0.2, Confidence C is 0.5, take the data set D as data source for rule extraction, extracted 49 rules, as shown in Table 4.

Regular explanation: 1. As the flux of crude material reduces, the rotary  kiln rotational speed should also slow down along with it;  2. When the amount of coal that fed in decomposing furnace increases, the amount of coal that rotary kiln?s head spurts should be reduced;  3. When the amount of coal that fed in decomposing furnace reduces, part speed of grate cooler must enhance;  ? 49 As the amount of coal that fed in decomposing  furnace increasing and the amount of coal that rotary kiln?s head spurts reducing, the electric current of the kiln?s main electrical machinery must enhance.

Table 4. Extracted rules No. Rule           S(%)   C(%)  1  c1(-1) => c6(-1) 24.248 62.417 2  c3(1) => c10(-1) 22.846 70.667 3  c3(-1) => c11(1) 25.251 70.199  .. .. .. ..

49 c3(1), c6(-1) => c7(1) 13.627 80.714  The Produced rule and the discipline that the site operators analyzed and summarized are match the case, which explained the validity and reliability of this method, and may apply in the expert system.

4. Conclusion  In view of the problems existing in our country?s flow industry enterprise at present, such as: big energy consumption, unstable product?s quality, backward technique of production, low automatization and operation level, taking data mining as a method and in     view of existing production technology and equipment, we can gain useful information for production and management from massive historical data which are preserved from the enterprise and analyze present operation situation of the enterprise comprehensively and objectively and explore the objective law in enterprise?s operation to achieve the goal of production optimization, product quality improvement and energy consumption reduction, then promote the enterprise to make profits, further improve process control and operational level according to these knowledge, it has an important economic and strategic significance in the situation that energy and natural resource are intense today.

