Research on alarm system in wireless network                                                  based on mining association rules

Abstract   With the development of telecommunication network, its large scale and complex frame work caused the relationship among mass alarms of network elements to become more and more complex. It is necessary to provide network administrator with an approach to implement alarm filtering and fault location.

To meet this need, an improved FP-Growth algorithm is given with which a new model is proposed based on mining association rules. Then the paper focuses on the alarm filtering and fault location with the help of these rules. An experiment to check the model and this algorithm is introduced and analyzed at the end of the paper.

Key words: association-rule, wireless network, data-mining, FP-Growth algorithm.

1. Introduction   Large scale and complex frame work of telecommunication networks make it produce mass alarms. In daily management of wireless network, people found that there are some special relationships among alarms of network elements. It is impossible to realize the actual state of related equipment with single alarm. And with the development of tele- communication network the traditional management and control method is no longer fit for wireless network. Therefore, how to mine association rules hiding in the mass alarms becomes a hot topic.

2. An improved FP-Growth algorithm  2.1. FP-Growth algorithm   FP-Growth algorithm which generates frequent item sets without any candidate generation process is based on a prefix tree representation of the given database of transactions, which save considerable amounts of memory for storing the transactions. This algorithm compresses a large database into a compact Frequent- Pattern tree (FP-tree) structure. The core operation of FP-Growth algorithm is to compute an FP-tree, which needs to scan a database twice. For the first time it finds frequent 1-item sets (single item pattern) and arrays frequent items in descending order of support.

For the second time it constructs FP-tree. Although FP- Growth algorithm is a landmark algorithm in data mining, it has its defects which can be described as below:  1) Huge numbers of transaction sets are stored in database and the algorithm needs to scan condition pattern bases twice so it causes repeated access to database when querying the same data. Such process not only reduces efficiency of the algorithm but also increases sever load.

2) Every time it invokes the algorithm recursively to construct a new tree it always ignores the close relation between the existed tree and the new tree. And in this algorithm it Top-Down construct sub FP-trees. That means it needs to do a lot of work on node matching.

This increases algorithm complexity.

To break this bottleneck of FP-growth algorithm, an improved algorithm is proposed.

2.2. The improved FP-Growth algorithm   2.2.1. First improvement. In FP-Growth algorithm,  it traverses ?  condition pattern bases which is set as {NULL (root node)} at the beginning and computes support of all items on the condition of grown? . And then it can give a table of support on the condition? .

DOI 10.1109/CSSE.2008.278    DOI 10.1109/CSSE.2008.278     Considering that support on the condition ?  contains all information in the new support table, it is unnecessary to re-compute support of all items in order to give a table of new support. The specific algorithm is described as below:  1) Create bivector table when traversing transaction sets for the first time, and store the support of two items? combining in a transaction set.

2) It is unnecessary to traverse condition pattern bases twice when constructing condition FP-tree on condition ?  recursively. Support value can be computed according to the bivector table mentioned above. Select the column and row related with Ei, the sum of relevant values of column and row selected is the support between Ei and other items. Ei is current item.

3) Traverse condition pattern bases, and construct sub FP-tree meanwhile create a new bivector table of support.

2.2.2. Second improvement. In FP-Growth algorithm it orders condition pattern bases according to support table, and then it traverses condition pattern bases and inserts nodes at the same time. And the construction of sub FP-tree is completed. It is obviously that the algorithm constructs a sub FP-tree again without taking the relationship between the existed tree and the new one into account. But in fact the existed tree includes all the information of a new tree. That means a new sub FP-tree can be constructed based on the existed FP-tree without a lot of work on nodes matching. The specific algorithm is described as below:  1) Find out the specific nodes according to the pointer of specific item X in item header table. The specific item X is the item in the union set of ?  and some other sets when ?  grows.

2) Find out the nodes whose value is X according to the pointer of item X. And find out the branch which the node is on it according to the pointer of the node?s father node. That means finding out the sub set tree of the existed FP-tree, and the leaf nodes of this sub set tree is the nodes whose value is X.

3) Compare the new support table with the existed one, if the order of items in this two table doesn?t change, the new tree is the sub set tree given by step 2.

4) If the order of items in this two table changes, it needs to adjust the sub set tree. Delete the branch if the order of nodes on the branch is different from the order in the new support table. And insert nodes to reconstruct the branch according to the order in the new support table. Keep the branch if the order of nodes on the branch is the same as the order in the new support table.

3. The structure of alarm system in wireless network based on mining association rules   Alarm system in wireless network based on mining association rules makes an efficient complement and strong support to wireless network management system. The alarm system analyzes the alarm information stored in network management system and mining association rules which serves for network management system. The model of the alarm system and the relationship with network management system can be shown as below:     Figure 1.  Structure of alarm system in wireless  network based on mining association rules   The detailed description of the structure of the alarm system in wireless network based on mining association rules can be expressed as below:  1) Data preprocessing sub-system It can convert data from databases in the network  management system into a unified form in order to provide data mining and analyzing sub-system with high quality data.

2) Data mining and analyzing sub-system It can mine association rules from mass alarm  information based on the improved FP-Growth algorithm mentioned above.

3) Result describing sub-system It can eliminate false rules, conflate and describe  valid rules.

4. Correlation analysis of alarm  4.1. Alarm filtering   Because of correlation between network equipment and inner modules of equipment, faults in some equipment may cause some fail working and issue alarms. According to the association rules mined from mass alarm information the correlation among alarms can be obtained. And based on it alarm filtering can be implemented.

4.2. Fault location   In modern telecommunication network, faulty  equipment often causes equipment related fail because     of complexity of network. It is common that several pieces of equipment fail working simultaneously.

The purpose of fault location is to locate faulty equipment or faulty module in equipment. The alarm system can mine several association rules. By explaining and using these rules fault can be located.

4.3. The process of alarm correlation analyzing   Some strong association rules which are described  as below can be mined from databases in network management system.

1aAlarm ? 1cAlarm , 2cAlarm , 3cAlarm , confidence is %a ,support is %? .

2aAlarm ? 4cAlarm , 5cAlarm , confidence is %b , support is %? .

3aAlarm ? 6cAlarm , confidence is %c , support is %? .

The threshold of confidence is set as 60%, the threshold of support is set as 0.02%, and the time window is set as 120 seconds.

The process of alarm correlation analyzing is described as below:  1) Mine association rules; 2) Compute the confidence of rules and save the  valid rules of which confidence exceed the threshold.

3) Implement alarm filtering according to the  association rules, eliminate redundant alarm. Eliminate alarms which are the consequence of one rule and preserve the alarm match the former of the same rule.

4) Locate fault according to the association rules. If alarms match the consequence of one rule it is considered that source alarm is the former of the same rules.

5. Experiments   Used this method, algorithm and thinking described above, a detailed alarm system in wireless network based on wireless network is implemented. The alarm information for three months (from May 1st 2006 to July 31st 2006) provided by a controlled company in a city of China mobile is selected. After analyzing the information using this system, 137 rules were mined and 13 of them were valid. Three of them are selected as examples and the result can be listed as below:   ID Former ?  Consequence Sup Cof 1 Alarm485  Alarm382,  Alarm837, Alarm283  0.02% 62.42%  2 Alarm484  Alarm485, 0.05% 78.34%  Alarm283 3 Alarm483  Alarm484 0.04% 87.30%  Table 1.  Results of association mining   In the real test, in a time interval of two minutes we got a sequence of alarm listed as below:  Alarm483, Alarm484, Alarm484, Alarm485, Alarm283, Alarm382, Alarm837  According to the method of correlation analysis above, Alarm382, Alarm837 and Alarm283 derived from Alarm485. That means these 3 alarms can be filtered.

According to the association rules, fault can be located easily. The source fault of this sequence of alarm is Alarm483.

The system sends the result to the network management system. The feedback from network administrator shows that the results match the real cases perfectly.

6. Conclusion and future work   Applying the technology of mining association rules to network management system can make good use of alarm information and some data mining knowledge, and can improve network management.

In this paper, a model of alarm system in wireless network based on mining association rules is depicted.

And the association between alarms is discussed. An improved FP-Growth algorithm to find out association rules is provided. Ideas to implement alarm filtering and fault location are proposed.

In this paper, as a core of the alarm system the improved FP-Growth algorithm is described in order to find out association more efficiently. The whole system is consisted of three sub-systems, data preprocessing sub-system, data mining and analyzing sub-system and result describing sub-system.

At present, the technology of mining association rules is very popular and has been applied to many different fields. With the further development of wireless network, the future work should include:  1) As a core of the alarm system in wireless network based on mining association rules the improved FP-Growth algorithm can still be improved.

2) Many results which were mined from the mass alarm information still remain unexplained. It needs further research on explaining the results and making use of them.

7. References  [1] Ge Yinglong, Zheng Ning, and Hu Xixiang, ?A Self- contained Fault Management Scheme in TMN Computer     Engineering and Applications?, Computer Engineering and Applications, No.20, 2002, pp. 147-149.

[2] Xu Qianfang, Kuo Jianjie, and Li Yongchun, ?An Algorithm for Ming Time-series Alarm Association Rules?, Microelectronics & Computer, Vol.24, No.3, 2007, pp. 23- 26.

[3] Zhao Wei, ?a Compressed Database Calculating Method in Association Rules and Data mining?, Science Mosaic, Oct.2005, pp. 8-12.

[4] Li Zhiyun, Zhou Guoxiang, ?A Fast Association Rule Mining Algorithm Based on MFP Tree?, Computer Technology and Development, Vol.17, No.6, 2007, pp. 94- 100.

[5] Wang Chun, Yin Mingde, ?Introduction to Fault Management in TMN?, Telecom Engineering Techniques and Standardization, No.12, 2005, pp. 48-51.

[6] Wu Zhiyong, Wu Yue, ?Research on applying data mining to Telecom Industry?, Computer Applications, Vol.25, Dec. 2005, pp. 213-214.

[7] Yo-Ping Huang, Chi-Peng Ouyang, and Ya-Hui Ke, ?A fuzzy approach to fulfilling personalized service through association rules derived from large databases?, 2001 IEEE International Fuzzy Systems Conference, Melbourne, Australia, 2001, pp.1-6.

[8] Shaw MJ, Subramaniam C, and Gek Woo Tan, ?Knowledge management and data mining for marketing?, Decision Support Systems, Vol.31 ,  Issue 1, May 2001, pp.

127-137.

