Research on Data Mining Algorithms for Automotive Customers? Behavior  Prediction Problem

Abstract   This paper extracts automotive marketing information, constructs data warehouse, adopts an improved ID3 decision tree model and an association rule model to do data mining, and then obtains prediction information of automotive customers? behavior. Experimental and comparative results verify the validity and accuracy of the prediction results.

1. Introduction   With the rapid development of automobile industry, the automotive marketing competition becomes more and more vigorous. Automotive types are numerous, and customers? needs are completely different due to different region, cultural etc. Therefore, how to obtain the information of customers? needs quickly, to predict the purchase intention accurately, to lower marketing cost, and to estimate marketing trends, is the key problem for an automotive enterprise to handle well.

To raise marketing success rate and customers? satisfaction, the core problems are analyzing the customer group, locating the target customer and making an active marketing to the target customer.

That is to say, we should try to discover which customers more likely to purchase which types of car, and the customer who purchases a certain car type has which common characteristics.

In this paper, the research was divided into the following three parts. Firstly, we collect the valid customers? purchase records from history data set, and clean up, converse and induct these data, and then using SQL Server construct data warehouse to  withdraw and handle the data. Secondly, we make use of two models which are more appropriate for prediction of customers? purchase behavior, that is, the decision tree and the association rule. Here, we propose an improved ID3 algorithm and analyze it.

Thirdly, we test the validity of the predicting results.

2. Construct of Data Warehouse   What the enterprise policymaker concern is the information of market developmental trends, customers? distribution and market prediction etc., but not those concrete trivial data. Therefore, the data warehouse should be designed according to needs. We can adopt subject-oriented data warehouse to store the analysis data of different use. Taking the data warehouse with automobile marketing subject as an example, we can adopt the simplest star model to predict market trends. The advantages of star model are convenient to construct, easy for comprehension, valid to analyze data from several dimension.

While constructing data warehouse, we need to select data from the car sale system real-timely.

However, while analyzing the customer group and locating the target customer, not all data are all valid to us. We need to select sample data from the data warehouse according to the decision analytical purpose. Generally, in order to avoid system being occupied to handle the confused data, data needs to be simplified. Here for the sake of comparison conveniently, we adopt same sample data as reference [1]. The attributes of CUSTOMER mainly include SEX, AGE, EDU and INCOME. Supposing the Automobile enterprise mainly sales SANTANA, AUDIA6 and BULK these three brands. We select 16 customers? purchase records from history data sets, and   DOI 10.1109/ICMLA.2008.23     clean up, converse and induct these data before restore into the data warehouse. The converted sample data is shown as Table 1.

Table 1. 16 Converted sample data  NO NAME SEX AGE EDU INCOME CAR_TYPE  1 Cheng L M young Bachelor low SANTANA  2 Zhang F M midlife Master high AUDIA6  3 Li W M young Master average1 BULK  4 Zhao YJ M old Master average2 AUDIA6  5 Lin Y M midlife Bachelor low SANTANA  6 Zhang LY M young Master average2 BULK  7 Li FK M midlife Master average2 BULK  8 Zhao Q F midlife Bachelor average1 SANTANA  9 Yao WY M young Master average2 AUDIA6  10 Li WW F midlife Master average1 SANTANA  11 Cheng K M young Bachelor average1 SANTANA  12 Jin W M midlife Master high BULK  13 Jiang C F old Bachelor high AUDIA6  14 Zhao GP M midlife Bachelor average2 AUDIA6  15 Jiang L F midlife Bachelor low BULK  16 Zhang XW F old  Bachelor high BULK   3. Models of Customers? behavior Prediction   The techniques or methods of data mining which used in prediction are numerous, and their mutations are also same. The common methods include regression prediction, decision tree, neural network, cluster, neighbors prediction, rules-oriented, etc. [2-5].

Considering the advantages and shortcomings of these methods and the characteristics of automotive customers? behavior prediction, we select decision tree and associate rule to construct prediction models.

3.1 Decision tree   The decision tree is to classify the history data of car-sales. The purpose is to resolve the problem which customers more likely to purchase which types of car.

The decision tree is essentially a greedy method. It induces a reasonable decision tree by top-down, recursive partitioning strategy. Here we propose a new ID3 algorithm which improved the judgment of noise node of ID3.

Input: a set of sample data (INFO) and a set of candidate attributes (ATTRIBUTE), including SEX, AGE, EDU, and INCOME.

Output: a decision tree.

PROCEDURE  CreateTree(INFO, ATTRIBUTE) {  CreateNode(INFO);  //Create node N using the set of sample data INFO  IF (all CAR_TYPE values of sample data in INFO are the same)  THEN   Return N as a leaf node; ELSE {  FOR (each attribute in ATTIBUTE)  { IF (the attribute of the node hasn?t been used to be a classification  attribute before)  THEN Compute the information gain of  the attribute of the node;  } IF ( the attribute whose information gain is the  biggest (>0) is marked as ATTIBUTE*) THEN { Mark this node as the node  which  needs to be divided next step according to  ATTIBUTE* ;  Divide N into Ni, and generate each branch of the node N;  } ELSE  { Mark the node as a noise node;  Return the node as a leaf node; }  FOR (each branch Ni) CreateTree(Ni, ATTIBUTE);  //Recursively calling this process }  } Supposing the attribute CAR_TYPE includes m  values (namely, there are m car types totally), s1~sm mean the number of cars of each type respectively in the data set, the S means the total amount of cars. For the attribute attr whose gain we try to find, 1~ n mean the corresponding number of the n kind of attr?s possibility value. So, s1j~smj mean the number of cars of each type respectively in the data set while attr is j.

The gain can be obtained through formulas (1)~(4) shown as follows, where mi ??1 and nj ??1 .

js ijs  ijp =                                                        (1)  ? =  ?= m  i ij pijpmjsjsjsI 1  )(2log),,2,1(    (2)  ),,2,1(1  21)( mjsjsjsI n  j S mjsjsjsattrE ?  =  +++ =   (3)     )(),,2,1()( attrEmsssIattrGain ?=             (4)  According to the above-mentioned algorithm and the formulas, we can get a decision tree as Figure 1 shown.

Figure 1. Produced decision tree   From Figure 1 we can see, the data set is divided to  10 nodes at the end, among them node 1 and node 5 are noise nodes. Therefore, there are 8 normal nodes which are produced to act as the prediction nodes.

According to these 8 normal crunodes, we can get 8 decision rules which can support automobile marketing prediction.

(1) The customer whose INCOME is low and SEX is M purchases SANTANA generally. (node 2)  (2) The customer whose INCOME is low and SEX is F purchases BUIK generally. (node 3)  (3) The customer whose AGE is midlife and INCOME is average1 purchases SANTANA generally.

(node 4)  (4) The customer whose AGE is old and INCOME is average2 purchases AUDIA6 generally. (node 6)  (5) The customer whose AGE is young, EDU is Bachelor and INCOME is avarage1 purchases SANTANA generally. (node 7)  (6) The customer whose AGE is young, EDU is Master and INCOME is avarage1 purchases BUIK generally. (node 8)  (7) The customer whose AGE is midlife, EDU is Bachelor and INCOME is avarage2 purchases AUDIA6 generally. (node 9)  (8) The customer whose AGE is midlife, EDU is Master and INCOME is avarage2 purchases BUIK generally. (node 10)   3.2 Association rule   In data mining, association rule algorithm is a  popular and well researched method for discovering interesting relations between variables in large databases. This algorithm can effectively discover the inside relations between the customers? purchasing  behavior and car?s attributes. It can assist making decisions of automobile marketing, mainly resolving the problem that the customer who purchases a certain car type has which common characteristics.

The rules produced by association analysis have credibility and support. The credibility measures the accuracy of association rule. The support measures the usage scope of the association rule, and means the appearing possibility of the associate rule in all transactions. The mining problem of association rule can convert into find out the rules which is larger or equal to the minimum support (min_sup) and minimum credibility (min_cred) which user provided in the data set. So looking for association rule information, can be resolved to as following two steps [6]:  Step 1: Find out all frequent item set A in the transaction database, namely the support of the item set A: supmin_% ?S ;  Step 2: For each frequent item set A, if ??? BA?B , and the credibility of BA ? : credmin_% ?C , then BA ?  is an association rule.

To explain easily, we will generalize the data of the customers? attributes and the marketing information. In this example, the data of customer?s attributes includes AGE, EDU INCOME and SEX, which are named with the set of item AG, ED, IN, SE respectively.  And the CAR_TYPE is named with CT.

The values of AGE include {young, midlife, old}, so the item set of AG is represented by AG = {AG1,AG2,AG3}.

The values of EDU include {Bachelor, Master}, so the item set of ED is represented by ED = {ED1,ED2}.

The values of INCOME include {low, average1, average2, high}, so the item set of IN is represented by IN = {IN1,IN2,IN3,IN4}.

The values of SEX include {M, F}, so the item set of SE is represented by SE = {SE1,SE2}.

The values of CAR_TYPE include {SANTANA, AUDIA6, BUIK}, so the item set of CT is represented by CT={CT1,CT2,CT3}.

We take for example the research on the relations of the customers? age, education, income and sex who purchases SANTANA as CAR_TYPE, and promising that the support of association rule must be larger or equal to 30%, the credibility must be larger or equal to 90%. We can extract the transaction set W from the item set shown as Table 1.

W={(SE1,AG1),(SE1,ED1),(SE1,IN1),(AG1,ED1), (AG1,IN1),(ED1,IN1),(SE1,AG1,ED1), (SE1,AG1,IN1),(SE1,ED1,IN1),(AG1,ED1,IN1), (SE1,AG1,ED1,IN1),(SE1,AG2),(AG2,ED1), (AG2,IN1),(SE1,AG2,ED1),(SE1,AG2,IN1), (AG2,ED1,IN1),(SE1,AG2,ED1,IN1),     (SE2,AG2),(SE2,ED1),(SE2,IN2),(AG2,IN2), (ED1,IN2),(SE2,AG2,ED1),(SE2,AG2,IN2), (SE2,ED1,IN2),(AG2,ED1,IN2), (SE2,AG2,ED1,IN2),(SE2,ED2),(AG2,ED2), (ED2,IN2),(SE2,AG2,ED2),(SE2,ED2,IN2), (AG2,ED2,IN2),(SE2,AG2,ED2,IN2),(SE1,IN2), (AG1,IN2),(SE1,AG1,IN2),(SE1,ED1,IN2), (AG1,ED1,IN2),(SE1,AG1,ED1,IN2)  } W is the item combination of all maybe frequent set  in the item set with SANTANA as CAR_TYPE. After processing the transaction set W to find out all frequent set, we will take out the rules which satisfy the credibility of BA ?  being larger or equal to min_cred in the frequent set. According to the definition of the credibility: credibility( BA ? ) = P(B|A), we can get 14 rules which satisfy the support and credibility in the customers who purchase SANTANA as CAR_TYPE.

(1) AG1 ? ED1                  (2) AG1 ? SE1 (3) IN1 ? ED1                   (4) SE1 ? ED1 (5) IN1 ? SE1                    (6) (AG1,ED1) ? SE1 (7) (AG1,SE1) ? ED1       (8) (ED1,IN1) ? SE1 (9) (IN1,SE1) ? ED1        (10) SE2 ? AG2 (11) SE2 ? IN2                  (12) (AG2,IN2) ? SE2 (13) (AG2,SE2) ? IN2      (14) (IN2,SE2) ? AG2 We can get the information from the rule (1): In the  customers who purchase SANTANA, if his AGE is young, then his EDU is Bachelor generally. With the above-mentioned methods, we can mine associate rules to assist automobile marketing decision better. Finally, we will get 30 associate rules which respectively correspond to the three car types. Among them, there are 14 rules corresponding to SANTANA, 4 rules corresponding to AUDIA6, and 12 rules corresponding to BUIK. The characteristics of associate rule algorithm make the set of these 30 rules not a minimum set, there are redundancy among the different k-item sets.

4. Verification of prediction results  4.1 Verification of the decision tree   With the same input data set, the algorithm adopted  in reference [1] produced the classification decision tree shown as Figure 2. Contrasting the decision trees produced in reference [1] and this paper (shown as Figure 1), the different places marked with ovals and labels for convenient to descript.

Figure 2. Decision tree produced in reference [1]  and differences with this paper   Label ? is a careless mistake in reference [1].

?EDU? should be replaced by ?INCOME?. Label ? shows we find the noise node earlier than reference [1].

In Label ?, the attribute of the second layer is ?EDU? and the attribute of the third layer is ?AGE?, but the results of this paper just are on the contrary. It is because that the gains of the attribute ?EDU? and ?AGE? are equal in this layer, and which is used firstly to classify is also permitted.

After contrasting, we can get following verification conclusions: 10 nodes were created totally as shown as Figure 1. The CAR_TYPE of each node is same as the Figure 2 if we look the nodes ? as a noise node. The results of this paper is completely correct, and higher efficient since we find the noise node earlier than the original ID3.

4.2 Verification of the association rule   We adopt the same idea of the association rule  model as reference [6]. Through contrasting the output results, we verified the validity and the accuracy of the prediction results.

Now we contrast the results of these two algorithms introduced in this paper. Comparing the output prediction rules, we can see, the problem that the decision tree model tries to solve is ?which customers more likely to purchase which types of car?, and the problem of the association rule model tries to solve is ?the customer who purchases a certain car type has which common characteristics?.

Take the first rule produced by the decision tree results: The customer whose INCOME is low and SEX is M purchase SANTANA generally. And we can find easily the 5th rule in the rules produced by the association rule model: In the customers who purchase SANTANA, if his INCOME is low, then his SEX is M generally. Though these two decision rules have different credibility because of probabilistic problem, the essences of their description are consistent basically.

If we converse the results of association rule slightly, we can find the similar description in the decision tree results. Although the number of decision rules produced by the association rule is more than the decision tree, it doesn?t influence the horizontal comparison. Because we have mentioned there are redundancy among the different k-item sets. If we want to raise speed and efficiency of the associate rule, we need to improve the algorithm further.

5. Conclusions   This paper constructed a data warehouse with automobile marketing subject by using SQL Server.

And on this foundation, we adopt the decision tree model and associate rule model to analyze the history data of the automobile marketing, get the automotive customer classification rules and customers? attributes associate rules, and realize prediction of customers? purchasing behavior to raise the core competitions of automotive enterprises.

