Energy Loss Analysis Based on Fuzzy Association Rule Mining in Power  Plant

Abstract   The rational determination of operation optimization values is very important to economical analysis and operation optimization in power plant. Based on the correlation of operation data, the economical analysis and operation optimization based on data mining was proposed to guide the operation optimization. The basic structure of economical analysis and operation optimization based on data mining was established and the fuzzy association rule mining was introduced to determine the operation optimization value. The deviation analysis and optimal operation guidance were carried out based on the optimal values obtained by data mining to guide the optimal operation in power plant. Experiment results show that the economical analysis and operation optimization based on data mining can guide the operator to make better adjustments and improve the economic efficiency greatly in power plant.

1. Introduction   The economic efficiency in thermal power plant is affected by many factors, which include the load, coal quality, equipment state, environmental condition and operation level, etc. The economical analysis and operation optimization is a complex system engineering that involves energy loss analysis and operation optimization guidance. The operation optimization value reflects the reachable optimal parameters and states under a certain load, which is the basis for energy loss and economical analysis [1]. The rational determination of operation optimization values is very important to economical analysis and operation optimization in power plant.

As the development of information technology, the operation data is stored by data acquisition and online monitoring system and large amounts of operation data are accumulated in power plants. Many useful knowledge exists in operation data and can be obtained by data analysis and data mining to provide operation optimization guidance [2,3]. Based on the correlation of operation data, the quantitative association rule mining was introduced to determine the operation optimization  value to guide the optimal operation in power plants. The economical analysis and operation optimization based on data mining is proposed to improve the performance and efficiency of electricity industry process in power plant.

2. Energy loss analysis system based on the fuzzy association rule mining   The equipments are related closely and interacted with operators in thermal power plant. The complex correlations exist among operation level, load and economic efficiency, which are obviously manifested by operation data [4]. Based on the correlations among operation data, the potential associations can be found by data mining and applied to guide the operation optimization in power plant. The quantitative association rule mining was introduced into operation optimization in electric power industry. The basic structure of economical analysis and operation optimization based on data mining was established and the quantitative association rule mining was introduced to find the operation optimization value and guide the optimal operation, as is shown in Figure 1.

O peration D  ata  D ata A  cquisition  D ata processing   Figure 1. Structure of economical analysis and operation  optimization system based on data mining  The operation optimization system based on data mining consists of four parts, which are data acquisition and data preprocessing, economic performance calculation, quantitative data mining, deviation analysis and operation guidance. The operation data is sent and stored in database by data acquisition. The economic performance calculation carries out the economical analysis. The coal consumption rate can reflect the economic performance in power plant and is selected as the target of data mining. The operation data that are relevant to the coal consumption rate are collected for data mining process. Based on the operation data and the  2008 International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design  DOI 10.1109/ISCID.2008.184   2008 International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design  DOI 10.1109/ISCID.2008.184     results of economic performance calculation, the quantitative association rule mining is introduce to acquire the operation optimization value of important parameters, which is the basis of the economical analysis and operation optimization.

3. Operation optimization based on fuzzy association rule mining   The energy loss analysis and optimal operation guidance are carried out based on the optimal values to guide operation optimization in power plant. The goal of association rule mining is to discover important relations among items. Agrawal and his co-workers proposed Apriori algorithm for mining Boolean association rules [5]. For quantitative attribute values in power plant, an efficient and convenient method is to mapping quantitative attributes into Boolean attributes, then the algorithm for finding Boolean association rules can be used on the transformed database to discover quantitative association rules.

Quantitative association rules were defined over quantitative and categorical attributes. The domain of quantitative attributes was discretized into intervals by fine-partitioning the values of the attributes and combining the adjacent partitions as necessary, the intervals were then mapped to contiguous integers [6]. As a result, each attribute had a form of <attribute, value>, where value was the mapped integer of an interval for quantitative attributes or a single value for categorical attributes.

Because distinct intervals will exclude those potential elements which are neighbouring the boundary, the data which are close the boundary will have to partial to one interval. To solve this problem, the fuzzy sets theory was introduced into the association mining process to soften the partition boundary of the domain and generalize the data. The fuzzy concept is better than the partition method because fuzzy sets provide a smooth transition between member and non-member of a set. The fuzzy association rules is in the form of ?If X is A and Y is B, then Z is C?, where X, Y and Z were sets of attributes, A, B and C were fuzzy sets which described X, Y and Z respectively. The main process of mining fuzzy association rules can be divided into the following four steps [4].

(1) The operation data is standardized and is transformed into fuzzy sets by using the membership functions.

Transform the quantitative value ( 1,2,..., )jit j m=  of each transaction ( 1,2,..., )iT i n=  in D into a fuzzy set  j if .

j it  is described by fuzzy sets as  1 2  1 2  ( ) ( ) ( ) ...i j i j i jkji  j j jk  R R R f  R R R ? ? ?  = + + +           (1)  where ( 1, 2,..., )jsR s k=  is s-th fuzzy region of attribute ( 1,2,..., )iT i n= , and iT  is i-th transaction in D.

(2) Generate large fuzzy patterns by scanning the database.

For each region jsR  stored in rC  calculate it scalar cardinality for all transactions.

( )  1 n js i js  i weight R  n ?  =  == ?                       (2) If jsweight  is equal to or greater than the minimum  support, put it into the set of large r-itemsets ( rL ). That is, { | , 1 ,1 }r js jsL R weight minsupport j m s k= ? ? ? ? ?   (3)  The similar steps are repeated for each newly formed (r+1)-itemset 1rC +  until 1rL +  is null,  (3)  Get fuzzy association rules. Based on the large fuzzy patterns, the desired fuzzy association rules with the minimum confidence are generated. Calculate the confidence values of all association rules with  1 1 1   ( ... ... )  k k q  n  it i  n  it it it it i  ?  ? ? ? ? ? +  =  =  ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ? (4)  (4) The quantitative association rules are achieved by the fuzzy association rules. These quantitative association rules are verified and the correct rules can be used to guide the industrial process online.

The fuzzy association rule mining is introduced to mine the parameters related to economic efficiency. The economic performance calculation calculates the coal consumption rate by indirect balance method, and the low coal consumption rate are chosen as the target of data mining. The quantitative association rules are achieved by analyzing the historical operation data. For example, when the coal consumption is low, the following rule is obtained.

1 2( , )load L L , 1 2( , )Parameters P P , 1 2( , )Parameters T T ? 1 2( , )Coal consumption b b  The rule to determine the operation optimization value is expressed as  1 2( , )load L L ? 1 2( , )Parameters P P , 1 2( , )Parameters T T If the rule satisfies the minimum support and minimum  confidence, optimal values from this rule can be used to guide the optimal operation in power plant. Based on the fuzzy association rule mining, the optimal values obtained from the operation data are listed in Table 1.

The operation optimization values determined by data mining from the actual operation data can reflect reachable optimal status under a certain load and corresponding conditions, which are more suitable for the actual operating state and can be used to guide the operating process to achieve an efficient performance.

Acquiring the optimization value from operation data by     data analysis and data mining provides a novel and efficient method for operation optimization in power plant.

Table 1. The operation optimization values by data mining  Parameters Operation optimization value  210MW 270MW 300MW  Main Steam Pressure/MPa 13.24 16.67 16.71 Feed water temperature/? 254.6 270.4 276.2  Reheater spray/(t.h-1) 5.73 8.65 12.52 Flue gas temperature/? 132.4 142.8 146.4 Excess air coefficient 1.482 1.321 1.293  Condenser vacuum/kPa 97.92 97.19 96.30  4. Energy Loss analysis and operation guidance   The target of operation optimization is find useful knowledge and method to guide the optimal operation in power plant. The economic efficiency is influenced by many factors, such as the deviation of operation parameters from optimal target value, load, coal quality, equipment healthy condition and operation level of the operators and so on. The main effect factors of economic efficiency is found out and energy loss analysis is performed based on those factors. The coal consumption rate is chosen as the main economical index. The operators can easily find the reason of coal consumption deviation and take measures to keep unit running in the optimal state. The deviation of coal consumption is calculated by the following formula.

[ ] [ ] [ / ]i i sb E b g kWh?? = ? i                      (5) Where [ ]ib?  is the deviation of coal consumption caused by parameters deviating from the optimal values. sb is the coal consumption rate. [ ]iE?  is the relative coal consumption rate of parameters deviating from the optimal values. The minus represents that the changing direction of them is inverse each other.

The operation optimization values based on data mining and measured values in 90% load range of a 300MW unit are shown in Table 2. The deviation analysis results are also presented.

Table 2. The deviation analysis results in 90% load range   The main steam pressure is 15.89MPa and is extremely  lower than the operation optimization value, which is the main effect factors of decreasing the economic efficiency.

The heat consumption increases about 88.86KJ/KW.h and the coal consumption increases about 3.28g/KW.h. So the  operation optimization in this condition should be analyzing the reasons of deviation and decreasing the deviation between measured value and optimization value of main steam pressure. Based on the results of economical calculation and deviation analysis, the operator can make adjustments and keep the unit running in the optimal state. The user interfaces of the deviation analysis and operation guidance based on data mining are shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2. The user interfaces of the deviation analysis and  operation guidance  5. Conclusion   The economical analysis and operation optimization based on data mining was proposed to optimize the operation in power plant. The basic structure of economical analysis and operation optimization based on data mining was established and implement in a 300MW unit. Based on the correlation of operation data, the fuzzy association rule mining was introduced to determine the operation optimization value. The energy loss analysis and optimal operation guidance were carried out based on the optimal values to guide the optimal operation in power plant. The operation optimization value achieved by data mining can reflect the actual attainable optimal state. Experiment results show that the economical analysis and operation optimization based on data mining can guide the operator to make better adjustments and keep the unit running in optimal state.

