The operation optimization based on correlation analysis of operation  parameters in Power Plant

Abstract   Accurate operation data is the foundation of system identification and system analysis. Based on the characteristic of operation parameters in power plant, the method of  data selection and data processing was discussed and the correlation analysis of operation parameters was introduced to operation optimization. The correlation coefficients were proposed to measure the related degree between operation parameters. The operation optimization values were determined by the results of correlation analysis and  data mining, which is the foundation of economical analysis and operation optimization. The optimal values of the excess air coefficient were obtained and provided to the operators online to guide the operation based on the results of the data analysis. The experiment results show that the boiler efficiency is improved greatly. The determination of the optimization value based on operation data by correlation analysis and data mining provides a novel and efficient method for operation optimization in power plant   1. Introduction   The operation optimization in power plant is a complex and important research field. The operation optimization values reflect the reachable optimal running state of the unit, which provide the operator the optimal controllable parameters in certain load range. The machine and equipments in power plant are interacted closely and the relationships among them are revealed by the correlation of operation parameters [1,2]. Based on the historical operation parameters, the optimal values of the operating parameters are found by data analysis and data mining technique to guide the operation optimization in power plant. It reflects the actual optimal operating state and can be used to guide the optimal operation.

The proper data selection is very important for data analysis [3]. Accurate operation parameters is the foundation of system analysis. The methods of data selection and data processing were discussed in detail to improved the efficiency of data analysis. The correlation coefficient of the operation parameters was proposed to measure the related degree between operation parameters  and the association rule mining was introduced to find the association among the operation parameters. The optimal values were obtained and provided online to guide the optimal operation based on the results of the data analysis.

2. Data selection and data processing   The operation parameters vary continually with time in power plant, which reflects the process of energy transformation and transmission in electricity industry.

When the load changes greatly and is far away from the stable state, the dynamic operation parameters cannot accurately reflect the actual state of the unit [4]. So the stable operation parameters should be selected to be analyzed and processed to obtain useful knowledge.

Generally the stable state is defined according to  the load, in which the load and other related parameters is stable more than 5 minutes. As is  shown in Figure 1, state a is the stable state of 100% load and state b is the stable state of 80% load for a 300MW unit. State c is the dynamic process of 80% load  and the operation parameters should not be selected for analysis under 80% load.

Figure 1. Curves of load and main steam pressure of a  300MW unit The running state is stable when the load is less than a  certain threshold ?  in the given time period [t-d, t]. The calculation formula is as follows:   __  ( ) 2( ) t  i  i t d N N ?  = ?  ? <? (1) Where  __  N  is the average of the load ( )iN  in the given time period.

2008 International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design  DOI 10.1109/ISCID.2008.182   2008 International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design  DOI 10.1109/ISCID.2008.182     The stable state parameters is selected and checked.

The bad data is detected and removed from the parameters based on data validation and data processing.

The correlation coefficients of the parameters are calculated to judge the related degree, which is the foundation of data mining. The potential associations can be found by data mining algorithm and applied to guide the operation optimization in power plant.

3. Determination of correlation coefficients of operation parameters   The operation data in power plant is valuable for learning more about the running state and operation optimization. Based on the correlation analysis, the uncorrelated and weak correlation parameters can be eliminated from data analysis and data mining. The correlation analysis and the calculation of coefficient of operation parameters can be used to learning more about the operation data, which provides guidance for data analysis and data mining in power plant.

3.1. Correlation between operation parameters   The data acquisition system monitors and collects thousands of operation parameters which reflect the actual running states in power plant. The combustion system, water system, steam system and electric system interact with each other, which makes the correlation exists among many operation parameters. One kind of parameters is greatly associated with load, for example, main steam pressure, main steam flow and excess air coefficient. The curves of load and main steam pressure are shown in Figure 1. Form Figure 1, we can conclude that the main steam pressure is strongly correlated with load. The other kind is less influenced by load, such as main steam temperature, furnace negative pressure, boiler drum water level etc. They are uncorrelated or weak correlated.

3.2. Correlation among performance index and operation parameters   The operation parameters and performance index are correlated closely. Based on the historical data, the association relationship among operation parameters and performance index are obtained. In certain load and other related condition, the parameters corresponding to the optimal performance index are selected and provided to guide the operation online. The optimal parameters which were determined from historical data are attainable and reasonable in practice.

By analyzing the relationship between important parameters and performance index, some useful knowledge and association rules can be obtained, which  can be used to guide the optimal operation. The scatter diagram of load and heat consumption of a 300MW unit is shown in Figure 2. The scatter diagram of flue gas temperature and coal consumption is shown in Figure 3.

We can conclude that the heat consumption will decrease with the load and the coal consumption will increase with the flue gas temperature. The correlation among performance index and important parameters can be visualized to the operator by the scatter diagram. The scatter diagram is often used to show the correlation of operation data in data visualization methods.

Figure 2. Scatter diagram of load and heat consumption of a  300MW unit   Figure 3. Scatter diagram of flue gas temperature and coal  consumption of a 300MW unit  3.3. Calculation of correlation coefficients of operation parameters   The correlation analysis is helpful to learn more about the related degree among operation parameters in power plant. The correlation coefficient among parameters can be calculated by operation parameters. So the uncorrelated and weak correlation parameters can be eliminated from the operation data during the procedure of data analysis and data processing in operation optimization.

The correlation degree of variables is often described by correlation coefficient [5]. For certain sample from the operation parameters in power plant, the calculation formula of the correlation coefficients is described as follows.

__ __   __ __  1 1  ( )( )  ( ) ( )  n  i i i  n n  i i i i  x x y y r  x x y y  =  = =  ? ? =  ? ?  ?  ? ? (2)     Correlation coefficients range in value from -1 and +1.

A value of -1 represents a perfect negative relationship and a value of +1 represents a perfect positive relationship.

A value of 0 indicates no linear relationship.

The correlation among operation parameters can be calculated by the formula of correlation coefficients and expressed by the correlation coefficient matrix. The process of correlation analysis and correlation coefficient calculation is described as follows.

(1) The stable state data is selected by formula (1). The sample data set and the conditions correspondingly are constructed. The sample data set is  1 2X { , ,..., | : , ,..., }i i i i mx y z condition c c c=           (3) where , ,..., ( 1, 2,..., )i i ix y z i n=  is the i-th records of the operation parameters and ( 1, 2,..., )jc j m=  is the conditions correspondingly.

(2) The correlation coefficients are calculated by formula 2, and the correlation coefficients matrix is obtained. The correlation coefficient is used to estimate the related degree between operation parameters in power plant.

(3) Based on the results of correlation calculation, the correlation coefficients among operation parameters are obtained and verified, which is the foundation of data mining. The data visualization and theory analysis can be used to test and verify the results of correlation analysis.

3.4. Result analysis of correlation coefficients of operation parameters   The historical operation parameters of a 300MW unit are analyzed and the correlation coefficients are calculated. These parameters to be analyzed include load, main steam temperature, main steam pressure, condenser vacuum, furnace negative pressure and excess air coefficient. The correlation coefficients between them are calculated to estimate the related degree by the correlation algorithm. The operation data set includes 4300 records.

The correlation analysis results are shown in Table 1. The correlation coefficients between operation parameters are represented by the result matrix. The correlation coefficients of operation parameters in this row with corresponding list are given in Table 1.

The correlation coefficient between load and main steam pressure is 0.988.

( , ) 0.988Correlation load main steam pressure = While the correlation coefficient between load and  furnace negative pressure is -0.016.

( , ) 0.016Correlation load furnace negative pressure = ?  From the results in Table 1, we can conclude that the load is strong correlation with main steam pressure, condenser vacuum and excess air coefficient. The load is uncorrelated or weak correlated with main steam temperature and furnace negative pressure.

The correlation analysis and the calculation of coefficient of operation parameters are helpful to estimate the related degree between operation parameters, which provides guidance for data mining in power plant.

Table 1. Correlation coefficients matrix the operation parameters    4. The determination of optimal excess air coefficient based on data correlation   Based on the correlation of operation data, the association rule mining is introduce to acquire the optimal value of important parameters. The operation optimization values are determined by the fuzzy quantitative association rule mining algorithm [4]. This method can avoid the hard partition boundary in traditional quantitative association rule mining [4,6].

The excess air coefficient is one of the most important factor for economical combustion of the boiler. An optimal value of excess air coefficient exists at a certain load range. The fuzzy association rule mining is introduced to obtain the optimal excess air coefficient based on correlation analysis and data mining. In a given load range, the excess air coefficient related to low coal consumption is chosen as optimization value to guide the operation. The optimal values obtained by data mining are listed in Table 2.

Table 2. The comparison of designed value and optimal values  of excess air coefficient  Parameters Excess air coefficient  Design value Optimal value  210MW 1.450 1.460  270MW 1.354 1.344 300MW 1.328 1.273  The optimal curve of excess air coefficient can be obtained by regression analysis of the optimal values determined by data mining. The regression equation between load and optimal excess air coefficient is established. The optimal excess air coefficient in certain load and corresponding operation conditions can be calculated by the following formula.

21.589 0.0004 0.000004839y x x= + ?            (4) Where x is load, y is the optimal excess air coefficient.

The optimal value of excess air coefficient can be calculated and provided to optimize the operation. The excess air coefficient is optimized based on the results of data mining. The boiler efficiency improved greatly and the coal consumption reduced. The actual curves between load and coal consumption rate are shown in Figure 4.

The optimal values by data analysis and data mining are from actual operation data, which can reflect the reachable optimal status under a certain load and corresponding conditions. Data analysis and data mining provide a new method to improve the performance and efficiency in electricity industry processes.

Figure 4. Curves between load and coal consumption rate in  different load range  5. Conclusion   Large amount of operation data is accumulated in power plant and abundant knowledge exists in those data, which can be used to guide the operation optimization.

