The Process Management and Quality Control of Graduation Design

Abstract   The graduation practice and design is a comprehensive education process in cultivating talents in the university. It becomes more difficult due to the increasing graduates and the employment pressure.

According to the analysis of some critical problems, such as the similar subject and incompact management etc., especially the investigation in graduation design in recent years, the paper prompts a bi-directional model in subject selection based on rule base and the process management mechanism in time stream.

Meanwhile, the system of process management and quality control of graduation design in the university based on web has been developed, which makes the process of graduation design more effective. The process management and quality control of graduation design is improved.

1. Introduction   Graduation design is an necessary step in the process of cultivating talents in university. It provides a chance for students to practice their professional quality and operating ability. Its aim is to cultivate students to analyze and solve problem through utilizing basic theory, fundamental knowledge and skill of their major. In the file of ? Notice on the Improvement of Graduation Design in Ordinary College?, Ministry of education points out that graduation design plays an necessary role in many aspects such as cultivating college students to seek after truth, strengthening social consciousness, putting up science research ,enhancing practice ability and so on.

This work is partially supported by the Tteaching Reform Project of Jiangxi Province (JXJG-06-10- 8)and  JingGang Star Talents Training Plan of Jiangxi Province, China.

2.The Main Problem Faced of Graduation Design   Some problems such as similar or repeated subject, little time students spend and difficulty for teacher to supervise srudent  are found out in the process of graduation design due to the increasing graduates and the employment pressure. It results in the decline of quality of graduation project(paper) .This phenomenon raises people to pay attention to it extensively and many colleges have do related research. Some of them prompted process management mechanism and also developed relevant information management system to realize effective management of graduation design.

However, the present research and application mainly focus on the management of graduation design stream.

Research on the quality of graduation design subject and loose management caused by the different practical was not well enough. The paper studies the bi- directional model in subject selection based on rule base and the process management mechanism in time stream. An information system also has been developed to achieve concrete targets.

3.Bi-selection Subject Model Based on Rule Base   It is the first step that student choose a subject. The  subject is the chief factor to evaluate the quality of graduation design and it highly generalizes the content of graduation subject. However, some problems such as divorced from reality, outdated subject, improper degree of difficulty, serious disparity workload repeated subjects among different teachers appear in the graduation design subject due to the increasing graduates and the employment pressure. Reason is various.Firstly, the subject is planed by teachers themselves in many colleges and universities and then chosen by students in this small area selection.

Secondly, communication between teachers is not enough and at the same time teachers lack overall  2008 International Symposium on Computer Science and Computational Technology  DOI 10.1109/ISCSCT.2008.321     impression about topics few years ago, which makes a large part virtual and re-use subject. These subjects divorced from the actual project and most of them don?t combine theoretical knowledge with practical application. This hinders the student's self-innovation capability training at a certain extent. So establish relevant rules, use Data Mining methods to analyze it, and constrain bi- selection subject between students and teachers are effective ways to enhance graduate theme.

3.1.Judgment of graduation project based on Association Rules   Teachers often give appropriate topic from the  perspective of their own knowledge. Although there is a collective discussion and final vetting before the design, duplication and similar topics still exist because of so many graduation design and a lack of understanding to the old subjects a few years ago. Data Mining tries to extract previous unknown, effective and potentially useful knowledge from the DB. As there are large amounts of data in the databases, it is very important for us to find the useful information from the database, and the Data Mining technology is an efficient solution to this problem. The research of Data Mining has reached significant achievement and has been applied successfully in many areas. However, successful application of Data Mining in the field of education has not been reported. In 1993, R.Agrawal etc. first put forward the issue of mining association rules which provides the degree of relevance of the things. Now mining association rules has been a significant content of data mining and so draws attention of many researchers. There are many association rules in education data. Data mining can discover it. Association rules mining is to find association relation between a large number items in the database. Apriori algorithm the paper used is an important algorithm in Mining Association Rules. It can be divided into two problems: ?  find all the frequent  item whose support degree is greater than min-sup; ? use the frequent item found in step 1 to generate expected rule. After teachers have given their subject, the computer analyzes subjects according mining rules of related data. Then computer shields repeat of similar topics and gives suggestion about similar subjects. This can effectively guarantee the quality of graduation design.

3.2 The process of bi-selection subject based on binding rules    In the past time, the number of students that a teacher guides, the rights of students to choose subject are confirmed in school through paper. It is difficult to achieve genuine sense of double election. There is a restriction number of students that a teacher tutors according to his/her title. Teachers often provide more subjects to enable students have sufficient choice.  The eventual confirmation of the fist choice and second choice also need rule.

The system accomplishes this complex process through the following series. Firstly, system judges whether a student has rights to choose subject after the student login the system. If the student passes the verification module, he/she can begin to choose subject. The system allows each student to select a topic in the primary choice, and each topic can be chosen by several students. Then the teacher chooses students that he/she satisfied to guide. This method effectively guarantees the bilateral selection of students and advisors. The system will count the number of students for each teacher at the end of topic selection.

If the number has reached quota and the teacher still has superfluous topics, the superfluous topics will be shielded (delete from the temporary table).This can avoid the number of guidance over standard.

When a student or teacher changes his/her choose for some reasons, the system will also count the number of student that the teacher guides. If the number doesn?t reach the quota, the teacher?s subject shielded before can be chosen again. This can ensure student to have enough choice. A specific process is shown in Figure 1.

Fig1.The Process of Bi- selection Subject Based on Rules  4.Process Management of Graduation Based on Time Stream   In general undergraduate graduation design lasts  for 4-6 months, and it is the longest period of time during the four-year undergraduate study. It is difficult for teachers and students to communicate with each other face-to-face because of employment pressure and different practice spots. It results in management     vacuum and loose management of graduation design.

The students can not finish graduate design exactly in accordance with the progress of design. They have to finish it rapidly at the end of design with poor graduate design.

Developing graduation design process management system based on time stream, controlling the contents of graduation design through time and using time to constraint teachers and students are effective ways to solve loose management.

4.1 Access control model based on time   The entire workflow is a series of tasks to complete the same objectives in management information system based on workflow. Time-based access control model divides the system into different sets and each has its own flow [4].Then business is divided into task unit which can?t be divided any more.

Task unit is the smallest module. User belongs to role.

A role can corresponds to multi-user and a user can contain multi-role. A role corresponding to a task has specific authority, at the same time the task is also limited by time. That is, rule that user belonging to has specific authority to task during a certain time. Time is an important feature of workflow model. Time series is an indispensable data format during people?s work and life. Analyzing time series can reveal inherent rule. It has great realistic significance for people to correctly understand things and make a scientific decision.

Workflow task is constrained by time. Undergraduate graduation design has strict time constraint and graduation Design Management System is a typical process-based management information systems.

According to time-based access control model, the design can be summarized as Figure2:  Fig 2: A time-based Graduation Design Process   4.2  The Method deal with time cue and time violation   Graduation Design is sensitive to time constraints  and we must push forward graduation design process in strict accordance with time. When waiting time excesses the default value, the system gives suggestion to both teachers and students, automatically reminds staff to expedite the processing speed, warns the user  to realize task that should be completed now and next time and avoids disobeying time.

4.3  Bi-communication between teachers and students   Communication runs through the whole design, and it is divided into one-way exchange and two-way exchange. One-way exchange is carried out mainly through releasing press. But when students have problems in the graduate design and need teacher?s guidance, the system will provide timely platform for the two-way exchange. SMS and message boards are the way to accomplish two-way communication. When one party can not log on the Internet, he/she can use short message to realize the integration of system and mobile network. The system will automatically record message which can be received when related communicate enters the system. The reply is also feed back the sender via short message. The system uses the following technology such as ASP, SMS and database technology to realize timely two-way communication.

5. Conclusion   According to bi-selection model based on rule and the process management mechanism in time stream, a process management and quality control system based on web was proposed and completed. The system realized the bi-selection of the thesis topic, the query of thesis topic and the basic demands, supervising on the network, checking of student's going, releasing announcement, thesis upload etc. The system met the dynamic demands of thesis supervising and management.

