Data Visualization and Analysis of CIC Graduate Student TeraGrid Resource Usage

Abstract- The computing resources of the TeraGrid are a powerful tool for research by graduate students throughout the world. In this paper we analyze the usage of the TeraGrid by a sample of 876 Graduate Students from the institutions that form the Committee on Institutional Cooperation. We investigate demographic information and usage of TeraGrid resources and present visualizations. We also analyze the sample using data mining algorithms, specifically rule association learning and hierarchical clustering, and create interactive visualizations. This work reveals interesting patterns about the research done by graduate students on the TeraGrid and the resources they use.

Keywords- TeraGrid, data mining, visualization

I. INTRODUCTION  We present the analysis and visualization of the use of TeraGrid supercomputers by 876 graduate students at the  twelve  research  universities  in  the  Committee  on Institutional Cooperation (CIC). Our goal is to generate a means  of  visually  exploring  the  use  of  an  integrated computational  resource.   We examine large volumes of previously  unanalyzed  usage  statistics  collected  by  the National  Center  for  Supercomputing  Applications (NCSA) using Meandre  (http://www.seasr.org/meandre), an open source data mining flow execution engine.  These visualizations  will  enhance  understanding  of  the utilization of TeraGrid resources  and illustrate the wide range of users? backgrounds and research interests.  This will  facilitate  future studies of TeraGrid resource  usage and of its graduate student users.

We analyze TeraGrid usage for the time period from January 1, 2008 to June 14, 2008, focusing on two main aspects: basic demographic data of CIC graduate student users and data on jobs submitted to TeraGrid resources.

We  used  Processing,  an  open-source  language  and development  environment,  and  Meandre  to  create  the visualizations.



II. DEMOGRAPHICS  The  CIC  consists  of  twelve  Midwestern  member universities.  Since  2003,  when  the  TeraGrid  began collecting user statistics, 876 graduate students from CIC institutions have used TeraGrid resources. Students from  all  CIC  institutions  are  represented,  with  the  most students coming from the University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign (UIUC).

The  dominant  departments  represented  include Computer Science, Chemistry, and Physics.



III. TERAGRID RESOURCE USAGE  In this section, we examine the use of the TeraGrid resources by CIC graduate students. Between January 1, 2008, and June 14, 2008, CIC graduates submitted a total of 138,204 jobs to TeraGrid supercomputers.

Only  eight  resource  sites  were  used  by  graduate students;  the  computational  resources  at  the  National Center  for  Atmospheric  Research  (Boulder,  CO),  Oak Ridge  National  Laboratory  (Oak  Ridge,  TN),  and  the National  Institute  for  Computational  Sciences  (Oak Ridge,  TN)  were  not  used  by  CIC  graduate  students between January and June 2008.

In  this  time  period,  UIUC  graduate  students submitted  the  greatest  number  of  jobs,  and  Indiana University students submitted the fewest.

Figure 1 is a visualization generated in Processing of the job distribution to TeraGrid sites. The majority of CIC students submit jobs to at most four external resource sites, and only those at UIUC and University of Chicago have submitted jobs to six sites.  Graduate students from the University of Iowa have only submitted TeraGrid jobs to the supercomputers at the Texas Advanced Computing Center.   In  addition,  jobs  from  the  University  of Minnesota, Penn State University,  Figure 1. TeraGrid Resource Usage by CIC institutions   DOI 10.1109/eScience.2008.155     and  the  University  of  Wisconsin-Madison  are  all concentrated at three TeraGrid sites ? NCSA, San Diego Supercomputer  Center,  and  the  Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center.

Four CIC institutions are also TeraGrid partner sites, i.e. UIUC/NCSA, Purdue University, Indiana University, and University of Chicago/Argonne National Laboratory (ANL).   A significant  number of jobs at  UIUC and the University  of  Chicago  are  submitted  to  local supercomputers.

The NCSA machines Tungsten and Abe and ANL?s DTF  received  the  heaviest  usage  between  January  and June 2008.  Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center?s Rachel received  the  fewest  jobs  from graduate  students  in  the same  time  period.   University  of  Wisconsin-Madison graduate students use NCSA-Abe the most frequently, but also  use  a  variety  of  other  NCSA  and  San  Diego Supercomputing Center machines.



IV. DATA MINING ANALYSIS  We  used  data  mining  algorithms  to  search  for patterns  within  the  CIC  graduate  student  dataset.  In particular, we used hierarchical clustering and association rule  learning  to  identify  connections  within  the  data.

Using Meandre,  we created interactive visualizations of our  results.  For  association  rule  learning,  these visualizations  consisted of  sets of associated items.  For clustering, they consisted of dendrograms.

Our clustering algorithm was run on two different data sets. The first was the set of jobs submitted by CIC graduate students from January to June 2008. The second set  was  clustering-based  text  mining  using  students? abstracts.  The  goal  of  the  text  mining  was  to  reveal common themes amongst  different  areas.  An interesting example of these themes is illustrated by CIC biological projects:  commonly  clustered  words  involving  biology were  ?virus,?  ?proteins,?  ?membrane,?  and  ?LRAC? (Large  Resource  Allocations  Committee).  The  LRAC handles  the  allocations  for  the  most  computationally intensive  projects  on  the  TeraGrid.  This  is  interesting because  there  is  a  distinct  link  between  these  areas  of biology  and  the  LRAC  ?  they  are  the  most computationally  intensive  projects.  Another  interesting example  was  the  association  between  ?NCSA,? ?Climate,?  ?Flows,?  and  ?Models.?  The  projects modeling  climate  systems  are  associated  with  NCSA resources.  Figure  2  illustrates  an  example  of  the interactive  text-mining  visualizations  generated  using Meandre.

We also executed rule association algorithms on the jobs submitted to the TeraGrid by CIC graduate students between  January  and  June  2008.  We  looked  for  rules associating  job  duration,  time  of  job  submission, institution of the student, and TeraGrid resource used.

These algorithms provide additional insight into the use of TeraGrid resources by CIC graduate students.

Figure 2. Interactive Text Mining Dendrogram Visualization

V. CONCLUSION  In  conclusion,  TeraGrid  computing  resources  are used  by  graduate  students  at  CIC  member  institutions from a wide range of fields and disciplines.  The majority of  these  users  are  from  the  University  of  Illinois  at Urbana-Champaign.  In the January 1, 2008 to June 14, 2008 time period, graduate students from CIC institutions used resources from eight of the eleven TeraGrid partner sites.  With the notable exception of students from UIUC and the University of Chicago, users at an institution also tend to submit jobs to at most four external resource sites, not including TeraGrid resources at their own institutions.

Job  distribution  across  specific  supercomputers  in  the TeraGrid  was  also  uneven,  with  certain  computing resources being used significantly more often than others.

Through  our  data  mining  analysis,  we  identified several patterns and connections in CIC graduate student usage.  We applied association rule learning, hierarchical clustering,  and  text  mining algorithms  on  the  TeraGrid data.

ACKNOWLEGMENTS  This  research  was  prepared  as  part  of  a  summer research  experience  at  the  National  Center  for Supercomputing  Applications.   The  authors  would  to thank Umesh Thakkar and Loretta Auvil, both of NCSA, for their assistance on this research experience. Also, the authors would like to thank Steve Quinn and Bernie Acs, both of NCSA, for their help collecting the TeraGrid data.

