Applications of Data Mining in the Education Resource Based on XML

Abstract   As the quick development of Internet, more and  more application of XML data description appears in the Internet. How to access the knowledge we need effectively among numerous XML data is becoming a main research direction. This paper studies the data mining of XML document initially, divides the mining of XML document into structure mining and content mining, introduces the knowledge to analyze by using the data mining, such as classification, assembly and relevancy and also analyzes the mould of mining data according to some typical educational resources.

1. Introduction   Since XML can easily combine structural data from different sources, it is possible to mine multiple and incompatible database. Moreover, because the data based on XML is self-described, it can be exchanged and handled without internal description. As an industrial standard of structural data, XML provides many favorable conditions for organizations, software developers, Web sites and terminal users. At present, many studies tell us how to mine data from the database, including relational database and XML database, but the data mining of XML document is rarely seen. For the data mining of XML document, this paper proposes the methods of data mining in the education resource.

2. The data mining method of XML document    XML mining  XML Structure mining  XML external structure mining  XML internal structure mining  XML content mining  XML content analysis  XML structure  purification   Fig.1 The classification of the data mining of XML document   The data mining of XML document can be  classified as the mining of the XML document structure and the mining of the XML document content, as shown in Fig.1.

2.1. XML structure mining   Element tags and their embedding use constitutes  the structure of XML document, and the mining of the XML document structure is practically the mining of schema or the mining of Document Type Definition (DTD). The main mining techniques are classification, association, and clustering.

1. Classification is to classify an event or an object.

The model can be used to analyze the existing data and also predict the future data. The concept of classification is that a classification function is trained on the basis of the existing data or a classification model is set up (i.e. known commonly as the classifier). This function or model can make the data records in the XML document mapped to one of the given category, and thus can be applied to predict data.

2. Association rule mining is to find the meaningful relationship among terms of the given dataset. For the analysis of the XML document structure, the association rule mining can be used to express the meaningful relationship among some tags which usually occur simultaneously in XML document. The XML document can be naturally analyzed into the tree structure, and the DTD of XML document structure is   DOI 10.1109/ICACTE.2008.170    DOI 10.1109/ICACTE.2008.170     also the tree structure. If the XML structure of the tree structure is converted into the object that uses pseudo- transaction as unit, the existing method of data-mining association rule can be applied to mine some meaningful rules.

3. The clustering analysis method of the data mining can be used to validate the similarity of different XML documents. Through the clustering algorithm, one set of DTD is aggregated according to the trait of the mutual similarity; and then a new generalized DTD is induced on the basis of the aggregation subset via the similarity; this new DTD has the hierarchical relation with this DTD aggregation subset, and it is the parent class of this DTD aggregation subset, i.e. the generalization of all DTDs in the aggregation subset, as shown in Fig.2.

Fig.2 The clustering of DTD   2.2. XML content mining   The content refers to the text between each start tag  and each end tag in XML document. The mining of the content is actually the mining of the tag value (i.e. the example of a relation). The semi-structured XML document challenges the data mining of the content, and at present some query languages of semi-structured data appear. The mining of the XML content has such two directions as content analysis and structure purification.

The content can offer help to the clustering of similar DTDs, and two DTDs that looks quite different may include the same content. Equally, DTDs also can help the content to cluster. Two documents with completely different content may cluster together, only if their DTDs are similar.

3. The data mining of education resource description   At present, the study of the metadata description is  carried out to the individuals of educational resource and the resource sets, which has gained some  development. In theory, the flexible flow of resource data in campus network can be realized. After a large quantity of XML data is possessed, the next data mining work we need to do is how to discover the knowledge contained in XML data and give correct prediction.

The data mining is significantly different with the report form or the query of given data, and needs to find out the hidden A relationship and the knowledge from the data. The education resources are characterized by complex structure, huge amount, dispersed storage, etc., so they needs to be comprehensively expressed by the consistent data description. Then, the relationship among education resources are discovered via the technique of data mining in order to predict the construction direction of resources and provide personalized resource services.

1. User analysis The user analysis aims at realizing the segmentation  of the users of network resources; according to different requirements of analysis, the division of users can be performed in terms of their natural attributes (such as age, sex, profession, professional title, etc.) or their behavioral attributes (such as search behavior, creative behavior, consumption behavior, etc.).

Fig.3 User division   For instance, through the user division, the user  groups who most frequently use resources in campus network will be found. The detailed requirement analysis can be made to such user groups, and the requirements of the most important users or the majority of users can be satisfied with the least cost.

For the user groups with the low resource utilization, we can learn the causes of their behavior and then improve the resource construction accordingly.

Through the analysis of the users? behavior characteristics, it can be found that at present the users with senior title of a certain specialty focus on which of resources, whether the campus resources can meet their requirements, what specialties need to be strengthened, and so on. Moreover, through the     analysis for using books, dissertations, and other information resources, the guidance suggestions of information resource construction can be gained to predict the next key region of the campus?s information resource construction.

2. Advanced service    Fig.4 The mining model of the resources? potential  users   The so-called advanced service is to find out potential users. On the basis of the user division, the attribute information of each class? users will be statistically analyzed, and the basic characteristics of the users who have certain behaviors will be found out.

In this way, the users who have such characteristics without the corresponding behaviors are the potential users of such behaviors. The mining model of the resources? potential users is shown in Fig.4.

The mining of such data aims to offer better resource service, and gain the distribution of different resources in different groups through statistical analysis, thus finding potential users. The principle of finding potential users is to, firstly extract some sample data of the users most frequently using these resources from the sample database, and make the similarity analysis of the user groups to gain similar characteristics of the users; extract some sample data of the users least frequently using these resources from the sample database, make the difference analysis of the user groups to gain differential characteristics of the users, and lastly obtain the intersections of similar characteristics and differential characteristics; the characteristics in such intersections are the basic characteristic attribute of potential users.

3. Personalized service  Personalized service refers to finding out the behavior pattern of a certain user or a certain class of users by analyzing his or their log records of accessing data resources, and then customizing his or their type, quantity, and order of using subsequent resources.

The mining object of such data is mainly log records, especially Web logs, which are not closely linked to the data description forms of education resources, but has a close relationship with the improvement of education resources? utilization.

At present, the metadata description of the resource aggregation has been realized, which lays a good foundation for mining the behavior pattern of the users in different resources. By studying access logs of the users, frequency resources can be found out to optimize access paths or access patterns.

Personalized service has two stages: firstly, analyze the content of the users? history access according to the log files of resource access to confirm the user session records and mine personalized information of the users, such as user clustering, resource clustering, frequent access paths discovery, etc.; then, combine the demands of the user access pattern with URI through the mined personalized information of the users, and predict the resource access and recommend the content through the similarity of the user groups.

Association rule is the regular method for the mining of such data, and can be used to discover the interesting association or correlation among item sets in a large quantity of data. For example, analyze the purchasing behavior or habit of the customer by discovering the correlation between different commodities purchased by a customer. By learning what commodities are frequently purchased at the same time, this association can be found, which can help retailers to develop marketing strategies, such as catalog design, cross-marketing, and loss-leader analysis.

The analysis result of the association rule can help us offer the personalized service of education resources and the construction planning of education resources.

For example, by analyzing the frequency and sequence of the user?s using resources, mine the retrieval habit and retrieval purpose of the users and discover the effectiveness of the user?s using retrieval tools and the rationality of retrieval methods, and thus provide the powerful scientific basis for the customization of personalized service.

These are typical examples of the application of association rule in the data mining. The result of the association rule is to discover some interesting rules.

The support and confidence of the rule are the rule interest measurements, which are used to discover the usefulness and certainty of the rule; the rule that satisfies the thresholds of the least support and the least     confidence is called the strong association rule, also called the interesting rule. These thresholds can be set by users or analysts.

4. Innovation of the author   Now the data mining of XML document itself is  rare. The semi-structured text features of XML determine that many theories and methods of traditional data mining are not applicable for the data mining of XML document itself. For the knowledge relating to the data mining of XML document, this paper proposes the methods for the data mining of education resources and some schemes for improving the data mining of XML document.

5. Reference  [1] Stefan Decker, Sergey Klein, Jeen Broekstra, Melnik, Frank Van Harmelen, Dieter Fensel, Michael Erdmann, and Iran Horrocks, ?The semantic web: The roles of xml and rdf?, IEEE Expert 15 (3)?October 2000.

[2] R Nayak, R Witt and A Tonev, ?Data Mining and XML documents?, Proceedings of the 2002 24-27, Nevada,  USA,  2002 [3] Garofalakis, M Rastogi?R Seshadri S and Shim K., ?Data Mining and the Web: Past, Present and Future?, Proceedings of the second international workshop on web information and data management, Kansas City, USA [4] Heather Dunn. Collection Level Description-the Museum Perspective [EB/OL].

