Medical Knowledge Acquisition through Data Mining

Abstract  Data mining has been widely considered as an  effective tool for knowledge discovery.  This paper discusses the important role of medical experts for medical data mining, and presents a model of medical knowledge acquisition through data mining.

1. Introduction  Data mining is to trawl through a huge amount of  data to discover or identify interpretable unknown patterns in the data [1,8].  Data mining has been widely considered as an effective tool for medical knowledge discovery [2,5].  Recent research indicates that data mining does not contribute to knowledge acquisition in a large scale [2,6,7,10].  For example, data mining research continues to propose incremental refinements in association rule mining algorithms, but very few papers describe how the discovered association rules are used as new knowledge in real life [7,10].  This paper proposes a model of medical knowledge acquisition through data mining.

2. The Virtuous Cycle Model of Data Mining   Data mining is considered useful and effective for knowledge discovery.  Because of this, people often misread data mining as a process that one can acquire new knowledge from computers through pushing a button.  The danger of this misperception lies in the de-emphasis on the role of users of data mining technologies in developing new knowledge through learning.

Various data mining process models for knowledge discovery, such as the virtuous cycle model and its derivatives, have been studied [1,2,4].  However, these process models focus only on data mining results and overlook the role of users of data mining technologies in developing new knowledge.  They  tend to ignore the key element: knowledge, which is different from data mining results generated by computers.  Knowledge is facts that guide us to possible actions [9].  In medical data mining applications for medical diagnosis or drug development, it is expected to develop new medical knowledge from computer generated data mining results to improve existing medical treatments or design new drugs.  In our opinion, the data mining process models for medical knowledge discovery ought to be developed in such a way that a distinction is made between the data mining results that are generated by computers and the medical knowledge that can be applied.

The virtuous cycle model of data mining shown in Figure 1 is one of the widely circulated data mining process models for knowledge discovery in the literature [1].  According to the virtuous cycle model, the data mining process consists of four stages: identify the problem, transform data into actionable results, act on the information, and measure the results.

One of the critiques of the virtuous cycle model is its limited real world application in two aspects.

First, people often find that ?knowledge? gained from data mining does not always lead to an action in all situations, particularly when the piece of ?knowledge? is hard to apply.  In fact, this model fails to recognize the role of users of data mining technologies in developing their knowledge for coordination of actions.  Second, the virtuous cycle model mixes non-sequential processes into a single cycle, and de-emphasizes the human factors of different users involved in the process.

In medical data mining applications for medical diagnosis or drug development, it is expected to develop new medical knowledge which can lead to actions to improve existing medical treatments or design new drugs.  Experienced medical experts should be involved and play an important role in this process to interpret data mining results and develop new medical knowledge.  Therefore, the virtuous  Proceedings of 2008 IEEE International Symposium on IT in Medicine and Education   ____________________________________ 978-1-4244-2511-2/08/$25.00 ?2008 Crown    cycle model is not adequate for medical knowledge acquisition.

Figure Figure Figure Figure 1. The virtuous cycle model of data mining 1. The virtuous cycle model of data mining 1. The virtuous cycle model of data mining 1. The virtuous cycle model of data mining  (Source: [1])(Source: [1])(Source: [1])(Source: [1])  3. Medical Knowledge Acquisition through Data Mining   In the medical fields such as medical diagnosis and drug development, knowledge workers attend to do one type of work at their best performance and play roles of joint collaboration [9].  Realistically, it is difficult to find an expert in the medical field who also possesses an excellent knowledge on data mining technologies, and vice versa.  In other words, knowledge workers involved in medical data mining are divided into two groups: medical experts and data mining experts.  Medical experts are experts in the medical field, and they know the best about medical diagnosis or drug development.  Data mining experts are experts of data mining technologies, and they know the best about different data mining algorithms.

To articulate the complex interactions among the knowledge workers in medical data mining, we explore the relationship between medical experts and data mining experts.  It is generally understood that medical knowledge acquisition through data mining consists of two basic cycles, as shown in Figure 2.

One is the data mining development cycle and the other is the medical knowledge development cycle.

The intersection of these two cycles is known as the phase of communicating and planning.

In the data mining development cycle, there are five stages: planning tasks, developing data mining hypotheses, preparing data, selecting data mining tools, and evaluating data mining results.  The data mining development cycle is data mining expert centered.

The descriptions of these stages are well known in the data mining literature.  Basically, data mining is to reveal interesting patterns in the data to verify a hypothesis or hypotheses, and a data mining algorithm is designed to verify a specific type of hypotheses.

Table 1 summarizes the categories of data mining algorithms and the corresponding types of hypotheses.

TableTableTableTable 1.  1.  1.  1. Data Mining Algorithms and HypothesesData Mining Algorithms and HypothesesData Mining Algorithms and HypothesesData Mining Algorithms and Hypotheses Categories of Data Mining Algorithms  Types of Data Mining Hypotheses  Classification Each data record in the data set can be assigned to a class  Clustering There exist distinct groups of data records in the data set  Association rule mining There exist condition-outcome relationships among attribution/value pairs in the data set  Regression analysis There exist functions that can describe the relationship between the attributes in the data set  Sequence mining There exist time-dependent patterns in the data set  Outlier detection There exist abnormal outliers in the data set   The medical knowledge development cycle is the  medical expert centered.  There are four stages in the medical knowledge development cycle: (1) Planning Tasks.  In this stage, the medical expert  understands the previous data mining results, and helps the data mining expert to plan new data mining tasks.

(2) Understanding/learning. Understanding and learning are vital for the medical expert to effectively transform the data mining results generated by computers into new medical knowledge.  This stage concludes how useful the data mining results are.  Different medical experts may develop different knowledge based on the same data mining results.  Human factors are critical.

(3) Action/internalization.  Knowledge acquired in the previous stage may guide us to actions.  An action could be an activity or an operation sequence.  If the evidences are not sufficient for making any substantial action, the medical expert may develop tacit knowledge through internalization based on the data mining results.

Identify the problem  Transform data into actionable results   Act on the information   Measure the results  Proceedings of 2008 IEEE International Symposium on IT in Medicine and Education     (4) Enforcing/unlearning.  If any action is taken, the medical expert must observe the outcomes.  The observations re-enforce the understanding and learning of the data mining results.  The medical expert may further develop new data mining tasks, and work with the data mining expert to plan a new data mining development cycle.  Unlearning processes may also be required in order to make inappropriate information obtained from the data mining results obsolete.

4. An Illustrative Example   In this section we use a simple example to illustrate the aforementioned model for medical knowledge acquisition.  This example is based on a well-known data mining application for identifying the causes of heart disease [3].  The data set consists of a number of heart disease patients? medical records, including the patient?s gender, age, whether the patient smokes, the percentage of diseased left anterior descending arteries, and the percentage of diseased right coronary arteries.

The stages of the data mining development cycle in this example are fairly clear.  The task of the data mining expert is to find unusual associations between the attributes in the data set.  The hypothesis in this case can be of the type of association rules.  For example, ?patients who are male, smoking, and older than 70, are likely to have more than 80% diseased right coronary arteries.?  For the medical knowledge development cycle, the following will happen: (1) The medical expert learns the data mining results  from the data mining expert, and understands the context.  Suppose that the association rule mining algorithm results in the following two association rules: Rule 1: patients who are smoking and older than  75 are likely to have more than 90% diseased right coronary arteries.

Rule 2: patients who have more than 75% diseased right coronary arteries are likely to have more than 80% diseased left anterior descending arteries.

(2) The medical expert may take an action in response to the data mining results, or take no action if he/she considers that none of the actions is worth pursuing.  In the latter case, the medical expert bears this piece of ?interesting knowledge? in the mind as tacit knowledge.  For example, the medical expert may think Rule 2 is trivial and not worth pursuing further investigation because it is generally known that if some heart region is diseased then the adjacent region is very likely to be diseased as well.  For Rule 1, the medical  expert may conclude that the age and smoking are possible factors of heart diseases, and need to conduct further investigation.

Regardless whether the medical expert takes an action, it is necessary to go beyond the enforcing/unlearning stage.  If an action has been taken, the medical expert must observe the outcomes, and plan a new data mining task for the data mining expert.  The new data mining task could be a validation of the previous actions, or a completely new hypothesis.

5. Conclusions   Research in the data mining field has been emphasizing data mining techniques and algorithms.

Little research has been done on how data mining can be more relevant to medical knowledge acquisition.

This paper has proposed a model for medical knowledge acquisition through data mining.  Through an illustrative example, this paper explains that the importance of this model in medical knowledge development.

