A Study of Performance Evaluation of HRM: Based on Data Mining

Abstract  As an important step of knowledge discovery in  databases, data mining is a process of distilling critic, unclear, potential useful information or knowledge from plenty of data, which has been applied in many places. In this text, we introduce a new method of data mining that can be applied in the performance evaluation of human resource management.

1. Introduction   The concept of data mining emerged in the late 1980s, which is developed from the field of database and is named as knowledge discovery in database (KDD) initially. The study of KDD is aimed at automatic dealing with plenty of original dada from database to find new knowledge by uncovering potential relationship pattern.

As the development of KDD research, it is then called data mining [1].

There are different definitions about data mining as follow [2]:  (1) Data mining is defined as distilling interesting knowledge that is critic, unclear and potential information from big database. According to this definition, we can call data mining as knowledge refining, information discovering or data mode transaction. It involves machine learning, mode identification, statistics, intellectual database, knowledge acquirement, viewdata, and expert system, etc.

(2) Data mining is defined as distilling interesting  information or knowledge that is critic, unclear and useful from mass, incomplete, noisy, blurry and random data. It is required to apply special discovery algorithm to search or produce an interesting mode or data set. The process of data mining includes three steps, such as data preparation, data mining and data description.

(3) Data mining is defined as distilling potential useful information or knowledge from mass, incomplete, noisy and random data. Data mining comes from the study of machine learning, which means to obtain requisite knowledge by a special learning algorithm from an existing data set. This knowledge can be applied in information management, intellectual inquiry, decision-making support, process control, and so on [3].

According above, we can define data mining as a process of distilling critic, unclear, potential useful information or knowledge from plenty of data. It is aimed at discovering the relationship among modes and data by all kinds of analysis methods. Hence, we can also call data mining as knowledge mining, knowledge distilling or knowledge discovery.

2. The process of data mining   Data mining is an important step of knowledge  discovery in databases (KDD). The process of KDD is showed as figure 1. It includes five steps: selection, data preprocessing, transformation, data mining and interpretation/ evaluation [4].

Data  Selection  Interpretation/Evaluation  Data mining  Preprocessing  Transformation  Target data Preprocessed data  Transformed data  Patterns  Knowledge  Figure 1. A KDD process  2008 International Seminar on Future Information Technology and Management Engineering  DOI 10.1109/FITME.2008.133     (1) Selection This step is aimed to search and select relational data  for data discovery, which includes transformation between different mode data and data gathering. The goal of data selection is to distinguish requisite data set to analyze and improve the quality of data mining.

(2) Data preprocessing and transformation This phase includes four substeps, such as data  cleaning, data integration, data transformation and data reduction. Their main task is to filtrate false or incompatible data and combine data that are used in multi-document or multi-database runnable condition [4].

(3) Data mining This is the most important phase of KDD. It requires  confirming the task or goal of data mining firstly and deciding what kind of mining algorithm should be used.

Then, we could start data mining to discover useful mode or knowledge.

(4) Interpretation/ Evaluation The task of this step is to express the final outcome and  filtrate information. In addition, we should make the discovered mode visionable or intelligible, for example, we can transform classifying decision tree to the classifying rule of ?IF??THEN??? [5].

3. The methods of data mining   The methods of data mining have been applied in many  places. The most popular methods of data mining include association rules, cluster analysis, classifying, visualization, ANN and decision tree, etc.

(1) Association rules For individual information searches, customers  emphasize information relativity but indissimilarity.

Hence, it can improve the veracity and depth of data mining by establishing appropriate rule according to the psychology of customers about information requirement, which includes analysis of association rules, multilayer  rules and discrimination rules.

(2) Cluster analysis It means to control macroscopically the same sort data  by the character of objects.

(3) Classifying For this method, the sort refers to the content of  information metagroup. We should establish a classifying function to map the concentrated data to a given sort..

(4) Visualization This method enhances the traditional function of  diagram to analyze data more clearly.

(5) Artificial neural network (ANN) ANN is based on self-study math model, which makes  mode choice and trend analysis. The typical method of study is backdating, which compares the different value of output and continuously adjusts their weights to get a new output. Then, the NN gets a stable output through continuous learning process.

(6) Decision tree It is based on information theory. This method needs us  to search the field which has the most information quantity in the database to establish a crunode of decision tree. And ramification can be set up according to different value of fields. Then decision tree is formed when the crunode and ramification of each layer are built repeatedly [6].

4. The performance evaluation of HRM   Human resource management (HRM) includes  personnel management, human resource plan, job analysis, employment policy, training, performance evaluation and salary management, etc. And the performance evaluation is a very important measure.

There are many ordinary methods of performance evaluation, such as scale evaluation, behavior evaluation and crucial incident method. In this study, a new method with data mining method is introduced.

Figure 2. The data mining process of performance evaluation  Former data  New data  Object  Data preprocessing  Algorithm  OutputModel Checkout     5. The application of data mining in performance evaluation   (1) Choosing the object of data mining We choose employee?s performance as the object of  data mining, because we can obtain potential and valuable information about human resource characteristic that can benefit manager to institute human resource policy to find excellent employees.

(2) Data preprocessing The aim of data preprocessing involve two sides: one is  to ensure the preciseness and efficiency of original data; the other is to ensure the preciseness and efficiency of the model of data mining by adjusting the format and content of data.

At this phase, we should collect every employee?s information as more as possibly. It includes demographic data as well as ability, attitude, belief and outstanding achievement, etc.

The data preprocessing is a fussy step of data mining.

It is needed to make the type of data consistently, unify  the value range of field and delete irrespective field, etc.

For example, the fields of employees? names could be deleted since they are not meaningful for the data mining of common characteristic. However, the fields of interpersonal communication, respect for occupation, responsibility and learning attitude could be dispersed to three grades as high, moderate and low because it is not necessary to evaluate them accurately. Finally, we collect the preprocessed data into a single database by deleting redundant data.

By the way, it can be used directly in the phase of data preprocessing if the data warehouse mode has been established in enterprise information system, because the cost of data preprocessing is high while the data warehouse can supply requisite data for next analysis that skips the phase of data preprocessing.

In the case of this study, we use the data warehouse model to analysis, which is built for the former HRM system. The model is designed for the simply evaluation for employees with asteroidal structure. The data warehouse model is showed as below:                                  (3) Cluster analysis After finishing the phase of data preprocessing, cluster  analysis is needed to classify the data more appropriately.

Cluster analysis is based on the similarity of data, which classify similar data into the same group. And the methods of cluster analysis include K - expectation or nearest neighbor algorithm, self-organization mapping NN algorithm, etc.

In this study, we use K - expectation to classify employees into the same group with the same characteristic. First, we select randomly a representation for every group. For the non-representations, we dispatch them into the nearest group according the Euclid distance  to the representation. Then, we substitute non-representations for representations repeatedly to improve the quality of cluster analysis. At last, we mark employees as sorts with the cooperation value of providers and the cluster analysis results.

(4) The data mining model Decision tree is a kind of data mining method by  establishing decision tree to find classified knowledge of training set. The data set of root node is equivalent to training set. And the content of leaf node is sort name while the middle node is aimed to the characteristic with a ramification. The ramification is a possible value of the characteristic. The typical learning system of decision tree  Information  Code Name  Department Job  Salary Harvest  Code Workload Quality  Efficiency Contribution  Ability  Code Specialty  Innovation Communication  Decision Organizing  Performance  Code Ability Attitude  Spirit Harvest ??  Conclusion  Attitude  Code Present ratio  Duty Learning attitude  Initiative  Spirit  Code Policy  Commitment Interpersonal relationship Upbringing  Figure 3. The data warehouse model of performance evaluation     is ID3 and the algorithm C4.5 is the extension of ID3.

And it is used in the research as below:  (1) Information gain analysis Algorithm C4.5 begins the process of learning through  establishing a decision tree from above to below. And it starts by the question ?which characteristic will be test at the root node?? To answer this question, we can use the information gain analysis method to solve it. The characteristic with the highest value of information gain is considered as the most relative to the object of data mining, which would be chosen to test as root node. And we can delete the characteristic with low value of information gain (below the threshold), which means having weak relation with the object of data mining [4].

The information gain is described as the function Gain (A), which is showed as below:   I (s1, s2, ?, sm) = -?pilog2(pi) (i = 1, ?, m)  (a) Pi = Si?S E(A) = ?(s1j + s2j +?+ smj)?s *I(s1j, s2j, ?, smj)(j =  1, ?, v)                                     (b) I(s1j, s2j, ?, smj) = -?pijlog2(pij)(i = 1, ?, m; pij =  Sij/Sj) Gain(A) = I(s1, s2, ?, sm) ? E(A)               (c)  (2) Establishing decision tree We select the characteristic with the highest  information gain as the test characteristic of given set S from the results of information gain analysis. Then, we establish the root nodes of decision tree and produce a ramification for each possible value of the characteristic of root nodes. At last, we put the training sp. below each ramification. We repeatedly select the best test characteristic with every training species of each ramification until classifying all the training sp. is finished.

Then, an integrated decision tree is formed.

6. Discussion   In this study, we apply the data mining structure as  below: {ability?attitude?spirit?harvest?performance} We use the field of performance as the dependent  variable of data mining and its value ranges as high, medium and low. We use half of the samples of all the 232 employees as training set to establish decision tree model and produce 13 classifying rules. According to the result of information gain analysis, we choose the attributes of harvest as the test attribute of root nodes.

We exam the decision tree model with the remnant half sample of non-training set. And the result matches the former decision tree model very well, which indicates that the result of the former decision tree is perfect.

There is an example of classifying rule as follow:  Rule?[ability =?High?] U [harvest = ?Medium?] U [attitude = ?High?] U [spirit = ?High?] ==> [performance = ?High?]  With the data mining model, managers can classify and select the excellent employees from the applicants. For different talents, managers could dispatch them into appropriate departments according the evaluating results of performance to take advantage of their abilities.

7. References  [1] QIAN, Z. (2004). ?On the development of the special  information database based on data-mining in key subjects?.

Library, No. 3, pp.50-53.

[2] ZHANG, J. (2008). ?A study of data mining and its application?. Journal of Xiangtan Normal University (Social Science Edition), Vol. 30, No. 1, pp.232-234.

[3] YAN, C., and Y. ZHANG (2002). ?Network data mining techniques in intelligent search?. Journal of Library Science in China, Vol. 28, No. 3, pp.49-51.

[4] HAN, J., and K. MICHELINE. Data mining: Concepts and techniques. Morgan Kaufman Publisher, San Francisco, 2000.

[5] LI, J. (2003). ?A model of data mining system?. Journal of Daqing Petroleum Institute, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp.87-90.

[6] LUO, L., and Y. CHEN (2004). ?Knowledge mining and personalized services of digital libraries?. Journal of Library Science in China, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp.69-71.

