Using Data Mining Techniques in Development of MURA

Abstract    Data Mining is concerned with the different  applications for discovery of a priori  unknown relationships such as associations,  groupings, and classifiers from data. The  solution of MURA problems in producing to  the large photomask industry is finding the  association rules or the algorithms for  learning classifiers from relational data. In  this paper, we designed and developed a  MURA related association rules which  suitable for the MURA model requirements,  and we named MURA Risk rating system.

Our purpose is to figure out the effective  application of data mining algorithms in  monitoring and control of complex Large  Area Photomask systems. We combine the  Data Mining into MURA risk management.

It is indeed saving time from standby  machine, and expectation the photomask  processing graphic of MURA problems. By  our scheme and MURA risk rating system,  we can shorten the time and reduce the  MURA problems.

Keyword: Large Photomask, MURA, Data  Mining, Data Mining application    1. Introduction    The effective and efficient management  and use of increasing amounts of stored data  and in particular the transformation of these  data into information and knowledge, is  considered a key requirement in modern  information systems.[1]Data Mining is  concerned with the different applications for  discovery of a priori unknown relationships  such as associations, groupings, and  classifiers from data. Data Mining is one  component of the broader process known as  Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD)  [2]. In the recently, the Intelligent Miner of  IBM and the Enterprise Miner of SAS are  the old well-known enterprise data mining  tools. SAS, Inc. developed the process for  Amazon.com to use data mining providing  customers with purchase suggestions which  has increased sales by 15% [3].Banks and  the Federal Reserve use data mining to  investigate the flow of money. Federal  2008 IEEE Asia-Pacific Services Computing Conference  DOI 10.1109/APSCC.2008.76   2008 IEEE Asia-Pacific Services Computing Conference  DOI 10.1109/APSCC.2008.76     agencies use data mining to monitor cell  phone communications via satellite.

Compaq uses data mining to examine calls  made to customer service to find patterns of  complaints. [4]  The goal of Data Mining is to discover  knowledge hidden in data repositories.

According to this concept which fallows as:  expert-select, database and optimization  mining [5]. The solution of MURA  problems in producing to the large  photomask industry is finding the  association rules or the algorithms for  learning classifiers from relational data. In  this paper, we designed and developed a  MURA related association rules which  suitable for the MURA model requirements,  and we named MURA Risk rating system.

Our purpose is to figure out the effective  application of data mining algorithms in  monitoring and control of complex Large  Area Photomask systems. In order to  enhance the quality of Large Area  Photomask, this paper will concentrate on  how to connect the Data Mining Techniques  with MURA problems. The organization of  this paper is as following. We present the  Large Area Photomask simulation and  MURA prediction module in the next  section. Then, we describe our scheme and  MURA geometric and graphic terms in  section 3 and 4. Before we concluding this  paper, we display the MURA Risk rating  system in section 5.

2. The MURA simulation in Large  Area Photomask    Standards for MURA are defined by the  experts [3]. The traditional data processing  can not predict what kind of geometric  would lead to MURA problems when a  mask machine painted. And it is also due to  the difficulties of data processing.

Thronging Data Mining to predict the  MURA modules, it could establish a set of  feed-back system. The MURA prediction  module will be more accurate judgments  than human experience. And because of its  feed-back system, when the scheme run  more and more over again, the database  warehouse will not only become more  precision but also adjust this module from  its history database warehouse.

The high level of FPD mask painted  machine almost produced by Micronic  Company. And the main differences in  high-end machine specifications are the size  of the mask depicted, and most  specifications of the machines are the same  (Fig.1.) [6].

Fig.1. The tendency of FPD Photomask  technology.

This study is intended to find a model  that fit for different machines and by  using similar method to develop their  own module of their own machine.

We will through the CATS program  and PERL language to simulate the  adjustment of the light exposure when  the graphics depicted. This part of the  graphics format will be converted into  vector, and it could provide a database  for our Data Mining scheme. By our  scheme, when the MURA problems  adjust at the plant, we can pre-know the  risk value of MURA. With this module  can provide a graphic adjuster a  reference value, in order to get the best  risk-adjusted of MURA.

3. MURA Scheme    During the manufacture of Photomask,  we can read the Layout format file with  these information like the customers  graphics, bar code, title, serial number, the  name of the company, the date of  manufacture and other vector data files  (GDSII) on the mask (Fig.2.).

Fig.2. The information from mask    The laser writer has lapped over each  array graphics to build a larger area  photomask [3]. The program has to compute  the depicting of start point position, and  output the overlap location plan (Fig.3.). We  try to simulate the same overlap graphics,  because of no need for a Fracturing on the  computing procession it should be faster  than the original operation.

Fig.3. The overlap of graphic    If the first time adjustment of overlap will  result of poor graphics, we can only restart  the starting point position till it?s qualify to  best required. Since we do this step again,  we will easily adjust the overlap in soon  without the further fracturing for another  once. And it will save more time among 30  to 60 minutes to know the results.

When it need to change the direction of  painted, we could repeat the simulate step  again to output the GDSII file which  transfer to 90 degrees Celsius or 270 degree  rotation(Fig.4.). When we get another new  start point position, we can know the new  overlap result and do not need to wait for  the different redirection of mask layout.

Fig.4. Fracturing Rotated    After the simulated has been done, the all  information will become our Data Mining     database. We organized all the information  from the standard operating of Photomask  Layout, and transfer the Layout format into  the program can read one(Fig.5.).

Fig.5.The Layout data format    The first part of our scheme is to shorten  the adjustment time of MURA graphics and  the output time of vector graphics in MURA  adjustment. We will work through the CATS  program and PERL language to simulate the  adjustment of the light exposure when the  graphics depicted. Because of this part, it  will provide a good source of information to  use in Data Mining which is composed in  our second part.

The second part is combining the Data  Mining Techniques into the MURA  simulation. As a photomask adjust at the  plant, we can pre-know the risk value of  MURA. It is involved in graphic analysis  and graphic mining which we will discuss in  next section. With this second port, it can  provide a graphic adjuster a reference value,  in order to get the best risk-adjusted of  MURA.

4. The graphic Geometric in MURA  Scheme    The photomask file is one type of graphic  geometric. As we know the graphic is hard  to be calculated in algorithm. To overcome  this drawback, we make the point line  represent the overlap region which we have  discussed in section 3(Fig.6.).

Through the first part of a simulation  study, we can gather the GDSII format when  mask graphic exposure for the MURA  adjustment at the plant. For its vector format,  the available source of data mining could be  established.

Fig.6. The represent in MURA scheme.

The laser painted machine?s pixel size is  0.25 um, address grid is 0.01 um, sweep  length is 210 um, and CD Uniformity is  0.07 um. If the overlapping regional  graphics are too complex, it is not only to  control different laser energy in every pixel,     but also necessary to control the good  overlap of the exposure in the Y-axis  precision regional at the plant.

To identify overlap in this region of vector  graphics, we have to analyze the  overlapping coordinates region. From this  information, we proposed to separate the  regional grid within the 100-area ratio  which is distributing the second part of the  input data mining file (Fig.7.)..

Fig.7. The two lines show the  overlapped region.

The general expectation is overlap on  the simple geometric shapes region. But  with the limit of graphic design, a mask  usually unable placed over the region on  the simple geometry panel. It is also a  MURA main issue in photomask.

5. MURA Risk rating system    In this section, we evaluate the MURA  graphic in our scheme by a number of  degrees. We named this part as a MURA  Risk rating system in our scheme. In section  4, we distribute the graphics into deferent  degrees. This is the way we define the result  of our output in Data Mining.

The bevel edge in overlap area is a  highly-risk of MURA. In this study, we  separate the overlap area into 100-area ratio  (Fig.8.). Then, we calculate the cut area of  graphics. By analyzing the cut area of  overlap, we could figure out the MURA  related association rule in this scheme.

According to the advantage of our feed-back  system, the more information has been  collected the more accurate of this system.

Fig.8. The separated overlap area and The  cut area of overlap    We separate the overlap area into 100  species, and all the lattice point area can be  calculate as ratio type. For example, the  superficial measure of this lattice in fig8, the  ratio is 0.35. It is settle down between  0.341~0.35 interval. When the calculated  value is true, we take it as 1; on the contrary  we take it as 0. And that make our  importation become a MURA risk rating  from 0.1 to 0.9(Fig.9.).

Fig.9. MURA Risk rating system    This module is helpful for company to do  the MURA risk management. If the risk  level of MURA adjusted could be aware in  advance. We may change the laser overlap     start line to reduce the MURA problems  which caused by the overlap area.

6. Conclusion    The photomask is rendering on  high-purity quartz and it painted the design  by the high-precision laser machine. The  laser has to double the graphic design line to  compose whole large photomask. That is  how it causes of MURA problems during  the photomask rendering. We combine the  Data Mining into MURA risk management.

It is indeed saving time from standby  machine, and expectation the photomask  processing graphic of MURA problems.

In this paper, we proposed a MURA  scheme to solve the phenomenon of uneven  brightness in display. By our scheme and  MURA risk rating system, we can shorten  the time and reduce the MURA problems. In  the future, we need more input data to  support our theory, and make our system  more pr?cised.

7. Acknowledgement    The authors would like to thank the PKLT  CO, LTD, Taiwan for technical supporting  this research. Besides, the authors would  like to acknowledge Kevin Chang for his  assistance in making this system possible.

