Significant Cancer Risk Factor Extraction: An Association Rule

Abstract   Cancer is the top most death threat for human  life all over the world. Current research in the  cancer area is still struggling to provide better  support to a cancer patient. In this research our  aim is to identify the significant risk factors for  particular types of cancer. First, we constructed  a risk factor data set through an extensive  literature review of bladder, breast, cervical,  lung, prostate and skin cancer. We further  employed three association rule mining  algorithms, Apriori, Predictive apriori and  Tertius algorithm in order to discover most  significant risk factors for particular types of  cancer. Discovery risk factor has been identified  to shows highest confidence values. We  concluded that apriori indicates to be the best  association rule-mining algorithm for significant  risk factor discovery.

1.  Introduction   Cancer is the one of the most common cause of  death all over the world. Furthermore, in  Australia, United States and the United  Kingdom, breast cancer is the second leading  cause of death [1]. Research shows that most of  the cancers are not detected in the early stage-  resulting in high death rates. Medical practitioner  diagnostic systems (mammography, biopsies,  ultrasound, etc) can takes a long time to inform  the patient about the cancer status, thus early  cancer prevention could save human life. The  aim of this research is to find out the different  cancer risk factors using modern machine  learning techniques. We consider bladder, breast,  cervical, lung, prostrate and skin cancer in this  research. Association Rule Mining (ARM), a  particular method of machine learning technique  could prove to have great potential within the  medical domain identifying responsible factors  for a specific disease. The ARM technique has  been considered as a tool for our research.

The use of association rules on medical data  records with heart perfusion measurements is  explored for the first time in [2]. Discovering  association rules on segmented images is studied  in [3]. Another study use association rule mining  algorithm to study associations of different  female hormones with the occurrence of breast  cancer and also bench mark the performance of  artificial neural networks (ANN) and data  envelopment analysis (DEA) against the standard  parametric Fisher?s linear discriminant analysis  (FLDA) technique [4]. Ho et al presented an  induction data mining approach in order to  predict cervical cancer by using a combination of  demographic, environmental and genetic factors.

They examined the risk factors for cervical  cancer using a combination of logistic regression  and a decision tree algorithm, and reported the  relationship among demographic, environmental  and genetic factors for cervical cancer using  induction technique. In addition, to the induction  technique, they compared logistic regression and  the decision tree algorithm, and present the  practical use of rule induction for the  management of cervical cancer [5]. Their  emphasis was on a specific cancer with several  limitations to their research. One being the  limited access to data, relying on one single  source subjecting themselves to bias in an  otherwise potentially data rich subject group its.

Sufficient validation for the generalization of  their findings to other geographic areas or groups  was not performed. The other limitation was the  lack of input variables for patient characteristics,  such as exercise behaviour, nutrition, stress, and  depression. Further study limitations also  included a low sensitivity for the logistic  regression and Chi-squared Automatic  Interaction Detection (CHAID) algorithm. An  association rule mining algorithm was applied to  Proceedings of International Workshop on Data Mining and Artificial Intelligence (DMAI? 08) 24 December, 2008, Khulna, Bangladesh     extract associations between the selected  socioeconomic variables and the colorectal, lung,  breast, and prostate cancers mortality from 1988  to 1992 cancer mortality rates in United States  [6]. Geographic information system technology  is used for data integration which is defined at  different spatial resolutions, and to visualize and  analyze the results from the association rule  mining process. This study provided the  emphasis on mortality rates. We failed to find a  single study which was able to demonstrate on  the significant risk factor for a specific cancer.

We therefore, decided to contribute towards  cancer risk factor issue through this research.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first risk  factor extraction research using association rule  mining algorithms. Our paper is organized as  follows: section two will explain the problem  description. Data collection evidence is described  in section three. The association rule mining  algorithm is summarized in section four. In  section five, we publish our experimental finding  concluding in section six    2.0 Problem Descriptions   We initially we considered bladder, breast,  cervical, lung, prostrate and skin cancer oriented  risk factors. This section will summarize each  problem definition and its significance.

2.1 Bladder Cancer  Bladder cancer is a cancer where abnormal cells  multiply without control in the bladder. In most  of the cases bladder cancer begins in cells lining  of the bladder and is called urothelial cell or  transitional cell carcinoma (UCC or TCC). If the  bladder cancer that is only in the lining is called  superficial bladder cancer, and if the cancer  spreads into the muscle wall of the bladder, it is  called invasive bladder cancer [7]. The  American Cancer Society estimates that in the  United States there will be about 68,810 new  cases of bladder cancer diagnosed in 2008 (about  51,230 men and 17,580 women). The chance of a  man developing this at any time during his life is  about 1 in 27 and for a woman, 1 in 85. In 2008,  there will also be about 14,100 deaths from  bladder cancer in the United States (about 9,950  men and 4,150 women) [8]. The cancer affected  bladder is presented in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Affected cancer bladder shows by  circle. (Source:  http://www.ecureme.com/emyhealth/data/Bladde  r_Cancer.asp.)    2.2 Breast cancer  Breast cancer is the combination of more than  100 different diseases. Breast cancer develops  while some of the cells in the breast begin to  grow out of control. Cancerous growth begins to  appear anywhere inside the breast. Most breast  cancers starts in the lining of the ducts though a  small number can start in the milk sacs. In time if  not treated properly, cancer cells from the breast  can spread to other parts of the body [8]. One in  eight Australian women will develop breast  cancer before the age of 85. In Australia, about  12,000 women and 84 men were diagnosed with  breast cancer in 2002. In 2005, breast cancer  caused 502,000 deaths worldwide (7% of cancer  deaths; almost 1% of all deaths). It is predicted  that by 2011, the number of new diagnoses will  increase to about 14,800 women and 122 men  [7]. The cancer affected breast is presented in  Figure 2.

Figure  2.  Normal breast with lobular carcinoma  in situ (LCIS) in an enlarged cross?section of the  lobule. Breast profile: A ducts, B lobules, C  dilated section of duct to hold milk, D nipple, E  fat, F pectoralis major muscle, G chest wall/rib  cage. Enlargement: A normal duct cells, B     ductal cancer cells, C basement membrane, D  lumen (center of duct).

(http://www.cancer.org/docroot/CRI/content/CRI  _2_2_1X_What_is_breast_cancer_5.asp?sitearea  =)  2.3 Cervical    Cervical cancer is a type of cancer that starts in  the cervix (part of the female reproductive  systems), the lower part of the uterus (womb)  that opens at the top of the vagina. Most of the  time, early cervical cancer has no symptoms.

Cervical cancer is divided into two stages; early  or pre-invasive stage, and the late or invasive  stage. Cervical cancer is a major worldwide  health problem with incidence and mortality  rates second only to breast cancer. It is the  number one killer of young women in under  developed countries. In Korean women for  example, cervical cancer is the third most  common form of cancer, after stomach and  breast cancer [9]. The affected cervical cancer is  presented in Figure 3.

Figure 3.  Cervical cancer, ( Source:  http://www.righthealth.com/Health/Cervical_Can  cer_Pictures/-od-  definition_adam_2%25252F9163-s)  2.4 Lung cancer  There are different types of lung cancer,  depending on which cells are affected. The lungs  are made up with three right lobes and two left  lobes. As soon as we breathe, air goes through  the nose , down the windpipe (trachea), and into  the lungs where it spreads through tubes called  bronchi. The majority of lung cancer begins in  the cells that line these tubes [7]. Statistics shows  that for both men and women people die from  lung cancer more often than any other type of  cancer. In 2004 lung cancer accounted for more  deaths than breast cancer, prostate cancer, and  colon cancer combined. In that year, 108,355  men and 87,897 women were diagnosed with  lung cancer, and 9,575 men and 68,431 women  died from lung cancer. During 2008, there will  be about 215,020 new cases of lung cancer  (114,690 among men and 100,330 among  women) [8]. The cancer affected lung is shown  in Figure 4.

Figure 4.  Lung cancer. (Source:  http://search.live.com/images/)    2.5 Prostate cancer  The cancer which originates in the  prostate  with an uncontrolled (malignant) growth of cells  in the prostate gland which is located at the base  of the urinary bladder and is responsible for  helping control urination as well as forming part  of the semen. It is a common malignancy in men  older than 50 years of old and it may cause no  symptoms in the early stage. Prostate cancer may  remain in the prostate gland or may spread to  nearby lymph nodes to other parts of the body. It  is a second leading cause of death of males in the  U.S.A. In Australia one in nine males affects for  prostate cancer at the age of 75 years and one on  five by the age 85 years. The death rate of  prostate cancer is lower which is one in 84 men  under the age of 75 years and one in 22 by the  age of 85 years [10]. The prostate cancer is  shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5.  Prostate cancer. (Source,  http://health.allrefer.com/pictures-  images/prostate-cancer.html)    2.6 Skin cancer    Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer  which estimated that over 1 million new cases  occur annually. Skin cancer occurs in the outer  layers of your skin. Each year the annual rates of  all forms of skin cancer are increasing,  representing a growing public concern. Research  estimated that nearly half of all Americans who  live to age 65 will develop skin cancer at least  once (www.cpaaindia.org). The affected skin  cancer is shown in Figure 6.

Figure  6. Skin cancer. (Source:  http://www.taconichills.k12.ny.us/webquests/n  oncomdisease/skin%20cancerpic.jpg)      3.0 Data Collection    We constructed a risk factor data set containing n  from patient records  with categorical attributes. All attributes are  uniformly treated as categorical to simplify the  problem. Due to lake of space the sources of data  are not available here. All the data are available  upon request.

4.0 Association Rule Mining  In this section we introduce the standard  definition of association learning  [11,12]. An  association rule is a simple rule, such as:    Smoking ? family_history_positve ?  lung_cancer    Where ?Smoking ? family_history_positve? is  called the body rule and lung_cancer the head of  the rule. It associates the rule body with its head.

In context of medical data, our example  expresses the fact that people who are smoking  and past family history have lung cancer are  likely to have risk of lung cancer. This  association rule makes no assertion about people  who are not getting skin or breast cancer.

Let D be a database consisting of one table over  n attributes {a1, a2, ? ,an} and the table contain k  instances. In the following an attribute-value-pair  will be called an item. An item set is a set of  distinct attribute-value-pairs. For instance,  smoking, family_history_positve, lung_cancer  and so on.

Let d be a database record and it satisfies an item  set X ? {a1, a2, ? ,an} if X ? d. An association  rule is an implication X ? Y where X, Y ? {a1,  a2, ? ,an}, Y ? ? ; and X ? Y = ?.

The support (s) and confidence (c) are two  measures of rule interestingness that reflect  usefulness and certainty of a rule respectively.

The association rules that satisfy user specified  minimum support threshold (minSup) and  minimum confidence threshold (minCon) are  called strong association rules. The formulations  of support and confidence measure are as  follows:    Support (X ? Y) = P(X?Y)  Confidence (X ? Y) = P(Y|X) = P(X)  (X P )? Y     where P is used for probability measure in  support and conditional probability in  confidence. A probabilistic interpretation of  support and confidence is discussed in [13].

Another rule measure metric called lift, defined  as    Lift (X ? Y) = P(X)P(Y)  P(X )?Y     Lift quantifies the relationship between X and Y.

Basically, a lift value greater than 1 provides  strong evidence that X and Y depend on each  other. A lift value below 1 state X depends on the  absence of Y or vice versa.

The task for association rule mining can be  divided into two folds:    ? Find all combinations of the risk factors for a specific cancer whose supports are  greater than a user-specified minimum  support (threshold).

? Use the risk factors from frequent risk factors to generate the desired rules.

Generally the confidence of each rule is  computed, and if it is above the  confidence threshold, the retrieve the  rule in the system.

Among the long list of association learning  algorithms Apriori [11], Predictive Apriori [14],  Tertius [15] are most popular algorithms in the  machine learning community. The Apriori  algorithm is a state of the art algorithm most of  the association rule algorithms are somewhat  variations of this algorithm [11].

5.0 Experimental Results   We considered three association rule mining  algorithms: Apriori, Predictive Apriori and  Tertius for our experiment. We found among  these three algorithms Apriori to be the number  one choice to extract useful rules for our cancer  data set. The reputed rules were selected based  on confidence and lift measure. All the reported  rules obtained confidence 1. However, in the lift  measure all types of cancer discussed in this  paper show a stable performance except prostate  cancer as shown in Figure 7. The breast data-set  shows the highest lift values, while on the other  hand skin cancer showed the worst lift values.

TOP10 TOP20 TOP30 TOP40 TOP50  No of Top Rules  L if  t  Bladder Breast Cervical  Lung Prostate Skin     Figure 7. Lift performances measures with  Apriori association rule mining algorithm for six  types of cancer problems.

Moreover we verified Apriori performance with  leverage measures as shown in Figure 8. Similar  to lift measures we found all other types of  cancers suggested similar steady performance,  except prostate cancer. The most reliable  performance was shown with the skin type  cancer data-set while breast cancer data  demonstrated the worst performance in the  leverage measure.

0.02  0.04  0.06  0.08  0.1  0.12  0.14  0.16  TOP10 TOP20 TOP30 TOP40 TOP50  No of Top Rules  L e  v e  ra g  e  Bladder Breast Cervical  Lung Prostate Skin     Figure 8. Leverage performances measures with  Apriori association rule mining algorithm for six  types of cancer problems.

Finally we compared the apriori performance  with conviction measures as shown in Figure 9.

We found similar steady performances for all the  cancer data set except prostate cancer, showing  the highest performance. On the other hand again  the breast cancer data set showed the worst  performance.

0.5   1.5   2.5  TOP10 TOP20 TOP30 TOP40 TOP50  No of Top Rules  C o  n v  ic ti  o n  Bladder Breast Cervical  Lung Prostate Skin     Figure 9. Conviction performances measures  with Apriori association rule mining algorithm  for six cancer types? problems.

We therefore concluded a rule for each cancer  dataset and summarized as below. All the rules  were shown highest confidence. We found the  breast and prostate cancer rules are very simple.

Whereas rest of the rules contained several  significant risk factors to predict an appropriate  cancer.

Relation:   bladder    Rule:  (work_esposure ? work_leather_industry  ? work_rubber_industry ? work_cable_industry  ? work_printing_industry) ? bladder_cancer    Relation:   breast    Rule:  (gender (female) ? age(>40) ?  family_history} ? breast_cancer    Relation:   cervical    Rule:  (poor_hygienic_practices ?  low_socioeconomic_status ? low_vegetables ?  sexually_transmitted_infections,smoking) ?  cervical_cancer    Relation:    lung    Rule:  (chemical_exposure ? smoking ?  previous_lung_disease ? urban_residence ?  family_history) ? cervical_cancer    Relation:  prostrate    Rule:  (family_history ? age (>50)) ?  prostrate_cancer    Relation:   skin   Rule:  (weak_immune_system ? fragile_skin ?  exposure_to_environmental_hazards ?  previous_skin_cancer) ? skin_cancer    All the generated rules demonstrated high  confidence. Thus, we conclude that these rules  are highly acceptable. Comparatively breast and  prostrate cancer showed shorter rules comparing  other cancer. This research argues to consider  more risk factors to be considered in the  experimental dataset for both breast and prostate  cancer to extract most significant risk factors.

6.0 Conclusions    This study has demonstrated the use of  association rule mining to identify some specific  risk factors for a particular cancer problem. In  this research we employed three types of  association rule mining algorithms to extract  significant risk factor for a specific cancer.

Finally we suggested in our research to use  Apriori algorithm for such type of task. All the  generated rules were showing highest confidence  level in our experiment.

We aim to extend this research by considering  more risk factors in the raw data-set for each  cancer problem, in order for association rule  mining algorithm to extract more useful and  significant risk factors for a particular type of  cancer.

