Application of Association Rules Mining in the System of University Teaching  Appraisal

Abstract?A large amount of data has accumulated in teaching appraisal that must be done every semester among most universities. In order to find out the law or model hidden in these data, the Data Mining technology should be used fully. This thesis introduces the application of Association Rules Mining in the teaching appraisal, which can effectively guide the teaching work by finding out the intrinsic association rules between the effectiveness of classroom teaching and teachers? age and title.

Keywords-Data Mining; Association Rules; Teaching Appraisal; Support; Confidence

I.  INTRODUCTION As a basic link of the teaching practice -the quality  assessment is an evaluation of teaching process and results by using the technical and theory of teaching appraisal, which aims to improve the teaching quality and to give standards of some kind of qualification of the estimated object.

Teaching appraisal is an important part of the teaching management and the primary means of teaching performance assessment. It can control, guide and promote the teaching practice and also has a strong orientation. A large amount of data has accumulated during the investigation of teaching appraisal that must be engaged each semester in many universities. At present, the teaching appraisal mostly based on Numerical Methods just summarizes the assessment given by students and inform the teachers of the results that is the basis for teacher?s promotion and excellent commentary and so on, without deep thinking. Several traditional methods such as qualitative, quantitative assessment methods or Stan- dardDeviation methods cannot be objective and accurate, whereas it cannot to reflect the teaching actual situation in- depth and can only reflects some sides of the teaching effectiveness. If the data mining technology is used in the teaching appraisal, the defects of traditional analysis methods in it can be amended. We can further explore the relationship between the teaching quality and the teachers? age and title, also between the classroom teaching effectiveness and teachers? personal qualities. Based on the above mentioned, by reasonably deploying the teachers of a class, students will maintain a interest and motivation to learn hard; by providing the decision-making information to teaching management, teaching work will be promoted and teaching quality will be greatly improved .



II. CONCEPT OF ASSOCIATION RULES AND DATA MINING ALGORITHM  Association Rules Mining is a Data Mining algorithm. It is well studied and most widely used in a variety of Data Mining methods in recent years. Data Mining means to analysis the observed data sets and extract the knowledge and rules that is implicit, unknown and has potential value for decision-making from the large database. The main Data Mining algorithms include: Rough Set, Association Rule, Classification, Clustering, Genetic Algorithms, Neural Net works.

A. Concept of Association Rules In Data Mining knowledge pattern, Association Rules is  important. The concept of Association Rules given  by Agrawal in 1993 is a simple rule for data application and an interdependence relationship among the data objects.

Assume I = (i1, i2, ..., im) as a value set of some attributes , known as Itemset, ik (1 ? k ? n) as item usually used to record the value of some attribute of a database. The number of the set I is known as the length of the itemset and an itemset whose length is n is known as n-itemset. An Association Rules is an implication as following A?B. If A, B? I, and A ? B?? , the rule A B is tenable in the transaction set D. Two parameters as following used to describe the properties of Association Rules:  ?  1. Confidence??If C% of transaction set D which includes A and contains B at the same time, then C% is the Confidence of the Association rules A B. In short, Confidence means that how much probability sets B will occur in the transaction Itemset A at the same time, and it is a measurement of the accuracy of Association Rules.

?  2. Support??If S% of transaction set D includes Itemset A and B at one time, then S% is the Support of the association rules A B. Support shows the degree of representation of this rule in all transaction. It is obviously that the greater the Support is, the more important and the more widely application the Association Rules is. Support is a measurement of the importance of Association Rules.

?  If Support and Confidence of Association Rules are not in consideration, many association rules can be found in database.

In fact, people are only interested in some association rules that meet a certain degree of Support and Confidence. Therefore, in order to find meaningful association rules, two thresholds need to be offered, which are MinSupp and MinConf. Generally speaking, one rule meeting certain requirements (such as  2008 International Workshop on Education Technology and Training & 2008 International Workshop on Geoscience and Remote Sensing  DOI 10.1109/ETTandGRS.2008.148   2008 International Workshop on Education Technology and Training & 2008 International Workshop on Geoscience and Remote Sensing  DOI 10.1109/ETTandGRS.2008.148     greater Support and Confidence level) is Strong rules.

Association Rules Mining means to generate all the association rules that meet MinSupp and MinConf from a given transaction set D.

To dig out the association rules contains two following major steps:  1. To discover all the frequent itemsets. The frequency of these itemsets should be at least equal to (pre-set) the MinSupp.

2. To generate Strong rules from the frequent itemsets.

These rules must meet the thresholds of MinSupp and MinConf.

B. to Generate Association Rules The relevant association rules can be easily acquire after  digging out all the frequent itemsets from database D, which is to obtain the Strong rules that meet MinSupp and MinConf.

The following formula can be used to obtain the Confidence of the association rules received. The conditional probability here is calculated by using the support frequency of the itemsets.

confidence (A B )= ? )(_sup )(_sup  Acountport BAcountport ?    Among which , support_ount (A ?  B) is the transaction record number of the items including set A ?  B , support_ount (A) is the transaction record number of the items including set A. Based on the formula above, the operations to generate association rules are as follows:  1. for each frequent set l, to generate all the nonempty subset of it.

2. For each nonempty subset s, if:   conf  scountport lcountport min_ )(_sup )(_sup ?    Then the association rule s ? l-s? is produced? min_conf is the threshold of MinConf. As the association rule is generated directly through frequent itemsets, therefore all the items covered by the association rules  meet the threshold of the MinSupp.

?

III. APPLICATION OF ASSOCIATION RULES MINING IN THE SYSTEM OF TEACHING APPRAISAL  A. to Prepare the Data To take 200 teaching quality assessment tables of the  teachers in this school randomly and input four data that are teachers? number, age, title and assessment scores into the database, ignoring other information, then we will find out the relationship among the age, the title and the assessment scores through Data Mining. Table gives a view of part teaching assessment information including 200 records.

TABLE I. VIEW OF TEACHING ASSESSMENT INFORMATION  number of teachers age title  assessment score  19123 45 professor 95  19141 39 associate professor 92  19145 31 lecturer 91  19150 37 associate professor 89  19156 53 professor 93  19160 25 assistant lecturer 79  19161 29 lecturer 87  ... ? ? ? The age attribute in table 1 is numerical and it should been  converted to Boolean type. In order to discrete, the age is divided into 4 groups named: A1 [22, 30], A2 [31, 35], A3 [36, 49], A4 [50, 60]; the title is divided into: B1 assistant lecturer, B2 lecturer, B3 associate professor, B4 professor. According to the actual situation, the title and the assessment scores are divided into: C1 [90100], C2 [80, 89], C3 [70, 79], C4 [0, 69].

A part of the data converted is shown in table II  TABLE II. PART OF THE DATA CONVERTED  number A1 A  A  A  B  B  B  B  C  C  C  C  19123 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0  19141 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0  19145 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0  19150 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0  19156 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0  19160 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0  19161 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0  B. Association Rules Mining Now we analysis the relationship between the classroom  teaching effectiveness and the teachers? age and title. If the assessment score ?  [90,100], that means a good classroom teaching effectiveness. The characteristics of the teachers who have a good classroom teaching effectiveness will be dig out by using association rules algorithm and mining technology.

First, almost 80 records whose assessment scores more than 90 can be received by searching the original database. Then assuming minsup = 5%, minconf = 16%, after mining, the initial association rules may be obtained, as shown in Table III.

The rule A shows that the possibility of excellent rate is 25.37% and the Support is 6% for those teachers whose age is between 31 ? 35. Similarly, the rule F shows that the possibility of excellent rate is 22.75% and the Support is 6% for those professors.

TABLE III. GENERATION RULES  rules age title Support / Confidence/  A 31 35  25.37 6.00  B 36 49  48.00 43.00  C 50 60  32.50 7.00  D  lecturer 24.37 6.67  E  associate professor 53.60 15.00  F  professor 22.75 6.00  C. Interpretation and Evaluation about the Model The inherent association of some attributes can be found  from these data: the higher the title and the education, the better evaluation of the students. The quality of teachers? classroom teaching is great related to their titles and performance level. Therefore, teachers must strive to improve their performance level and titles to enhance their teaching quality. If high-titled and well-educated teachers give more lessons, the quality of classroom teaching would be much better as a whole.

1. In the teachers team, the backbone group whose age is in 50 - 60 is still a large proportion, and these teachers are now about to retire or already retired. The vacancy they left is must to fill in immediately. Therefore, it is important to train the young teachers under the age of 30.

2. The 31 - 49-year-old middle-aged teachers with rich teaching experience can usually gain higher Support and Confidence. This shows the importance to build a reasonable teacher team and to improve the practical teaching ability of the middle-aged teachers. When the middle-aged teachers have grown up to become the backbone, the structure of the teaching team will be more reasonable.

3. The university teaching content is characterized as being highly professional, strong scientific, informative, broad and deep, and the classroom teaching is strong academic. The mediate-titled teachers who have a high ability of research and a wide range of knowledge can often encourage students to  study hard and have the ability to combine teaching with research. The primary-titled teachers need more practice, more study and harder work to improve their level of research and teaching.

In this way, if the teachers who have different ages and titles can been arranged reasonably, students will  maintain a good state of learning. The same, by providing information to support decision-making, the teaching quality can be improved.



IV. CONCLUSION A large amount of data has accumulated during the  investigation of teaching appraisal that must be engaged each semester in many universities. It is obviously a waste if the data are only used as a basis of teachers? promoted and excellent commentary and so on. We should make full use of data mining technology to find out the hidden law or model and dig out some useful knowledge for further education services. It is an important way to check the effectiveness and improve the teaching quality to find out the relationship from a large amount of data. This thesis discusses how to use association rules in data mining technology in order to ensure a scientific teaching appraisal. As the direct impact on the teaching quality of teaching appraisal, it has drawn  more and more attention. Data mining will also be more widely used in teaching appraisal.

