

Cloud Services: Opportunity and Direction  January 29, 2013  LEE, Yeong Ro, N IA  National Standards Coordinator for  Cloud Computing     Outline  This Tutorial is presented using many publically available information and Presentation reflects my  understanding which may be erroneous  ? Introduction to Cloud Computing  ? Market trend and Issues  ? Government Policy Direction  ? Some Example of Cloud Promotion     What is Cloud Services ?

Mega Trend: IISharing Economy"  20TH CENTURY ?  HYPER CONSUMPTION =  CREDIT + ADVERTISING + INDIVIDUAL OWNERSHIP  21 ST CENTURY ?  COLLABORATIVE CONSUMPTION  =  REPUTATION +  COMMUNITY +  SHARED ACCESS  Me Generation To We Generation  Hyper Consumption To Collaborative Consumption  Source : http://openwear.org/blog/?p=1633  http://economyplus.chosun.com/special/special_view.php?boar dName=COl&t_num=6075     "Cloud"  : says Sharing of Computing Resources    "Cloud computing is a model for enabling convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction."     "Service II  : says the Change of IT management I like "financial  services" in monetary market  Financial Service  Cloud Service  Customized Financial Service     Cloud Computing- Characteristics  Deployment Models  Service Models  Essential Characteristics  Common Characteristics  l [ [  L  Software as a Service (SaaS)  ommunity loud  Platform as a Service (PaaS)  Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)  On Demand Self-Service  Broad Network Access ] [ Rapid Elasticity Resource Pooling ] l Measured Service  Massive Scale [ Resilient Computing l Homogeneity [ Geographic Distribution  ( Vi rtua I ization ) ( Service Orientation ( Low Cost Software ) ( Advanced Securit?  I J J  ] J  ) ) ?  * Source: NIST Cloud Computing Standards Roadmap, 2011    Cloud Market Trend     Cloud User Market  ? SME and Public Sector ? Difficulty in employing and maintaining talented IT staffs ? TCO Burden for IT System and securing Critical Mass ? Most of them welcome II Off-the-premises Cloud Servicesll  if the providers are IITrust worthyll and services are IIVisible" ? They know benefits of Cloud and saving of TCO under the  normal condition, but real concern is - Potential Cost of Risk which is difficult to measure because  of lack of statistics and business damages cases caused by service discontinuity  ? Large Size Enterprise ? began to introduce On-Premise Private Cloud at first since 2010 ? raise utilization of in-House IT Resources ? recently turn to use Commercial Cloud Services from KT, SKT, Google,  Amazon etc    ? Individual (Personal) User (B2C) : is growing faster than ever .. according to Smart Phone User Population Smart Phone Penetration  ? Public Cloud is gaining big popularity  among Smart Phone and Pad users  - SOGbyte Storage free for each Subscribers  * Smart phone penetration : 60% (30miliions)  ,as of June, 2012  100 .--------------80 % ?

80 +-------4?--  60 +-----?-f-  40 +---??'------I-  20 +--------\?  o +-----------r--  2009. 11 2010. 11 2012. 06 (2012. 12)  ? Number of " Pure Cloud user" who has thin or zero client seems to  be low .. need some time before changing of "Attitude to Use"  - but number of employees who use DaaS(Virtual Desk-top) is increasing due to the needs of corporate data protection and work everywhere     Providers Market: Global View  '--';-1 ,     Providers for Service Models  ? IaaS: Many Local Service Providers, KT, SKT, NHN  Compete with Global Players, Amazon, Google  Open Sources SW and White Box Servers are available.

Technical Maturity and Cost Reduction makes IaaS reasonable  ? PaaS: Google, Apple, Amazon lead global market  Package Solution providers(MS, IBM, Oracle)  have some latency in the PaaS market  ? SaaS: So many players, So many business domains * Domains : CRM, HR, Finance, Content management, Enterprise Social media,  Marketing Analysis, e-Commerce, Collaboration, BI etc     Policy Direction     Lessons from Broadband - Historic Review  ? Digital Evolution since 1990's  - Broadband Network build-up was one of the best Korea's ICT  Policy to take advantage of Internet and Digitalization in time  : e-Government, e-Business, evolution of manufacturing ..

- The catalyst for the Industry Transformation next to the  Broadband seems to be Cloud Computing, so many talks  about How to make the Cloud "Reality"     ? Back to the early 90's  - In early 90's US Vice President(AI Gore) first introduced the concept of Nil and Gil and announced a plan to connect the world with digital network  - Technically Internet standards, TCP/ IP and WWW, were key enablers to Network of Network and Real Connected World across the borders  - In 1994, Korea made a nice plan, "National Information Highway Plan" toward 20years from 1995 to 2015  - Since it became a reality in 2000, Korea has been ranked as lithe world highest" in Broadband Internet penetration     ? New Industries Creation and Eco-System  Simply Broadband have changed traditional business and created  big new Industries by utilizing Broadband and Mobile Internet  e-Government G2G, G2B, G4C  Eclt?cation ? e-Learning e-School  SOC ? ITS/GIS/e-Port ? Smart City  Networks  Economy ? e-Business ? digital  economy  -Manu? Facturing  Politics & Culture  ? e-People ? e-Voting     Example of "Eco - system" : Financial Market  Concept of Cloud Services is not the new if we see the financial  market, Just like the trusted banking and financial system, we may  need to consider an Eco-system and regulation for Cloud Computing  Central ....

Bank Ji?  Users  Insurance Co And Security  Supervisors, Broker and Auditors  Law and Regulation  Guidelines    What to be done for Cloud eco-system ?

- What should Government do as a first mover?

-How to create healthy eco-environment for IT as a Services  and to protect users  Cloud Auditor  Cloud Broker  Cloud User  Cloud Carrier  . T.

Cloud operator  Cloud     The New Role of Government to facilitate the progress of Cloud  Computing Services is ..

r  - Minimizing the Risk of using Cloud Services  - Securing Open Standards and Open Innovation  Conventional  Gov's Roles  Policy and Legal  Framework  Research and  Development  Public Private  Partnership  Coordination  r  New Roles  Risk Minimizing  - Security & Privacy - User Protection  Open Innovation  Environment  - Open e-Gov platform    Government Plan  ? Cloud First Government as a first mover - 60% of e-Gov system goes to Cloud until 2017  - Save IT operating cost by 40% by the year 2017  - Legal Basis for Cloud Promotion  * such as "Cloud Promotion and User Protection Act"  ? Open Platform Development by Securing Open Innovation Environment  - KCC(service regulation, security), MKE(Standards and technical  development), MOPAS(e-Government) and NCIA(Government Data Center)     ? "trust worthy" environment  - To Formulate a System to protect consumers  <ex> Insurance System, data back-up, workload or VM restoration  - To develop Standards and guidelines to secure usability  <ex> interoperability, portability, data security, privacy  - To secure transparency and minimize the information asymmetry between  consumers and providers  <ex> Auditing, Brokering, Principle-agent model in Business Management  Change of Government ICT Management and Introduction of K?  Cloud First and G-RAMP     Some Examples of Cloud Policies     1. K-RAMP for RISK Management for Cloud First Gov  Security Compliance     "Risk Authorization and Management Program"  Subscribers  Cloud Service Providers  Individual Risk management N x N Problem, High Cost  co t: co.., E t:  ? Q) fA E .- Q) D:::C)  Subscribers  - Risk Manage - Certification - Monitoring  ...

Cloud ServiceProviders  Cost and Time Reduction Single Authorization. Multi Purpose     2. OPEN Platform Development  PaaS Stack Paas for Systems  - Innovation Services  - Life Cycle Services  - Operational Services  - Application Services  - Infrastructure Services     Common Platform for mUlti-purposes  Cloud for Smart Industry  TV  Building management  Cloud for Smart Services  weather  ,t/  Tourism .

Health     Guideline for the Open Platform and Framework  development  Large and S ME  Cooperation  PPP Center  Open License Policy  International Commu  Training developers   Joint Development and  Testing  Max use of Open Source  tandardized Process  Standard Process  Web Based Registry     Examples: Open Source SW for Cloud Services  Platform / Service  Cloud Managemen  Hyperviso  t  r _  r Datacente / Hardwar ee  -  \.

?  Data Management - .  . - - - - . --  (Hadoop/ MongoDB ?)  " PaaS  (Cloud Foundry)  \.

OpenStack/ CloudStack OpenNebula/ Eucalyptus/ Cloud Forms  Monitoring '''\ Automation  I""

I...,  (Zabbix/ Nagios/ collectd/ Hyperic) (Puppet/ Chef) \ \.

- 1-.", ' .... Load Balancer '''I  Xen/ KVM ? Open Network (HAProxy) Foundation \  / Open Flow Switch '''I \  [ J (Open vSwitch) Open Compute \. "-l ZFS/ Nexenta/ GlusterFS ? \. \.

Source: KT, 2011  -  -  Utility  Network  File System     3. G-laaS and Data Center Consolidation  + Economic use of Gov IT resource by hardware consolidation  & virtualization(/09""14) - Integration of small-sized / less-used servers - HW resources(CPU, Storage, etc.) reallocation  ? On-demand & Real-time resource provisioning ('11-'14)  ? eRt.

Request for  resources N?IA  ? NCIA: ati nal C m utin inf rmati n ency  Integrated servers  Common storage & backup devices  Security & network equipment, etc.

AlIgcate resources  t.\lIocated resources     G- PaaS  + Standard frameworks applied to the platform where App  developers can easily do develop and test (/12'" )  - platforms for the cloud service developers  I Authorized Developers  I Authorized Developers  I Authorized Developers  Standard frameworks  ?8 syste? SW ?? pooling  ?  HW Pooling     G-SaaS : Cloud- Based Smart Work  Building private cloud infrastructures to provide virtual desktops  for tele-workers  Modification of group-wares & public services systems and  Optimization to Cloud Environment  ... ... w Office  NCIA  ? ,  ,  ... ...

Field Smart Work  Center     Summary  ? Cloud is one of the paradigm changers  ? Government Role as a first mover  ? Creating Eco-environment for IT as a Services in advance  Cloud Auditor  Cloud Broker  Cloud User  Cloud operator  ? ?  Cloud Carrier     Speaker: Dr. Yeong Ro LEE (Korean Agency for Technology and Standards)  Yeong-Ro Lee is the National Standards Coordinator for Cloud Computing in Korean  Agency for Technology and Standards with overall responsibility for technology and  standard planning and managing across Cloud Computing community and Standard  organizations in Korea. Recently he was actively involved as an main editor in  developing Government Cloud promotion plan, K-Cloud. Before joining KATS, he had  been a vice president of NIA, National Information Society Agency in Korea leading  National Broadband Infra and e-Government Initiatives. He received MBA degree  from Korea University and Ph.D in MIS from the Hankook University of Foreign Studies  res pective Iy  Abstr act: Internet has changed everything in our daily life and our daily life is heavily depending on the Internet and mobile devices. Next big thing will be Cloud  Computing which be another big Software and Computing Infra beyond the physical  network Infra, Broadband. Recently Public Cloud has been gaining big popularity  among Smart Phone and Pad users. Also the Cloud Computing will be an enabler of  ITaaS, IT as a Services as we see it in the financial service market Just like the trusted  banking and financial system. Today's presentation covers Korea Government's  perspective on Cloud and current issues for the trusted eco-system development.

