Evaluating Fractionated Space Systems - Status  Steven Cornford

Abstract-DARPA has funded a number of teams to further refine its Fractionated Spacecraft vision. Several teams,  including this team led by JPL, have been tasked to develop a  tool for the evaluation of the Business case for a fractionated  system architecture. This evaluation is to understand under  what conditions and constraints the fractionated architecture  make more sense (in a cost/benefit sense) than the traditional  monolithic paradigm. Our approach to this evaluation is to  generate and evaluate a variety of trade space options. These  options include various sets of stimuli, various degrees of  fractionation and various subsystem element properties. The  stimuli include many not normally modeled such as technology  obsolescence, funding profile changes and changes in mission  objectives during the mission itself. The degrees of  fractionation enable various traditional subsystem elements to  be distributed across different free flyers which then act in  concert as needed. This will enable key technologies to be  updated as need dictates and availability allows. We have  described our approach in a previous IEEE Aerospace  conference paper but will briefly summarize here. Our  approach to generate the Business Case evaluation is to  explicitly model both the implementation and operation phases  for the life cycle of a fractionated constellation. A variety of models are integrated into the Phoenix ModelCenter  framework and are used to generate various intermediate data  which is aggregated into the Present Strategic Value (PSV).

The PSV is essentially the value (including the value of the  embedded real options) minus the cost. These PSVs are  calculated for a variety of configurations and scenarios  including variations of various stimuli or uncertainties (e.g.

supply chain delays, launch vehicle failures and orbital debris  events). There are various decision options (e.g. delay,  accelerate, cancel) which can now be exercised for each  stimulus. We can compute the PSV for the various  combinations and populate a trades pace. We have developed   tooling to allow models to be automatically created and  executed allowing us to explore large numbers of options with  no human intervention. The methodology, models and the  process by which they are integrated were a key subset of the  previous paper. We will present the results of the Business  Case analyses for a variety of configurations and scenarios,  present the populated tradespace, show the GUI we have  developed to facilitate the use of the tool and discuss the  implications of both the results and our work to date. We will  also discuss future work and possible approaches for that  work.

