Dynamic Acquisition and Retrieval Tool (DART) for

Abstract- The 2011 Decadal Survey for planetary science released by the National Research Council of the National  Academies identified Comet Surface Sample Return (CSSR) as  one of five high priority potential New Frontiers-class missions  in the next decade. The main objectives of the research  described in this publication are: develop a concept for an end?  to-end system for collecting and storing a comet sample to be  returned to Earth; design, fabricate and test a prototype  Dynamic Acquisition and Retrieval Tool (DART) capable of  collecting 500 cc sample in a canister and ejecting the canister with a predetermined speed; identify a set of simulants with  physical properties at room temperature that suitably match  the physical properties of the comet surface as it would be  sampled. We propose the use of a DART that would be  launched from the spacecraft to impact and penetrate the  comet surface. After collecting the sample, the sample canister  would be ejected at a speed greater than the comet's escape  velocity and captured by the spacecraft, packaged into a return  capsule and returned to Earth. The DART would be composed  of an inner tube or sample canister, an outer tube, a  decelerator, a means of capturing and retaining the sample,  and a mechanism to eject the canister with the sample for later  rendezvous with the spacecraft. One of the significant  unknowns is the physical properties of the comet surface.

Based on new findings from the recent Deep Impact comet  encounter mission, we have limited our search of solutions for  sampling materials to materials with 10 to 100 kPa shear strength in loose or consolidated form. As the possible range of  values for the comet surface temperature is also significantly  different than room temperature and testing at conditions  other than the room temperature can become resource  intensive, we sought sample simulants with physical properties  at room temperature similar to the expected physical  properties of the comet surface material. The chosen DART  configuration, the efforts to identify a test simulant and the  properties of these simulants, and the results of the  preliminary testing will be described in this paper.

