Emotion sense Ontology to avoid human error on   Autonomous Decentralized Multi-Layered Cache

Abstract?In the control of operation of the machinery and equipment of vehicles human error by operator makes accidents and disasters. In information technology system, there are also some accidents to system failure and data lost by the human error by operator. It is one of big issue for assurance system. To avoid human error by operator, emotion sense evaluation by Ontology rule is proposed. We configure this approach on Autonomous Decentralized Multi-Layered Cache system (ADMLC). We selected Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) value as the factor of human emotion for each operator.

We try to sense operator unstable emotion by GSR value then request other operator to check whether his command order is true or not. We evaluated GSR value of nine operators by a week. Each operator has different GSR value and it is depending on person and environment. The analyzing method, Ontology rule is utilized in this proposal. Its rule engine always records the GSR value for ontology rule engine. The dynamic value of GSR shows operator's emotion in real time. Ontology rule engine decision makes the result of GSR value using the historical data. The result of emotion sense accuracy shows more than 90 % by evaluation. By the Ontology emotion sense rule engine on ADMLC system, it shows as one of possibility of method to avoid the system failure or data lost by the human error.

Keywords --- Human error; GSR, Ontology; ADMLC

I. INTRODUCTION  At present information system requires high assurance, adaptability and sustainability of the system [1], [2] & [3].

The system is established by hardware and software plus the operator's commands which are subject to mistakes.

Therefore, mission critical system requires evaluating whether the command by operator is true or not. This paper proposes Emotion Sensor Ontology to avoid human error on Autonomous Decentralized System. The method of emotion evaluation utilizes GSR value of operator who generates commands for the mission critical system. GSR value  depends on each person's emotion and its environment.

Therefore, our proposed system utilized ontology database for each operator along with historical data [4]. GSR is a method of measuring the electrical conductance of the skin, which varies with its moisture level. The sweat glands are controlled by the sympathetic nervous system [5] so skin conductance is used as an indication of psychological or physiological arousal. There has been a long history of electro-dermal activity research [6], most of it dealing with spontaneous fluctuations or reactions to stimuli [7]. GSR value shows the human emotion situation by the value.

There are some ways to approach emotional sense. The capturing face situation analysis cannot evaluate quantitatively due to different describing emotion level on face by person. But our proposed system provides much easier measurement method for all operators. We estimate if value is higher than average of ordinate value of user, it shows much higher positive emotion and less stress than average situation of user. To do this decision making, the system needs historical database for each user. Using a quantitative analysis such as Monte Carlo simulation model and standard deviation from the central limit theorem is required a large amount of data to enhance the accuracy of decision making. To make a high accuracy with less sample data, our proposed system has own ontology rule engine for GSR sensing data for each user autonomously. The judgment of emotion sense utilizes real time sensing value with historical analysis data by ontology database. GSR value of a limited time period shows much more sensitive human emotion. Therefore, Ontology engine analyzes GSR dynamic value within a minute too. Ontology technique to determine the feelings of individuals with high accuracy in the inference rules, by describing the conditions in Ontology Web Language (OWL) was adopted. OWL makes input events even from low self-learning information that are intended to achieve a high decision making rate of emotional judgment. We estimated the value of GSR as nine    operators? emotion every time when who makes a critical operation. Evaluation shows operator's emotion is changing every second. To enhance the high accuracy rate, GSR value is analyzed by ontology rule that was designed by us for this system with historical data. Ontology GSR creates individual user entities and attributes. Evaluation shows higher accuracy rate compared to the traditional approach.

Ontology analyzer achieves more than 90% accuracy of emotion situation. By the Ontology emotion sense rule engine on ADMLC system, it shows a one of possibility of method to avoid the system failure or data lost by the human error by operator.

The paper is structured as follows: Section 1 is introduction.

Section 2 describes architecture of Emotion Sense. Section 3 narrates Ontology rule engine for GSR sensor. Section 4 shows system implementation on ADMLC system. Section 5 shows the evaluation and Section 6 concludes this paper.



II. ARCHITECTURE OF EMOTION SENSE  The architecture of Emotion Sense is shown in figure 1. The command from system operator is the trigger of event. First of all, GSR value of operator is sensed every second and the command of operator is always evaluated. When the command is mission critical then start to evaluate whether GSR value is normal level or not. The operator touches his hand or body with GSR sensor. GSR sensor senses operator's electric skin resistance and stores in to GSR ontology database. GSR ontology database analyzes what is the status of operator's GSR value now. It also compares to analyze with historical data from Ontology database. Then GSR ontology rule defines operator?s condition on the basis of GSR value. If GSR value is abnormal, it notices to other operators and ask whether this command request is acceptable or not. If acceptable the command is executed.

Generally, if GSR value is higher value than average value, operator is in stable emotion. The algorithm of the decision making of each operator's emotion was defined by dynamic value with historical GSR recording value co-relation.

Therefore, a decision making criterion is based on individual GSR value of each operator. GSR ontology is tuned by operator?s historical GSR value. It also adds the GSR dynamic value in a second on each operator. Each value has weight value by the times of frequently cycle.

The sampling time of GSR and other life data from operator, the GSR ontology program counts the value of each date per second. It is greatly dependent on the sampling of the data processing time. In addition less transient effect is also cached by the data to pass. The value of sensed data was calculated by the total sum of sense data and its weight plus threshold value to judge. Basically, function and weight are main parameters. The following formula is very standard model of this decision making process.

Figure 1. Operator command Evaluation process by GSR emotion sense  Function X is GSR value, Y is GSR dynamic value and Z is other environmental values. Basically, weight and type of data are not static but dynamic parameters. This module senses each sampling time and calculates with historical sensed data.

The emotion of operator makes the decision by the weight and threshold table. Each operator has different GSR value but dynamic value within a second shows plus value or minus value within this time period. The positive value of GSR indicates a relaxed state while a negative GSR value indicates a stressed state. GSR dynamic value has the potential to show each operator?s emotional reaction in real- time. Therefore, this value is one of the heavy impact factors to see the operator emotion at the time. In our ontology rule engine, we make a much higher weight value than weekly average value of GSR as shown in figure 2.

Figure 2.       Weight and threshold value table  Ontology rule engine has been utilized in intelligent web application attack protection and network security [10], [11]  k  n  k kkk  j  n  j iji  i  n  i iii  nZWfnZ  nYWfnY  nXWfnX          & [12].  Our ontology engine is designed referring these existing models.



III. ONTOLOGY RULE ENGINE FOR GSR SENSOR  Ontology analyzing process for GSR sensor is shown in figure-3. All of GSR value is evaluated by the rule of Ontology and analyzes it with its historical data.  There are four functional parts. First is protocol validating which receives GSR sense data and evaluates its value and store GSR data into the historical database. Logging and monitoring logs the GSR value, and shows whether its value is normal or not. Knowledge base has inference engine with Ontology store. Inference level is always updates by the new rule from Rule base analysis engine. Rule base analysis engine has rule cache and rule generator.

Figure 3. GSR sensor ontology rule engine  This ontology rule layer is written in OWL. The architecture is composed of four layers as shown in Figure 4. All layers are connected by main Ontology database [14]. By these layers, the accuracy of decision making by GSR sensing data is enhanced.

Ontology rule engine studies by the real time measured sensor data and add ontology database to adjust more realistic value for each operator. GSR ontology has rule generator. Every rule contains an indicator for detecting a specific portion from the operator?s request and the corresponding mitigation actions. Rule based reasoning is done through Inference Engine by using semantic rules and ontology model saved in the knowledge base. Inferred knowledge model is given by Inference engine is queried by the Rule Generator for the generation of detection rules.

Semantic Query is generated by Query builder using Rule template. Rules Generator passes the semantic query to inferred knowledge model and populates the rule template.

Rules will be stored in the Rule Cache until unless there is some update in knowledge base. Detection Rules is fetched by the Analyzer from Rule Cache and it uses the Rule Grammar for parsing the Detection Rules and analyzer examines the incoming operator?s requests and outgoing responses.

Figure 4. Ontology Design Layered Model

IV. IMPLEMENTATION ON ADMLC SYSTEM  A. System Architecture ADMLC system is composed by dual Data Fields with  dedicated nodes [17], [18]. The first Data Field is processing Data Field (P-DF) and it is for processing node (P-Node) to emotion sense Ontology rule engine to analyze operator emotion timely. P-Node is holding each operator historical GSR ontology rule. The Ontology rule database is generating and is holding in C-Node. C-Node runs another Data Field that is called Contented Data Field (C-DF). The all operation process is in located C-Node storage partition. Thus, human sense ontology is stored two types of node groups. This configuration brings the advantages of timeliness manner with high assurance.

The emotion sense ontology on ADMLC system has following features:  It has Dual Data Fields (content and processing): Processing Data Field senses operator GSR value at P-Node while Content Data Field has emotion ontology rule database at C-Node. P-Node and C-Node are configured Trio Nodes group on each Data Field. L3 cache on P-node holds GSR sensing value to low latency time communication with C-Node. C-Node generates emotion Ontology rule database and holds its list on L4 cache on C- Node to low latency access from P-node.GSR sensing data is updated by P-Node and it transfers to C-Node dynamically.

P-Node mounts C-node storage partition to utilize emotion Ontology database.

Each C-Node is connected as trio group node. When receive the request of command from operator on C-Node, P-Node is always refer Ontology rule database on C-Node.

Therefore, P-Node and C-Node correlation is required initially. In case of Figure 6, C-Node trio group has storage partition such as (A/B), (B/C) and (C/A). Each C-Node maintains Ontology database in A, B and C storage partition.

Once P-Node mounted C-Node (A/B), (B/C) and (C/A), P- Node to be representative Node for C-Node trio C-Nodes. P- Node and C-Node have dual network port physically and connect both of nodes by C-DF.

B. Initialization process Initialization process contains following important tasks.

C-Node broadcasts own node status including program data type, number of application services, available storage data space and service priority. When other C-Node received their    node status, reply to it with own node status through Content Data Field. If there are more than three nodes available, selects nearest node for trio node group. After created Trio node group, broadcasts the request of P-Node availability via P-DF. Once received node initialization request from C- Node trio group, P-node reply its node status. If more than three P-Nodes are available, C-Node trio group selects them and notices to P-Node for P-Node trio group creation. P- Node is created by nearest P-Node autonomously. Once P- Node trio group is created and C-Node trio group, P-Node starts to mount C-Node storage partitions. Here, P-Node has two mounting points on C-Node. P-Node mounts one storage partition as L3 block cache and another storage partition is mounted as standard device under OS. The P-Node manages two storage partitions now. The data assurance is achieved by duplicate storage partitions in C-Node. For example, there are C-Node (A/B), C-Node (B/C) and C-Node(C/A).

Therefore, P-Node trio group also has same storage partition as P-Node (A/B), P-node (B/C) and P-Node (C/A). After mounts C-Node successfully, it loads application program and service from C-node. Then, P-Node is ready to start for emotion sense on C-Node ontology database.

C. Receive GSR value and Refer Ontology database from C-Node  P-Node always senses the value of GSR for each operator and it stores the values in Ontology database on C-Node. The ontology rule engine on C-Node generates new ontology entities and its attribute. When P-Node receives the command from operator, P-Node refers the command list on P-Node. If the command is mission critical request, then P- Node broadcasts the request of the command evaluation to other operators. Other operators receive the notice of mission critical command request by the P-Node. Other operators reply the answer of this request.  If one of operators does not accept this command, then this reply is broadcast to the P- Node and the command is not allowed to get executed.

The characteristic of p-node is that request command list is located in P-Node while GSR sensing application is located in P-Node device partition with OS. To compare and analyze GSR value with Ontology rule database is executed by P- Node L3 cache.

C-Node has following characteristics: Ontology database, GSR application program, GSR application program and Ontology rule database and Ontology rule database is located reside in C-Node. New Ontology database is generated by C- Node and holds at L4 cache to keep low latency access from P-Node.

D. GSR value sensing and store the value process  Firstly, P-Node GSR sensor senses the operator?s value per second in real time. When GSR value of operator is stored at P-Node, P-Node broadcasts its updated data to all other P- Nodes as the second step. Thirdly, when the capacity of data size of GSR value reaches threshold, P-Node unicast to C- node to add the historical data of GSR. C-Node stores and manages all historical GSR value in the storage of C-Node.

When Ontology rule engine requests the historical value of GSR of each operator, Ontology analyzing executes inside C-Node without P-Node business. Therefore, P-Node can maintain low latency response for GSR sense for each operator. When Ontology database is updated by the newGSR value, the result is distributed by broadcast manner via P-Node that is connecting C-Node. Therefore, P-Node can utilize the latest status of Ontology rule.

E. Ontology database  update process Ontology database is updated by the historical GSR value  from all operators. First of all, when GSR value is received from P-Node, P-Node sends the data to C-Node. Secondly, Ontology rule engine on C-Node creates new rule by new P- Node data and infer the ontology class of type of criticalness.

Thirdly, each C-Node has same Ontology rule engine to maintain high assurance manner. One of C-Node updated new Ontology rules, C-Node broadcasts to other C-Node to sync other C-Node. The eventually, even one P-Node capture new behavior of GSR, all of C-Node gets same level.

Therefore, the accuracy of Ontology rule is maintained at a very high level.

Figure 8 describes Ontology update process by C-Node to other C-Node. Thus, ADMLC system can sustain the system operation avoiding human errors through above four step process.

Figure 5. Ontology update process by C-Node.



V. EVALUATION  A. Evaluation of GSR sense data  This section evaluates GSR sense data from individual operator. GSR sensing data is variable by each operator and programmer. Therefore, system needs to store individual historical data logs to estimate the average value for each user. Figure 9 is GSR sense data result by multiple operators.

Testing equipment is GSR sensor (original made) and measurement tool by MT-4520 digital multiple testers from mother-tool Inc and Windows XP SP3 OS with testing monitor tool from tester as shown as Figuer10. There are nine operators from A to I in this test.

Figure 9. GSR sense data result by multiple operators  The test stores all sensing data by date and by time. Sensing data is variable and changes day by day. Therefore, the result of GSR ontology sense for human emotion is influenced by these situations. It also shows daily basis behavior as can be seen in Figure 11. Thus, GSR value shows the different value at each operator and shows the stability of value. We can detect if operator emotion is unstable at the time of command for mission critical system.

Figure 10. GSR sensor with measuring tool  These results are gained from same testing equipment.

People emotion has been changed by the date but this graph shows each operator has different zone of average value of GSR [15]. The causes are multiple reasons. But electric resistance by skin condition is main factors. In history GSR is also known as or closely related to the Sympathetic Skin Response (SSR) and Skin Conductance Response (SCR)[16]. GSR Dynamic value is also measured as shown in Figure-12. Each operator has own range of GSR value but GSR value within a second after start GSR sensing shows much  Figure 11.  GSR value for each operator  more variable emotion at each operator. For instance, some operators show the plus value within a minute. This means he or she shows more relax than starting position. Ontology rule evaluates GSR average and acts GSR dynamic value with higher weight rate than average value for the final decision making. If Ontology decides the unstable value, operator command should be double check by other two operators by the process flow of Figure-1 as shown at section-II.

Figure 12.   GSR Dynamic value within a minute for each operator  B. Ontology engine accuracy level simulation  Evaluation carried out here includes GSR historical sense data with real time measure GSR sense data. The traditional real time measure of GSR sense data in both case are same accuracy as 50%. And historical GSR sense data is adjusted once a seven on ontology approach but traditional GSR model doesn?t consider this value. It is always considering real sensing data only. Therefore, ontology GSR sensing accuracy result can maintain higher than traditional real time measure sensing data model. Accuracy rate is time    consuming factor. In this simulation, we utilize exp (-rt) curve.

CGSRrealPGSRhistP  GSRrealPGSRhistPtotalP  CGSRrealPGSRrealP  GSRhistPGSRhistP  e  e  rt n  i  rt n  i  **  )(  *  *    Here, P(GSRhist) = GSR historical sense data accuracy P(GSRreal) = real time measure sense data of GSR  Figure-13 is Ontology GSR accuracy vs. traditional GSR sensing accuracy. The accuracy rate of ontology maintains from 99.17% to 94.49% but traditional real time measure model is getting low accuracy. In this case, it drops 65.57% after 35 days. The reason of this result comes from advantage of Ontology database. Its rule utilizes historical data to adjust the average value of GSR for each operator for high accuracy rate.

Figure 13.  Ontology GSR accuracy vs traditional GSR sensing accuracy

IV. CONCLUSION To solve the issues of human error by operator, Emotion  Sensor Ontology to avoid human error is proposed in this paper. The implementation of the proposal approach is composed at ADMLC system. To sense the operator unstable emotion is utilized GSR value, Ontology rules are updated by each node of ADMLC autonomously. We look at the dynamic value of GSR after each second to notice other operator to decision making. This means if operator shows high fluctuations in GSR values then it is indicative of instability in his emotion. The proposed system detects unstable operator?s emotion by the dynamic GSR value.

Each operator has own range of GSR value but GSR value within a second after start GSR sensing shows much more variable at each operator. To analyze each operator emotion with multiple factors, we design GSR ontology rule engine.

Our approach shows high accuracy rate than traditional GSR data mining. The accuracy rate of ontology maintains from 99.17% to 94.49% but traditional real time measure model is getting low accuracy. In this case, it drops 65.57% after 35 days. Thus, historical data analyzing of GSR value by ontology method shows each operator's emotion situation with high accuracy.

