1569664773 1

Abstract?Current industrial monitoring systems gather big  amounts of data which are provided to plant personnel for  maintaining the proper function and desired production  performance. Unfortunately, these systems do not take into  account context as part of the plant, leaving out useful  information that could be useful for personnel when they perform  their everyday tasks. This context information includes data that  are implicit to the system but is not measured, like the  temperature of the room, location and time; and other system  information that already exists but has not been integrated into  the monitoring system, like 3D models and manuals. Therefore,  there is a need for a monitoring system that integrates context  data and existing plant information to provide dynamically only  the most relevant information for users when it is needed. The  information should be in the right modality based on the state of  the system, user, environment and functionalities of the device  used for providing the information. This paper presents a  proposal for a context-aware industrial monitoring system. Its  main characteristics, components, requirements and possible  enabling technologies are presented. In order to illustrate the  expected benefits of the approach, a representative scenario of the  domain of discrete manufacturing is provided. Finally, feature  and constrains are discussed and future steps are presented.

Index Terms?Adaptive HMI, context awareness, context  modeling, industrial monitoring, user cognitive model.



I. INTRODUCTION  ANUFACTURING is a vital part of the world?s  economy. In the US, it generates 13% of the total  economic output and in Europe around 20% [1]. Due to the  requirements of competitive global markets and the  technological developments of the last decade, manufacturing  industries have faced the necessity to evolve. They need to  reduce production costs, improve the quality of products and  develop self-adjustable and integrated production systems  which require minimal attention from personnel (e.g.

operators, maintenance, supervisors, and others) in order to be  competitive [2]. It is possible to achieve a reduction in   Manuscript received October 25, 2012. This work has partially received  funding from the ARTEMIS First Call 2010 Program under Grant Agreement  number 269334, correspondent to the project shortly entitled ASTUTE Pro-  active decision support for data-intensive environments. ?Enhancement of  industrial monitoring system by utilizing context awareness?, Ang?lica Nieto  Lee, Jos? L. Mart?nez Lastra.

The authors are with the Department of Production Engineering, Tampere  University of Technology, FI- 33101 Tampere, Finland (phone: +358 40 198  1784; e-mail: angelica.nieto@tut.fi, lastra@ieee.org).

production costs by increasing the performance of processes  and workers.

Monitoring systems have been used for many years both for  knowing the state of the plant and present it to users [3]. The  aim of such systems is to support decision making needed to  maintain the desired performance of a production system by  gathering as much information as possible from the plant and  displaying it to managers, supervisor, operators, maintenance  and other people involved with the process in a context aware  manner. Conventionally, such systems show the information at  each level of the plant on Human Machine Interfaces (HMI)  which are created during development time. These HMIs are  expensive and time-consuming to design and deploy, and they  cannot be adapted during system operation [1]. They display  as much information as possible to users regarding the  performance, status and other aspects of the plant at different  levels. As shown in the automation pyramid in Figure 1, the  amount of data and time requirements changes based on the  hierarchy level. Current monitoring systems do not take into  account the need of the user as a function of time and the  possibility of overwhelming the user with big amounts, which  reduces the performance of the personnel in contact with the  system. This problem becomes even more critical due to larger  and geographically distributed plants required by global  markets, where a large volume of events is continuously  collected.

In recent years, context-aware systems have been developed  in various domains due to the advances on embedded devices  Enhancement of industrial monitoring systems  by utilizing context awareness  Angelica Nieto Lee, Jose Luis Martinez Lastra  M  Control  SCADA (Supervisory Control  and Data Acquisition)  ERP (Enterprise Resource  Planning)  MES (Manufacturing  Execution System)  Sensors &  Actuators  Amount  of data  Time  requirements Amount of nodes  Server Workstation  PC  PLCPLC  I/O I/O I/O I/O  SoftPLCPLC  PLC  PC PLC  PC  PC  I/O I/O      Fig. 1. Automation Pyramid. Levels and hierarchy of data processing and  time requirements in automation.

2013 IEEE International Multi-Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness and Decision Support (CogSIMA), San Diego     1569664773 2  and mobile computing [4]. Its purpose is to provide relevant  information for users related with their environment (devices,  places, things and people). Therefore, in order to improve the  performance of personnel, only relevant information is  provided for them by including the environment and the user  as part of the monitored system through adaptive HMIs.

This paper proposes the enhancement of monitoring systems  by using context awareness.  It introduces a novel solution to  support context awareness, describes its components,  functionalities and possible technologies for deployment. The  solution is composed by three main components: a Context  Engine, a Proactive Decision Engine and an Adaptive HMI  Definer. The Context Engine maps the data of the plant to  context models. Context models are queried by the Proactive  Decision Engine and it creates a list containing the information  that will be shown to the user. Finally, the Adaptive HMI  Definer selects the modality and creates the HMI for the user  based on the device that is use to display the information, the  user profile and cognitive model. With the creation of adaptive  HMIs it is expected to reduce the time needed to perform  particular tasks by decreasing the number of visual elements in  the interfaces and the number of steps to reach the required  information.

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II  presents a review of current monitoring systems, context-  awareness and adaptive user interfaces. Section III presents the  proposed monitoring systems, its architecture and  characteristics. Section IV presents a representative scenario  of the approach on the domain of discrete manufacturing [3].

In Section V, a qualitative assessment is presented to identify  the advantages and possible drawbacks of the proposed  system. Finally in Section VI, the conclusions and future work  are presented.



II. STATE OF THE ART  A. Monitoring systems  The demands of global markets require the constant  improvement of plants to maintain themselves against other  companies [1]. These improvements are done by constantly  tuning the plant based on information provided by monitoring  systems and it requires from monitoring to change and adapt  the newest technologies for communication and data gathering  [1]. In the last decades, developments in Information and  Communication Technologies (ICT) have changed the  functionality of monitoring systems, as plants have evolved to  more smart automated systems. The introduction of  Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) gave the  possibility to create user interfaces and give a graphical  representation to the data collected from the plant.

Unfortunately, in the automation field there are many vendors  of devices for control and monitoring which developed their  own communication standards, restricting the possibility to  have heterogeneous systems. Later OPC was developed to  enable the communication between heterogeneous devices and  applications. However, even with the possibility to use devices  at field level from different vendors, HMI are still developed  at design time and are not able of adaption at run time.

Recently, web-based technologies have started to be used  for plant control and monitoring Service-Oriented Architecture  (SOA) which give interoperability and flexibility to distributed  systems [5]. This technology integration enables the use of  devices from different vendors. Unfortunately, even with the  possibility to have heterogeneous systems, plant personnel  continuously ask for more useful and powerful HMIs which  could support their work because the interfaces are still created  by integrators and developers at design time [6]. Also these  interfaces show the information to users without taking into  account the user role, profile, preferences, tasks to perform or  the environment.

B. Context awareness  The first publication related with context-aware systems was  presented in 1994. Since then, many developments have been  done in pervasive, personal and ubiquitous computing, smart  homes, smart vehicles, asset tracking, tour guides, smart  factories, health monitors and many others.  Context refers to  any information that can be used to characterize the state of an  entity, where ?entity is a person, place, or object that is  considered relevant to the interaction between a user and an  application, including the user and applications themselves?  [7]. Context awareness is the ability of programs, applications  or computer devices to sense, interpret, respond and act based  on the environment such as location, user, light, temperature or  time. It is done by conveying ideas in an automatic way to be  able to adapt based on its environment as humans are able to  do it [4]. A system is considered to have context awareness ?if  it uses context to provide relevant information and/or services  to the user, where relevancy depends on the user?s tasks? [8]  or for devices to adapt their surroundings if it is needed. The  most common context sources considered in context awareness  are: user, devices, location, environment, temperature and  time. When this information is taken into account and  interpreted the systems are able to provide the right  information for the right user, in the right time and modality at  the right place in the right device. In Figure 2 contextual  sources and results of context awareness for presentation of  information are shown.

During the past few years, different context-aware systems  have been developed for general purposes [8]-[13], but  specific frameworks and implementations for manufacturing  have started to be created during the last years. The most  relevant implementations are: MOSES, SAGE, Context  Toolkit, Smart Factory, Context-aware MES, wearIT@work  and SiWear. MOSES, a safety system for mobile work  provides information for maintenance personnel to create safe  working industrial environment. It also produces adaptive  maintenance tasks lists to be performed based on their location     1569664773 3  using RFID readers [14], [15]. Semantic, Ambient, Generic  and Extensive (SAGE) is a framework developed to optimize  the manufacturing processes and support decision taking for  Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) [16] [17]. Context-  aware work flow is a system developed to reduce machine  repair time by identifying machine maintenance needs and  send information to maintenance personnel when repairs have  to be performed [18]. It is part of Smart Factory [19], a project  which proposes a context-sensitive manufacturing  environment. Context-aware computing in Manufacturing  Execution Systems (MES) was developed to prove that  context-aware computing can be applied in manufacturing  systems by providing different information for the personnel  though different devices [20]. WearIT@work was presented in  2004. Its main target was to create real-world industrial  wearable computing applications in the manufacturing,  maintenance, and other domains [21] [22].  SiWear provides a  wearable HMI where the material list is shown in a graphical  way (how things are placed in the shelf), a picture of the piece  that has to be picked and the current status of the order [23].

A summary of implementations for the manufacturing  domain is presented in Table I. It can be seen from the  previous descriptions that many of the context aware  approaches use Semantic Web technologies to model the  context which constitute the base for creating applications of  this kind.

C. Adaptive user interfaces  Adaptive user interfaces have been developed and  implemented for different domains [24], [5]. An adaptive  system is defined as ?a system able to change its own  characteristics automatically according to the user?s needs?  [25], therefore, the main characteristic of adaptive user  interfaces is the possibility to change how the information is  presented. This adaptivity not only includes the visual  information but also to provide the information in different  modalities, like audio and haptic. From the various  developments in adaptive interfaces it was recognized that  there are two types of system, the adaptive interfaces at run-  time for users and at design time for system managers. The  run-time adaptive interfaces are adapted during working time  based on the information that will be displayed. The adaptive  interfaces for system managers are used to make easier and  faster the design of interfaces when new users are registered,  new information related with the system has to be shown or  when they are used by third party systems of other clients.

Adaptive user interfaces for industrial systems have been  developed for control and monitoring purposes. Some of the l  approaches are: adaptive HMI for process industries [5],  adaptive User Interface (UI) for process control using a multi-  agents approach [26], and adaptive HMI in cognitive  environments [27].



III. CONTEXT-AWARE INDUSTRIAL MONITORING SYSTEM  This paper presents an approach that uses context awareness  to create adaptive user interfaces to enhance industrial  monitoring systems. The purpose to do this is to provide the  right information, in the right modality, in the best way for  users when it is needed. It is done based on the context like the  state of the user, the monitored plant, the environment and  time.

The conceptual diagram of the approach is shown in Figure  3.  At the left hand side, all the context sources are considered:  TABLE 1  CONTEXT AWARENESS FRAMEWORKS AND APPROACHES IN  MANUFACTURING  Name Description Purpose  MOSES  It is a mobile safety system. Provide  technicians with an adaptive list of  maintenance tasks and safety information.

Client/server approach. Industrial PDAs  for users.

Maintenance  Safety  SAGE  It uses Semantic Web technologies and  ambient intelligence. Focused on the users  to optimize the manufacturing processes  in SMEs and support decision making.

Ontologies are used for context modeling.

Maintenance  Shop floor  control    Context-  aware  workflow  It Identifies machine maintenance needs  and creates work flows for maintenance  personnel when needed. Use of BPELs  extension called context4BPEL which  includes context events, context query and  context decision.

Maintenance  Smart  Factory  Context-aware assists people and  machines in execution of their tasks.

Extension of context-aware workflow.

Maintenance  Production  Context-  aware  MES  Prove use of context-aware computing in  MES. Ontologies for context modeling. It  is implemented in a locomotive company.

Production  wearIT@  work  It is use for car assembly training. Context  is obtained from wearable sensors, sensors  installed in tools and instrumented car  body to provide the right information for  workers in an HMI. Based on state  machine and sensor fusion.

Production  training  SiWear  It is used for picking systems in  warehouses. Composed by a head-  mounted display and a laser range finger.

It shows the order containing the parts to  be picked and tacks the position of the  arm/hamd in the material self..

Production  Inventory  Picking  Temperature  Devices  Location  Time  Environment  User  Contextual Data  Contextual Presentation of  Information  Right User  Right Device  Right Time  Right Place  Right Modality  Right Information  Context Awareness     Fig. 2.  Context awareness  concept.  Usual contextual data are shown on the  left hand side and the effects of taking into account context are shown on the  right side.

1569664773 4  users, location, environment and plant; which are used to  select relevant information per user. Then information is  provided for users through multimodal devices, like tablets,  smartphones, in the best modality (e.g. audio, visual, and  haptic) based on the tasks of the user, available devices and  preferences. Finally, the result of taking into account context  and available multimodal devices, different HMIs are created  for each user which provide the right information when it is  needed, in the right modality. Also different display  technologies can be selected based on the role of the user, the  performed tasks and the characteristics of the multimodal  devices to provide information in a more intuitive way for the  user like 3D and AR.

The requirements of the context-aware industrial monitoring  systems were identified and taken into account to define the  architecture of the approach. These requirements are: context  sharing, robustness, extensibility, interoperability, flexibility,  highlight relevant information, optimize space usage, select the  best presentation, the best modality and consider time. In order  to fulfill the requirements, the proposal needs the following  functionalities:  ? Gather information from the context (monitored  system,  user?s roles, environment, location, time)  ? Map the data in context models to make it usable for  generating meaningful information and put data  into context  ? Query the models to identify the relevant  information related with the system for each user  based on the current state of the plant  ? Generate a list of information that will be shown to  each user  ? Modify the HMI design and select the best modality  to provide the information for the user  ? Get feedback from the user and model updating  ? Off/online working system  A. Proposal solution  The solution proposed in this paper (see Figure 4) is  composed by three main components in order to separate the  concerns of interaction between the physical sensors and  context mapping, selecting the content of the HMI and  creating the final HMI. These components are the Context  Engine, the Proactive Decision Engine and the Adaptive HMI  Definer.

The Context Engine is responsible for mapping the  information from sensors (e.g. temperature, plant performance,  time, and others) and enriches this data with other context  information, for example, the user profile. It manages the  context models and updates them when there are changes in  the system. The Proactive Decision Engine queries the models  stored in the Context Engine and generates a list of  information for the users based the output of queries  performed to the Context Engine. Finally, the Adaptive HMI  Definer selects the best modality to give the information for  the user and designs and generates the final HMI based on the  device used to provide information.

1) Context Engine  Context Engine is the component that has direct contact  with the physical sensors. It receives data from heterogeneous  devices and maps them to the context models. It has two levels  of context to give more flexibility to the approach. The lower    User  Location  Environment  Equipment  CONTEXT  Operator  Maintenance  Manager  MULTIMODAL  DEVICES  Tablet  Smartphone  Desktop  Laptop  ?? System state  ?? Performance  ?? Production orders  HMI  ?? 3D model  ?? Assigned tickets  ?? Manuals  ?? KPI  ?? Reports  ?? Personnel     Fig. 3.  Conceptual diagram of the approach. Context is used to create  interfaces to different users based on their role, location, environment,  devices and multimodal display devices.

Data sources  Application  Proactive Decision Engine  Context Engine  Adaptive HMI Definer  Context models (Semantic Web)  Display device, user and cognitive models  HMI layout and logic creator  HMI Builder  Reasoner (e.g. Pellet, Jena)  Device 1 Device 2 Device 3 Device n  User  External sources (Internet, external  Databases  Aggregator  Light Adaptive HMI Definer  Database  Database     Fig. 4.  Proposal solution for context-aware industrial monitoring system.

1569664773 5  level is composed by individual models for the devices in the  production system, user roles, environment and location. The  upper level contains a general model which integrates the  individual models. When new data is received, the context  models are updated to always have the last state of the context  in the models. The data is sent to the repository (database),  where the historical information related with the context is  available. This layer of the architecture communicates with the  Proactive Decision Engine and answers its queries.

2) Proactive Decision Engine  This engine is in the middle of the solution and  communicates with the Context Engine and the Adaptive HMI  Definer. It is composed by a set of rules which are fired when  specific conditions are satisfied in the system or when changes  in the context are identified. It performs queries to the Context  Engine and creates a list based on the context and user state.

This list contains all the information that will be shown to the  user, the priority of each one, and sends it to the Adaptive  HMI Definer to create the new interface. A more detail  description of this layer of the architecture can be found in  [28].

3) Adaptive HMI Definer  The input of this module is the list of information generated  by the Proactive Decision Engine. When the information is  received, it creates and deploys the multimodal HMI that is  provided for the user. It selects the device where the  information is provided, defines the modality, the layout of the  HMI and its main design characteristics based on a set of  models.

The Adaptive HMI Definer is composed by three main  modules: Devices, user and cognitive models, HMI definer,  and HMI builder. The first module is composed by three basic  models: user?s model which includes the user role, preferences  and skills; the device model that contains all the devices used  to display information, its main characteristics, for example,  possible modalities and screen size; and the cognitive model.

These models are updated with the latest information related  with the user and devices Based on the models and the input  from the Proactive Decision Engine, the HMI definer selects  the best modality to provide the information, the layout of the  HMI is defined and the main characteristics of the interface.

Finally, the HMI builder deploys the designed interface in the  mobile devices.

In order to make the system more robust, the Adaptive HMI  Definer is able to work on offline and online modes.

Therefore, a light version of the Adaptive HMI Definer can be  installed in the devices used to display the information to  support the offline mode. A local database is used in each  device, where the latest and most important information is  stored to populate the HMIs with information and make it  functional for the user at any time. The Adaptive HMI Definer  not only takes into account different modalities, but also the  different technologies (e.g. 3D, AR, and others) that can be  used to show the information and selects the best option for  each user depending on the state, tasks and display device  capabilities. This solution considers the possibility of having  several devices to receive information for the same user, and  based on the type of information that will be provided; the user  will receive it in the most appropriate device.

B. Enabling technologies  Due to recently available technologies, it is possible to  create a context-aware industrial monitoring system. These  technologies   will be briefly presented in this section to get a  general overview of the solution.

Semantic web technologies are the most popular for creating  context aware frameworks [12, 13, 16, 17, and 20]. They are  used to model the context in a human and machine  understandable way which makes it the first choice for  implementing context awareness.  Ontologies are knowledge  representation models and they are the most common Semantic  web technology used to model the context in general  frameworks and manufacturing applications. They can be  reused in different domains; new knowledge can be inferred  out of them and they are understandable by humans and  machines [29]. There have been several developments of  ontologies in factory automation, for example, a general guide  to create domain ontologies is presented in [30] and different  ontologies for specific purposes like modeling assembly  processes and automation devices [31], for optimization of  Flexible Manufacturing Systems [32] and production control.

In this approach, ontologies can be used for the models in the  Context Engine (devices, time, user role, monitored system,  and environment).

As ontologies are stored using Web Ontology Language  (OWL), Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) rules can be  used to enrich the information in the models [33]. SWRL rules  make possible to complete the transition from the real world to  the ontology model as it provides expressivity for OWL.

For the Proactive Decision Engine, SPARQL Protocol and  RDF Query Language (SPARQL), used in many context-  aware frameworks, can be used to create the lists of  information that are sent to the Adaptive HMI Definer. It is  able to update Resource Description Framework (RDF) graphs  and make queries to different sources over RDF data [34].

As the Adaptive HMI definer also has devices, users and  cognitive models to select the modality and design the HMI,  ontologies can be used for this purpose. Also SWRL and  SPARQL are candidate technologies for the full version  (online version) of the HMI definer module. But it needs to be  considered that as it will be used on mobile devices and they  have to support the offline mode of the system. Performance  problems could be faced on the light version of the HMI  definer, so more simple models will be developed for this  purpose.



IV. SCENARIO FOR INDUSTRIAL MONITORING SYSTEM USING  CONTEXT AWARENESS  To indicate feasibility of the monitoring system proposed in  this paper, a representative scenario will be presented to     1569664773 6  perform a qualitative assessment of the main characteristics for  systems of this kind. The same amount of information is shown  even if the user is stress. The scenario is for the domain of  discrete manufacturing where production is performed by a  line composed by modular manufacturing cells. The context is  modeled and used to identify which information is the most  relevant to the user and how it is shown. In this way, the  monitoring system though the Decision Support Engine and  the Adaptive HMI Definer selects the best modality for the  user and reorganizes the information in the HMI.

1) Context  In the domain of the scenario and for research purposes,  context is considered as  ? Production: Information related with the production  system, like its performance, OEE, quality.

? Device: It contains the unique device ID, its  characteristics and current state. For this scenario,  the considered devices are robots.

? User: Represents the user related information like  the user name, role, profile, skills, and state.

? Location: Contains the current position of the user  and devices.

? Environment: Comprises information related with  the surrounding of the plant and the user such as  temperature, light and humidity of the room.

? Time: The current time is used to obtain context  history and take into account the user need as a  function of time.

? Display Devices: It contains the devices that are  used to provide the information for the user such as  tablets, smartphones, PCs.

2) Users  The users of monitoring systems in the industrial domain are  usually: manager, supervisor, team leader, operator,  maintenance, and materials handler. For this scenario it was  selected the manager, supervisor, and maintenance roles to  exemplify the approach. The selection of the roles was based  taking into account the big difference in the kind of  information that these users need for their everyday tasks.

Scenario  There are three people (manager, supervisor and  maintenance personnel) working on the plant for assembly of  mobile devices. The plant is equipped with a monitoring  system that receives context information from heterogeneous  systems to maintain the desired performance of the production  and support the personnel in their everyday tasks. Each user  has different mobile devices (tablets and smartphones) to  monitor the assembly line and receive notifications, alarms and  task tickets  When the robot of one of the manufacturing cells in the  production line has an error, every user will receive different  information based on its role and profile and the available  monitoring device. The information will be selected by the  Proactive HMI Engine taking into account the context models  provided by the Context Engine. The manager receives a  notification of the error on its smartphone containing very  general information about the problem as he only needs to  know that something is happening in the production line After  receiving the notification, he can continue with the tasks he  was performing. On the other hand, the supervisor of the line  receives the notification of the error in two different modalities  (visual and audio) on his tablet and more specific information  related with the problem is provided for him. As he is  responsible for supervising that the assembly line is working  properly, the context-aware monitoring system provides the  possible causes of the problem and information related with  previous errors of the robot and maintenance details. In this  way, the supervisor can take faster decision to solve the  problem and assign people to fix the error of the robot error as  soon as possible.

The maintenance worker receives a ticket in three  modalities (haptic, visual and audio) on his tablet to solve the  problem with the robot that was reported to the manager and  the supervisor. The three modalities were selected by the  Adaptive HMI Definer and Context Engine because he has a  tablet to monitor the line and it is possible to use the three  modalities in this device, he is not in a meeting and to make  sure he receives the notification as he is responsible for fixing  the problem soon as possible. He needs more detail  information to solve the problem, so the Adaptive HMI  Definer will create an interface that shows for him a 3D model  of the robot where relevant information and possible causes of  the problem are provided. Also the possible components of the  robot that could cause the error are highlighted in the 3D  model. By selecting the pieces on the model, he can access  manuals of the parts and diagrams to reduce the time to access  the needed information.



V. ASSESSMENT  In the scenario described in the previous section, if the  monitoring system operates without context awareness, the  information if provided to users in the same HMI As already  pointed out in Section 2.1, current monitoring systems do not  take into account the user, environment and the display devices  as part of the system. Therefore, the proposed monitoring  systems abandon some current monitoring practices like  generating the HMI at design time by system integrators and  designers and consider only the monitored plant and its  devices as data sources without considering the user and other  not plant related information.

As can be seen from previous scenario, the proposed  solution provides adaptive HMIs which take into account the  context and the display devices. Due to the fact that current  monitoring systems only work with local servers or they have  to be online all the time to have access to information, the  proposed solution is robust enough to provide a working  system even when the connection is not available.

The benefits of the approach compared with the current     1569664773 7  monitoring system are:  ? It provides more flexibility for the monitoring  system as it creates HMIs at run time.

? Users need less time to perform their tasks as the  needed information is provided proactively.

? The number of steps to get the required information  is reduced because the HMI offers access to it  when the user is performing specific tasks.

By reducing the number of visual elements in the interface  and the number of steps to reach the required information by  creating adaptive HMIs it is expected to reduce the time to  accomplish particular tasks such as fixing a robot, solve a  quality problem and others. A comparison of characteristics of  industrial monitoring systems with and without context  awareness is provided in Table II.



VI. CONCLUSIONS  Motivated by the new possibilities provided by new developments in context awareness, communications and mobile devices; a solution was proposed to enhance industrial  monitoring systems by using context awareness. The identification of the requirements for the context-aware monitoring system was done in order to create a solution, where the three main components (Context Engine, Proactive Decision Engine and Adaptive HMI Definer) were identified to provide the needed information for users at the right time in the right modality.

Different mobile devices are considered as part of the monitoring system to provide the information in different modalities and display information using other display technologies that current industrial monitoring systems do not use, like 3D and AR.

The next steps of this work will focus on the development of the models: context, display devices and user cognitive models. In parallel the implementation of the solution will be done based on the scenario described in this paper and a quantitative assessment will be performed in order to validate the benefits of this proposal. Ontologies, SWARL and SPARQL are some of the possible technologies that can be used to create the context-aware monitoring system but further research is needed to evaluate constrains and other possible technologies for reasoning on mobile devices. The prototype will be used test the improvement on the performance of workers by reducing the time needed to perform tasks.

