

Microwave Dielectric Properties of Brown Adipose Tissue  (BAT)   Erin Colebeck* and Erdem Topsakal    Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering  Mississippi State University  Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA      Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is prevalent in mammals that lack the capability to  produce enough heat to stay warm due to their surroundings, i.e. shivering. This  form of thermogenisis is found in new born children, and while it was believed  to change into a type of white adipose tissue by adulthood, BAT has been  discovered along the neck and torso in adults.  While occurrence of BAT in  adults is limited, its presence is becoming better known. Unlike white adipose  tissue, BAT contains a significant amount of mitochondria, which leads to the  browning in color. The mitochondria assist in converting high amounts of  glucose and lipids into the necessary heat for the individual to stay warm. Not  only does this conversion provide heat, it also provides assistance in increasing  metabolic output. Several recent studies proposed the possibility of manipulating  BAT to reverse the obesity in adults. One big challenge in developing drugs to  stimulate BAT is that there is no technology available to continuously monitor its  activity. To overcome this challenge, in collaboration with our colleagues from  Duke Medical School, we are currently designing a small radiometer to  continuously monitor temperatures at the BAT site in the body. Because the  radiometer operates at microwave frequencies, the design requires the  knowledge of BAT microwave electrical properties. Thus, in this study, we  performed microwave dielectric property measurements of BAT samples  extracted from rats between 500 MHz and 20 GHz. We used Agilent 85070 E  dielectric slim form probe, a fiber optic temperature probe, and a water bath. The  tissues dielectric properties are measured at a temperature range from 25 0C to 45 0C. Based on these measurements, we have developed first- and second-order  cole-cole models. We will present dielectric constant, electrical conductivity and  cole-cole model data over the frequency range of interest.

