

A Possibility of the Power Supply Leveling By Using Electric Vehicles As Storage Batteries    Yoshinobu Akimoto Graduate School of System Design  Tokyo Metropolitan University, TMU Tokyo, Japan  akimoto-yoshinobu@sd.tmu.ac.jp  Takuya Mizutome Graduate School of System Design  Tokyo Metropolitan University, TMU Tokyo, Japan  mizutome-takuya@sd.tmu.ac.jp  Yihsin Ho Graduate School of System Design  Tokyo Metropolitan University, TMU Tokyo, Japan  ho-yihsin@sd.tmu.ac.jp  Toru Yamaguchi Graduate School of System Design  Tokyo Metropolitan University, TMU Tokyo, Japan  yamachan@tmu.ac.jp    After the big earthquake on March 11, 2011 at Fukushima,  there are not enough power supply sources in Japan since almost all nuclear power plants stopped for checking each safety level, and no alternative power supply source is available. Then there is a risk that the amount of electric power demand would exceed the maximum amount of electric power supply. Once the power demand would exceed the power supply, a widespread blackout would occur. To avoid this kind of blackout, Japanese citizens are required to reduce the electric power demand during the peak power demand hours. But this means that if the peak of the power demand can be cut down, there is no reason to reduce the power demand. To cut down the peak of the power demand, we need to change the point of view from the increase of power supply and/or the decrease of power demand to the power supply leveling. Then we decided to study a possibility of the power supply leveling with the storage batteries. But since the storage battery is not popular as a home electric appliance, then we started to study it with electric vehicles (EVs) as storage batteries.

This study must depend on behaviors of each family and each family has a different life style. Then in this study, we chose the approach by the simulation with user model.

Keywords?uer profile; user model; electric vehicle; factoid;

I.  INTRODUCTION To lead the secure, pleasant, healthy and comfortable life,  sufficient electric power is required. But there are not enough electric power supply sources and it is difficult to prepare enough new power supply sources soon and/or to reduce the power demand. There are many papers about ?Vehicle to Home? (V2H) [1] and ?Vehicle to Grid? (V2G) [1]. Then the base technologies to use EVs as storage batteries are already established. However the paper, which shows the efficiency of V2H and V2G in consideration of the behavior of each family segment, could not be found.

Since the EV is a car for driving, then it can be used as the storage battery only when it is at home and the enough electric  power is left in it. The amount of power in the EV is sometimes not full, because during the driving, the electric power in it is consumed. And EVs would become a threat to the power supply if many EVs would be charged at peak demand hours.

Then we decided to study a possibility of the power supply leveling by using EVs as storage batteries in consideration of each family segment?s life style.

A. Energy management configurations For the power supply leveling, storage battery can be a  solution as a buffer of electric power, and also EV can be used as a storage battery instead of an actual storage battery. The system in this study consists of three components those are an EV, a switch board and home appliances. Following is the image of the energy management system in this paper.

Fig. 1. Image of the energy management configurations in this paper  B. User modeling process in this paper Family is a key component in our study, but it is not easy to  define the behaviors of the target family members since each family has different life style. For defining their behaviors, user profiling methods are effective, which are adopted at product   Switch Board  Power Supply Charging Power  Fe ed  in g  Po w  er   Home Appliances    Controller  EV    Fe  ed in  g Po  w er      marketing stage. So we adopted the step-by-step user modeling process from the user profile [2] for defining behavior data of each family member. Fig. 2 shows our user modeling process.

Fig. 2. User modeling process  This process is a bi-directional process starting from the user profile. The user profile is a set of user features such as ?age?, ?sex?, ?life pattern?, and ?preference?. In this study, the user model consists of three levels based on ?The hierarchical structure of the road user task? [3] by Michon. The strategic level user model is the root level user model which is a set of user behaviors at planning stage which is defined from the features in the user profile. The tactical level user model is a set of user behaviors at negotiating with its environment. The operational level user model is a set of primitive user behaviors.



II. DATA USED IN THIS PAPER For the simulation in this study, it is necessary to define the  electric power demand pattern by home appliances and the user model based on the statistical data. This chapter shows the statistic data which are used in this paper.

A. Average Electric Power Demand pattern in Home Sector The average electric power demand pattern within a day per  family in the Tokyo Electric Power Company area is reported in the ?Energy Report 2011 in Japan? [4] as shown in Fig.3.

Fig. 3. Average electric power demand pattern within a day per family  B. Home Rate The home rate pattern is reported in the ?2010 NHK  Japanese Time Use Survey? [5] as shown in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4. Home rate of family members  C. The Electric Power Demand In A Day Of Each Season The electric power demand data in each day of the Tokyo  Electric Power Company area are reported at the web site of Tokyo Electric Power Company [6] as shown in Fig.5.

Fig. 5. Electric Power Demand within a day at each season

III. ASSUMPTION IN THIS PAPER For this simulation, the behaviors of family members and  the season are the key components because family members consume the electric power with the different power demand pattern in each season. This chapter shows the user profile for each family member and the season for this paper.

A. User Profiles of Family Members The profiles of family members in this study are defined  based on the statistic data as followings,  ? The electric power demand pattern for this family is assumed based on the average electric power demand shown in Fig.3.

? The leaving and arrival time of each family member is assumed with the home rate data shown in Fig.4.

? The bottom demand hours in a day of each season are assumed based on the electric power demand in a day of each season in the Tokyo Electric Power Company area shown in Fig.5.

User Model User Profile (Lifestyle Level User Model)  Strategic Level User Model  Tactical Level User Model Operational Level User Model    ? By the reference [7] and [8], we assumed that the family structure in this paper consists of a father, a mother and a child or two children.

Then, we assumed the profile of family and its members in this paper as followings,  ? By the reference [9], we assume that the number of Family members is three. Family is consists of a Father, a Mother and a Child.

? Family has an EV.

? Father commutes by EV.

? Family lives at a satellite city around Tokyo, since Fig.3 is the data of the family?s power demand in Tokyo area and EV is used for commuting by Father.

? Father works at a factory in the local area of Tokyo.

? Mother is whole day staying at home for house work.

Since the air conditioner in Fig.3 is working in daytime, then at least one person has to stay at home in daytime.

? Child is a high school student. Child leaves home after Father left. And Child arrives at home before or at same time when Father arrives.

Then, we assume the life pattern (?At home? or ?Not home?) of each family member as shown in Fig.6.

Fig. 6. Assumption about the life pattern of each family member  B. User Environment We assume the user environment as following,  ? The season in this study is the summer, since the simulation is executed based on the data of ?Average Electric Power Demand in Home Sector? shown in Fig.3.



IV. SIMULATION PROCESS AND RELATED VALUES We defined a process for the simulation of the power  supply leveling by using an EV as a storage battery. This chapter shows the simulation process and related values.

A. Values related to simulation In this study, there are five key values, two are constants  and three are variables.

1) Constants a) Average power of use in a day (for driving) b) Specified threshold demand to charge to or to feed  from EV The ?Average power of use in a day? is calculated from the  average driving distance. The ?Specified threshold demand to feed from the EV? is the specified value. If the current power demand exceeds it, then the feeding from the EV is executed.

2) Variables a) Location of EV b) Current demand c) Power left in EV  The ?Location of EV? is a Boolean value, the value is true during the EV is at home. The ?Current demand? is the real time electric power demand. The ?Power left in EV? is the real time electric power left in the EV.

B. Simulation Process Fig. 7 shows the simulation process in this study. In this  simulation, the specified threshold demand is a key value to make charge the direction of power flow between charging to and feeding from the EV.

Fig. 7. Process to charge to and feed from EV  The simulation process shown in Fig.7 is as followings,  ? At first, the ?Specified threshold demand to feed from EV? has to be defined. If the 20% peak cut is required, then threshold rate is ?0.8? and the threshold demand is ?Estimated peak value * 0.8?.

? Only when the EV is at home, the charging and the feeding operation can be executed.

? If the ?Current demand? does not exceed ?Specified threshold demand?, then ?Charge power? is executed.

Start  End  EV is at Home  Power left in EV > Average power of use  in a day  Feed power from EV Charge power to EV  No  Yes  No  No  Yes  Yes  Current demand > Specified threshold  demand to feed from EV    ? And only when ?Power left in EV? is over ?Average power of use in a day?, ?Feed power? is executed.



V. SIMULATION WITH STATISTIC LIFE PATTERN DATA The simulation with static life pattern data is executed with  the user model based on the data in chapter III and the electric power demand data shown in Fig.3. This chapter shows the definition of user model and the result of the simulation with the user model.

A. User Model for this simulation In this simulation, Father is the key family member for the  power supply leveling since he commutes by EV as defined in Chapter III. We defined the user model of Father as followings,  1) Features as Strategic Level User Model ? Family has an EV.

? Only Farther drives the EV.

? Father?s absence means the EV?s absence.

2) Features as Tactical Level User Model ? The EV can be charged with electric power in  nighttime under the condition of Fig.7 since Father drives the EV outside in daytime.

3) Features as Operatiobal Level User Model ? Father is not home from 7:30 to 18:30 according to  ?Fig. 6. Assumption about the life pattern of each family member?. So the EV is also not home during above term.

? In this paper, the simulation is executed with the threshold value rates of ?0.5?, ?0.6?, ?0.7? and ?0.8?.

? Simulations are executed with following average driving distances per day.

a) 10 kilometer b) 20 kilometer c) 30 kilometer d) 40 kilometer e) 50 kilometer  ? The EV can be charged at the value of (?Specified threshold demand? - ?Current demand") Watt, where it is greater than 0, up to 24000 Watt hour.

? The 1 kilometer driving consumes 105 Watt hour at the speed of 30 kilometer per hour.

B. Result of Simulation The simulation is executed with the process shown in ?Fig.

7. Process to charge to and feed from EV?. Each result shows the peak rates of the last day after the peak cut simulation with one week data. If the result is equal to the threshold rate, the desired leveling is achieved during EV is at home, otherwise leveling is failed. If the result is 1, no power is left for feeding in EV after the simulation with one week data. TABLE I shows the results of simulation with the user model.

TABLE I.  RESULT OF SIMULATION WITH USER MODEL  Threshold rate  Average driving distance per day 10 km 20 km 30 km 40 km 50 km  0.5 1 1 1 1 1  0.6 0.6 1 1 1 1  0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 1  0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8    Above results prove followings,  ? At some combinations of ?Average distance per day? and ?Threshold rate?, a possibility of the power supply leveling, during EV is at home, is proved  ? To achieve the desired result of peek cut, the ?Threshold rate? must be specified correctly according to the driving distance per day.

? The driving distance before arriving at home is a key factor for the leveling by peak cut.



VI. SIMULATION WITH ACTUAL LOG DATA In the Chapter ?V. SIMULATION WITH STATISTIC  LIFE PATTERN DATA?, a possibility of the power supply leveling by using EV as a storage battery is proved. However since this result shows just a possibility with the user model, then we also have to prove the possibility with actual log data to certify the results with the user model.

To acquire the actual log data, we develop a system. As a device for this system, we chose a smartphone with a GPS function, an accelerometer function and capabilities to process data and to store data. This chapter shows the summary of this system and the result of the simulation with it.

A. Location and Motion Logs Acquisition System We developed a simulation system automatically to acquire  the location and motion logs of subjects for this study as shown in Fig.8.

Fig. 8. Location and Motion Logs Acquisition System  Database for Motion Logs  Yes  Database for Home GPS And Office GPS  (1) Home (2) Office  CSV Files  Within 250m GPS  Database for Sensor Values  (1) Position (2) Speed (3) Acceleration  Accelerometer  (3) Stop (4) Walk (5) Car (6) Train  Speed Calculator  Fuzzy reasoning at every 5 min   - Speed variance value - Acceleration variance value    This system consists of three databases. The input data of this system are position data and acceleration by smart phone, and the output data are location logs and motion logs. Those Databases are a ?Database for Home GPS and Office GPS?, a ?Database for sensor values? and a ?Database for Motion Logs?. The ?Database for Home GPS and Office GPS? stores the global position of home and office of the subject. ?Database for sensor values? stores the real time global position data, acceleration data and speed data. Position data and acceleration data are automatically collected by smartphone. Speed data are generated from the position data. ?Database for Motion Logs? stores location logs and motion logs. These logs are generated from the data in the ?Database for Home GPS and Office GPS? and the ?Database for sensor values?. The location logs and motion logs in database can be moved to SD card with the CSV file format.

B. Data in the Database for Sensor Values This system automatically acquires data from a smart phone  by GPS and Accelerometer function in every five seconds.

These data are stored in the ?Database for Sensor Values?.

These data will be the base of the location logs and motion logs.

? ?Position? data are the time series data of global position collected by GPS function.

? ?Speed? data are the time series data of speed generated from the ?Position? data.

? ?Acceleration? data are the time series data of acceleration collected by accelerometer function.

C. Location logs in the Database for Motion Logs Location logs are the time series data of location shown  below generated and saved in every five minutes from ?Position? data in ?Database for Sensor Values? and ?Database for Home GPS and Office GPS?.

? ?Home? means the area within 250 meter radius of the global position of the subject?s home.

? ?Office? means the area within 250 meter radius of the global position of the subject?s office.

? ?Other? is not ?Home? nor ?Office?. This is not used in this study.

D. Motion logs in the Database for Motion Logs Motion logs are the time series data of motion shown below  generated and saved in every five minutes. The motion is guessed by the fuzzy reasoning from ?Speed? data and ?Accelerometer? data in the ?Database for Sensor Values?.

? ?Stop? means staying somewhere.

? ?Walk? means moving on foot.

? ?Car? means moving by car, that is EV.

? ?Train? means moving by train.

? ?Others? means not ?Stop?, ?Walk?, ?Car? nor ?Train?.

This is not used in this paper.

E. Fuzzy reasoning and Fuzzy rules At first, we defined the acceleration variance membership  function as shown in Fig9 and the speed variance membership function as shown in Fig10, through trial and error.

Fig. 9. Acceleration Variance Membership Function    Fig. 10. Speed Variance Membership Function  And then we also defined four fuzzy rules as followings,  ? If variance (Acceleration) is Low AND variance (Speed) is Low, then ?Stop?.

? If variance (Acceleration) is High AND variance (Speed) is Low, then ?Walk?  ? If variance (Acceleration) is Medium AND variance (Speed) is High, then ?Car?  ? If variance (Acceleration) is Low AND variance (Speed) is High, then ?Train?  In this paper, we do not care about any other conditions.

F. User data for the Simulation with Actual Log data For comparing the result of the simulation with the user  model from statistic life pattern data in Chapter V, we chose two subjects who commute by car and have the similar profile with the user profile in Chapter V. And then to acquire the actual log data, we made these subjects keep the smartphone, in which ?The Location and Motion Logs Acquisition System? is installed, during the term of experiment. In this simulation, the    actual ?At-home rate table? and ?Average driving distance per day? are applied instead of statistic data used in Chapter V.

G. Log data For the simulation with the actual log data, we generated  ?At-home rate table? and ?Average driving distance per day? for each subject, from the location logs and the motion logs in the ?Database for Motion Logs?.

? The?At-home rate table? consists of the rate values for every 30 minutes, which show how long the subject is at home during the term of research. If during the specified time the subject is at home, then the rate is 1.

And if not home during that time, then the rate is 0.

? The ? Average driving distance per day? is the average driving distance per day during the research term.

1) Subject 1 ? The ?At-home rate table? was created from the  location logs? of Subject 1.

? The?Average driving distance per day? was 27.5 kilometer, created from the motion logs of Subject 1.

2) Subject 2 ? The ?At-home rate table? was created from the  location logs of Subject 2.

? The ?Average driving distance per day? was 20 kilometer, created from the motion logs of Subject 2.

H. Result of Simulation This simulation is also executed with the process described  in ?Fig. 7. Process to charge to and feed from the EV?. The results of this simulation, with same threshold rates applied in chapter V, are shown in the TABLE II.

TABLE II.  RESULT OF SIMULATION WITH LOG DATA  Threshold rate  Subjects Subject 1 Subject 2  0.5 1 1  0.6 1 1  0.7 0.7 0.7  0.8 0.8 0.8    Even though the leaving time, the arrival time and the driving distance of each subject are slightly different every day, the result of Subject 1 is same as the result of the user model with 30 kilometer drive per day, and the result of Subject 2 is same as the result of the user model with 20 kilometer. These results mean that the results of simulation with log data are similar with the results with the user model if both profiles are similar together, even with slight differences.



VII. CONCLUTION The result of this study is that the power supply leveling by  using EVs as storage batteries, during EV is at home, is proved where the threshold demand rate would be set properly for each family segment. And in this study we showed that the proper threshold demand rate can be found by the simulation with user model.

In this paper, since we studied this power supply leveling where EV is at home only in nighttime, then the peak cut of power demand in daytime is not discussed. So we will study the power supply leveling in daytime with other family segments such as the family segment which members do not commute by EV by using the user model. And then we will be able to estimate the total efficiency of the power supply leveling by using EVs as storage batteries.

And we will study this theme further as following,  ? To realize the electric power demand pattern of each family, we will make a simulator to generate it automatically with user model.

? To optimize the power supply leveling, we will study with the home power generator such as solar cells and so on.

? For the comparison of efficiency, we will study also with the storage batteries instead of EVs.

