Warpage Analysis and Improvement for a Power Module

Abstract  Comparing with the single-chip power packages, the power modules usually have a much larger size due to multiple die built inside. This may induce quite a big package warpage in the assembly process, especially after molding, which makes the package warpage big impact on the DBC substrate, as well as on the silicon die when mounting the power module to an external heat sink during application.

Therefore, in this paper, the warpage after molding process of a power module is investigated, and an improvement method is introduced. After molding, the DBC side of the power module may have convex warpage. To reduce the convex warpage, the pre-concave warpage of the DBC substrate is generated during molding process, to balance off part of the convex warpage. However, the concave profile at the DBC side may cause some flash issue around the DBC area during transferring molding process. Both FEA modeling and practical measurement of the package warpage of the power module are conducted thoroughly. It is found that the trends of FEA simulation results are consistent with the measurement data for the package warpage. By balancing off the warpage issue and flash issue, a better option of the pre- concave warpage of the DBC substrate is presented for mass production.

1. Introduction The demand for highly integrated electronic devices is  driving the power packaging industry to develop advanced packaging solutions for next generation multi-chip system in package (SiP). Both ceramic and organic polymer substrates have been successfully used as the carrier to integrate semiconductor chips in order to realize the power module packaging [1-4]. For high-voltage power modules, multiple dies are attached to one or more ceramic substrates, because of the combination of high ampacity, high isolation performance and high thermal conductivity. Power electronics are used for consumer products and industrial products in many different applications, from inverters in hybrid and electric vehicles, power conversion for wind and solar, traction drives for trains, to medical resonance imaging (MRI) amplifiers [5]. In customer field application, the power module is usually mounted on an external heat sink before mounting to the application PCB board, for better and efficient thermal dissipation.

Power modules usually have a much larger size. This may induce quite a big package warpage after the mold process due to the CTE mismatch of different materials and the chemical shrinkage of the mold compound in curing. The warpage will have a big impact on the DBC substrate when mounting the power module to an external heat sink during  application. The power module comprises the DBC substrate, power dies and passive components, lead frame, and the epoxy mold compound. After molding, the DBC side of the power module may have convex warpage due to the CTE mismatch of different materials and the chemical shrinkage of the mold compound. In order to reduce the convex warpage, the pre-concave warpage of the DBC substrate is generated during molding process, to balance off part of the convex warpage. However, the concave profile at the DBC side may cause some flash issue around the DBC area during transferring molding process. Thus, the concave profile needs to be optimized to balance off the warpage issue and flash issue. Several DoEs regarding different values and patterns of the pre-concave warpage of the DBC substrate are designed to obtain the optimized package warpage. Both FEA modeling and actual sample evaluation of the package warpage of the power module are studied thoroughly.

Correlation is checked between the FEA simulation results and the measurement data. It is shown that the trends of FEA simulation results agree with the measurement data for the power module warpage. By balancing off the warpage issue and flash issue, a better option of the pre-concave warpage of the DBC substrate is proposed for mass production.

2. Warpage Calculation Method                 The schematic of the warpage calculation method is  illustrated in Fig. 1. The actual warped top surface is represented by the solid curved lines 1-3 and 2-4. Four corner points of the top surface of the block are denoted as points 1- 4, which are set as reference points.  The center point of the actual warped top surface is denoted as point a. If the warped surface is not twisted, the points 1-4 are coplanar forming a virtual plane. The center point of the virtual plane is denoted  Fig.1 Schematic of warpage measurement  (a)  (b)  Convex warpage  Concave warpage     Fig.2 FEA model of the power module package  Fig.3 Locations of reference points for warpage calculation  Fig. 4 Package warpage of measurement data and FEA results with respect to the CTE1 of the mold compound  as point a?, which is the same point as the intersecting point of dot lines 1-3 and 2-4. If the warped surface is twisted, the points 1-4 are not coplanar, and dot lines 1-3 and 2-4 cannot intersect. In this case, two virtual intersecting points (a?? and a???) are obtained at center of dot lines 1-3 and 2-4. Point a? is defined as the midpoint of points a?? and a???. The warpage of the block is defined as the vertical distance between point a and point a?. Suppose the top surface of the power package is the DBC substrate, Fig. 1 (a) shows the convex warpage of the DBC substrate, and Fig. 1 (b) shows the concave warpage of the DBC substrate. Throughout this paper, the definition of convex and concave warpage of the DBC substrate follows this rule.

3. FEA Method of Warpage Modeling The package warpage after molding process can be  assumed as the summation of two parts. The first part is induced by the CTE mismatch of different materials due to temperature decrease, and the second part is induced by the chemical shrinkage of the mold compound during the mold curing process. The first part of package warpage can be simulated by the FEA routine modeling. But the second part is hard to directly simulate by the FEA modeling. Some equivalent methods are developed to include the second part of package warpage into the FEA modeling by many researchers [6-8]. In this paper, an equivalent CTE method is developed to simulate the package warpage of both parts by FEA modeling.

The equivalent CTE method is actually an empirical CTE method based on correlation of actual measurement data and FEA modeling. For a specific package, some package samples are produced following the standard assembly processes. Then the package warpage of each sample package is measured, and an average package warpage is calculated based on the package warpage data of all the samples. At the same time, an FEA model is built according to the package sample, and the DoEs regarding different CTE1 (CTE below Tg) values of the mold compound are conducted to calculate the package warpage. One case can be found that the simulated package warpage by FEA modeling matches well with the measurement data. The CTE1 value of the mold compound for this case is taken as the equivalent CTE1 including both the CTE mismatch effect of different materials and chemical shrinkage effect of mold compound.

In order to save time and cost, some dummy package samples are produced, in which the silicon dies, passive components, and bond wires are not considered.

Accordingly, the FEA model only consists of the DBC substrate, lead frame, and mold compound, as shown in Fig.

2, for both top and bottom views. The material property data adopted in the FEA model are listed in Table 1. The commercial code Ansys? is used for all the FEA simulations.

Table 1 Material property data             The CTE1 value of the mold compound listed in Table 1 is from the vendor. In order to obtain the equivalent CTE of the mold compound, DoEs with different CTE1 values of the mold compound are conducted based on the detailed description above. The loading condition is the temperature cools down from the mold curing temperature 175?C to the room temperature 25?C. It is assumed that the power module is stress free at the mold curing temperature.

The package warpage of the power module is calculated based on the method described in Section 2. As shown in Fig.

3, points 1-4 are four reference points, and point 5 is the center point of the package surface at DBC substrate side.

When the simulation is completed, the result file is post- processed. The deformed shape of the power module can be extracted, and the distances between the four reference points 1-4 and point 5 in Z direction (normal to the surface shown in Fig. 3) can be outputted based on the deformed shape. The package warpage of the power module is finally obtained by averaging the four Z-direction distance values.

Fig.5 Deformation contours in Z direction for all six  Fig.6 Package warpage of the power module for all six  Totally eight simulation legs are conducted with the CTE1 of the mold compound ranging from 9.1 to 30 ppm/C. The simulation results are illustrated in Fig. 4. It can be seen that the package warpage of the power module is linearly proportional to the CTE1 of the mold compound. By comparing with the measurement data of the package warpage of the power module, an equivalent CTE1 of the mold compound is obtained as 28 ppm/C for this specific power module. Therefore, this CTE1 value of the mold compound is used in the following FEA simulations for this power module.

4. Warpage Improvement by FEA DoEs After the molding process, the DBC side of the power  module may have convex warpage due to the CTE mismatch of different materials and the chemical shrinkage of the mold compound in curing process, as shown in Section 3 of the measurement data. The package warpage will have big impact on the DBC substrate, as well as the silicon dies when mounting the power module to an external heat sink during application. Therefore, an improvement method is introduced to reduce the package warpage. During molding process, the pre-concave warpage of the DBC substrate is generated, to balance off part of the convex warpage. In order to optimize the package warpage after mold cure, six DoEs regarding different values and profiles of the pre-concave warpage of the DBC substrate are designed as shown in Table 2. The outer surface of the DBC substrate becomes spherical for 2-D pre-warpage case, and cylindrical along the long side for 1-D pre-warpage case. The pre-warpage value means the travelled distance of the center point of the DBC substrate when reaching the designed pre-warpage profile. Case 1 shows no pre-warpage of the DBC substrate for comparison reasons.

Cases 2-5 are for 2-D pre-warpage DBC substrate with the pre-warpage values ranging from 80 to 150 um. Case 6 is the 1-D pre-warpage case of the DBC substrate.

Table 2 DoEs regarding different DBC pre-warpage          The same FEA method, as described in Section 3, is  adopted for all the DoE simulations. The simulation contour results of the Z-direction displacements of the power module for the six cases are shown in Fig. 5, in which the package warpage of each case is also listed. The package warpage of the power module is calculated based on the warpage calculation method described in Section 2 and 3. Figure 6 shows the simulated package warpage of the power module with respect to different pre-concave warpage values and profiles of the DBC substrate.  It can be seen that the package warpage of the power module is linearly proportional to the 2- D pre-concave warpage values of the DBC substrate. With  larger pre-concave warpage of the DBC substrate, more convex warpage of the package is balanced off after mold cure. Thus, results in smaller convex package warpage. By comparing case 4 and case 6, it can be seen that with the same pre-warpage value of the DBC substrate, the 1-D pre-warpage case produces larger package warpage of the power module after molding process. From the viewpoint of package warpage of the power module, the 2-D pre-concave warpage profile of the DBC substrate has better improvement than the 1-D pre-concave warpage case.

The max tensile stress (S1) and compressive stress (S3) in  the ceramic of the DBC substrate at room temperature are listed in Table 3. Since the FEA models are much simplified, the stress values can be used only for trend analysis. By comparing all the six cases, the variation of both S1 and S3 in the ceramic is with 5percent, i.e., the pre-warpage of the DBC substrate does not have significant impact on the stresses in the ceramic of the DBC substrate. Therefore, the induced stress in the ceramic substrate is not an important factor when qualifying the pre-warpage of the DBC substrate.

Fig.7 (a) warpage measurement equipment, (b) sample and jig  (b)  (a)  Fig.9 Locations for flash depth monitoring after mold cure  Fig.8 Comparison of FEA results and measurement data  Fig.9 Locations for flash depth monitoring after mold cure  Table 3 Simulation results for ceramic stresses at 25?C             5. Warpage Measurement Setup and Results The optical 3-D warpage measurement equipment is  shown in Fig. 7(a), and the power module sample and jig used for warpage measurement is shown in Fig. 7(b). The surface of the jig, which the package sample is sitting on, is smooth and flat. By adjusting the focus of the optical equipment, the height relative to the flat jig surface at the location points 1-5 (as shown in Fig. 3) can be read out as h1-h5. According to the warpage calculation method in Section 2, Fig. 1a equals h5, and a? equals the average of h1-h4. Thus, the package warpage can be calculated as the difference of a and a?.

Table 4 Power module samples for warpage measurement       Three sets of power module samples (option A, B and C)  are produced according to the parameters listed in Table 4.

The measurement data of package warpage are listed in Table 5. The comparison of the FEA simulation results in Fig. 6 and the actual measurement data in Table 5 is illustrated in Fig. 8.

It can be seen that the FEA simulated package warpage is quite close to the measurement data for the 1-D pre-warpage of DBC substrate. For the 2-D pre-warpage case, the trends of the FEA simulated warpage with respect to the pre-warpage values agree with the measurement data. However, there exists a gap between the absolute package warpage values from the FEA simulation and the actual measurement data.

Further investigation of the FEA method will be conducted to close the gap in the future.

Table 5 Measurement data of package warpage                   During transferring molding process, the DBC substrate  will have gap with mold cavity due to the pre-warpage.

Usually support pins are applied at four corners of DBC substrate before mold compound filling up, but it is difficult to completely close the gap. The gap near edge of DBC substrate is larger, and mold flash can easily bleeding out because of transfer pressure. The benefit of 1-D pre-warpage design can make the support pin work more effective for reduction of the gap between DBC substrate and mold cavity.

The flash depths and lengths of the power module samples are monitored, and the locations of the flash depth measurement are shown in Fig. 9. The measured max flash depths and lengths around the DBC area are listed in Table 6 and7 for the three options. Option C with 2-D pre-warpage with the value of 100 um of the DBC substrate, has the best performance, and option B with 1-D  and option A with 2-D pre-warpage of the DBC substrate have similar level control for flash depth.

Table 6 Measurement data for max flash depth           Fig.10 Comparison of imprint paper mark and grease i d C  Fig.11 Imprint paper mark on the DBC substrate for three  Table 7 Measurement data for max flash length option Max flash length (mm)  A 3  B 1.6  C 1.2   In the power module application, it is assembled to an  external heat sink by screw driver with specified torque force.

In order to verify the contact between the DBC substrate and the heat sink, imprint paper, which is sensitive to pressure, is put between DBC side and heat sink. As shown in the left figure in Fig. 10, red mark means good contact between the DBC substrate and the external heat sink. The actual samples with thicker grease area in yellow circles in Fig. 10 indicate poor contact between the DBC substrate and the external heat sink. It can be seen that the imprint paper mark method matches well with the actual test, so this imprint paper method is feasible and efficient. The imprint paper marks on the DBC substrate for the three cases are shown in Fig. 11. It can tell that option C has more DBC contact area.

In comprehension, option C produces the largest package  warpage, but has the highest Ppk value, which is the process performance index. Ppk basically tries to verify if the sample that you have generated from the process is capable to meet Customer CTQs (requirements). It can be used for a short pre- production run. A value of Ppk, larger than 1.67, is usually acceptable and the larger the better. The Ppk value of option A is less than 1.67, so this option can be screened out. Option B is the intermediate case of option A and C from the viewpoint of package warpage. However, option B produces much thicker flash around the DBC area than option C.

Through the imprint paper mark analysis, option C shows the best contact between the DBC substrate and the external heat sink. Therefore, by balancing off the package warpage issue and flash issue, option C, with 2-D pre-warpage of the DBC substrate with the value of 100 um is recommended as the optimized option.

6. Discussions and Conclusions The warpage after molding process of a power module is  investigated through both FEA modeling and practical test measurement. In FEA modeling, the equivalent CTE method is developed to include the effect of both chemical shrinkage of mold compound and CTE mismatch of different materials.

In practical tests, the optical 3-D warpage measurement equipment is used to measure the warpage of the power module after mold cure. A warpage improvement method is introduced by generating a pre-concave warpage of the DBC substrate. Several DoEs with different values and patterns of the pre-concave warpage of the DBC substrate are designed to obtain the optimized package warpage.

(1) The package warpage of the power module is linearly proportional to the 2-D pre-concave warpage values of the DBC substrate. With larger pre-concave warpage of the DBC substrate, more convex warpage of the package is balanced off after mold cure. Thus, results in smaller convex package warpage.

(2) From FEA simulation results, the induced stress in the ceramic substrate is not an important factor when qualifying the pre-warpage of the DBC substrate.

(3) From practical measurement data, option C produces the largest package warpage, but has the highest Ppk value, which indicating better process performance.

