Visualization of Resource Description Framework  Ontology Using Hadoop

Abstract? Handling big data visualization using existing visualization method has problem. So we try to visualize the big data using the Hadoop to solve the problem. Our system consists of data server, visualization server and user devices. The data server is preprocessing to big data and the visualization server processes outputs of data server or transform the output into web format. The data server and the visualization server use the Hadoop. User devices have a web browser. User is provided visualization result by visualization server through the web browser. In this paper, we experiment to visualize that subclass is one of resource description framework schema.

Keywords?Ontology visualization; RDFS visualization; Big data visualization; Hadoop;

I.  INTRODUCTION1 The big data processing is a hot issue recently. Engineers in the various field suggested a solution and research for solve own problems. The big data processing is important but showing to big data or processing result is important too.

Handling big data visualization using existing visualization method has problem like processing speed, processing step and etc. So we try to visualize the big data using the Hadoop.

The Hadoop software library is a framework that allows for the distributed processing of large data sets across clusters of computers using simple programming models [1]. The Hadoop is widely used as a solution for solve big data problems because the distributed processing has to handle more data at the same time. These advantages help to big data visualization.

Our visualization system consists of server part and client part. The server part is divided into data server and visualization server. The data server and the visualization server use the Hadoop. The data server processes big data and generates processing result. The visualization server process output data of data server to extract information which is used in the client part from the data. And then, the visualization server provides information to web services. A reason to use the web services is to provide cross platform to user. The client part receives information that user want from the visualization server through a web browser.

1 Corresponding author  The outline of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 explains a way to visualize big data using the Hadoop. Section 3 explains detail of our propose system and section 4 explains method of RDFS (Resource Description Framework Schema) visualization. In Section 5, we are showing experiment to our system. Finally, Section 6 gives conclusions and future works.



II. RELATED WORK Visualization methods using the Hadoop are two things.

First method is to use the Hadoop for representation to image such as Figure 1 [2].

Fig. 1. A representative suite of visualization tasks being evaluated with MapReduce.

The Hadoop can effectively processes expensive operation like 3D rendering compared with single machine. The Other method is to use the Hadoop for preparation to data for visualization [3, 4]. The preparing to data for visualization is to process big data or to reprocess processing result. So, the preparing result is making format. So, a result of the preparing is to make format which other process can use the format. Our propose system is this method.

DOI 10.1109/IMIS.2013.46     Visualization with Web has benefits.

platform independence and to use open sou with Web implement on web browse requirements. Open source for visualization i source supports a variety of languages. Anot Web interlocks other system [5, 6]. Output o to formalize a format that is supported on the

III. PROPOSE SYSTEM Figure 2 shows overview of proposes sy  consists of data server, visualization server The data server and the visualization serve logical. They may be one physical machine.

A single machine has a scalability p visualize big data. The single machine is slo growing of data size. The problem is overc Hadoop.

Fig. 2. System overview and steps of big data visualiza  A. Data Server The data server should preprocess big dat  system visualizes big data or processing resu is solution for solve own problems. The da HDFS (Hadoop File System) in order that v use these data at any time.

B. Visualization Server The visualization server consists of proce  service part. This structure is similar to the work together. The processing part processes of data server to use the Hadoop. So, th generates visualization result for web format and the Javascript. The result is serviced by service part. A reason to use web format in v is to provide cross platform to user.

C. User Devices User devices had to have Web browser su  Users request the desired information throu there are able to confirm the result. Users ar visualization server regardless of device.

The benefits is urce. Visualization er without other is plenty. The open ther benefit is that  of other system has Web.

ystem. The system and user devices.

er are divided into  problem about to wed depending on  come by using the   ation.

ta in order that the ult. The processing ata should store to visualization server  ssing part and web [7]. The two parts  s that data is output he processing part  using the HTML5 web server in web visualization result  upporting HTML5.

ugh the Web and re provided by the

IV. RDFS VISUA RDFS is a set of classes w RDF extensible knowledge rep basic elements for the descri called RDF vocabularies, inten [8]. A subclass of RDFS form and parent class in order. Mapp parent class and child class represents the contents.

Given C as child class and P  triple T = [C, P]  if T = [C, P] then  TC = C, T  Map(T) = {(TC, T), (TP, T)}   Reducers collect triples in acco reducers compare self-key and triples. If self-key is same to ev class. The every child class is c key is same to every child class parent class is parent of the key other the keys are classes of e content is Formula (2). Figure visualization method.

CK = ?{TC | TC = K} + ?{T  PK = ?{TP | TC = K} + ?{T  For ?X  If CX = ? and PX ? ? then t  Else if CX ? ? and PX = ? th  Else type of X is other class    Fig. 3. Overview of RDFS processing  The data conversion proces is abstract model. First data f format is used input data by H  ALIZATION METHOD with certain properties using the presentation language, providing iption of ontologies, otherwise nded to structure RDF resources mat is child class, ?subClassOf? pers generate two key using the  s for one triple. Formula (1)  P as parent class.

TP = P  }                                       (1)  ordance with the keys. And the d child class or parent class of very parent class, the key is root child of the key class. Or, if self- s, the key is leaf class. The every y class. Parent or child classes of ach group except for own. This  e 3 shows the overall of RDFS  TC | TP = K}  TP | TP = K}  type of X is root class  hen type of X is leaf class  s                                          (2)?   g in Hadoop.

ss is shown in Figure 4. The tree format is RDFS subclass. This adoop system. Next data format     is output of Hadoop system. This format name][Type][Parent class][Child classes]. Fi Jason format for web services.

Fig. 4. RDFS data conversion process for visualization

V. EXPERIMENT Experiment goal is implementation of server. So we built environment of visualiza Table 1. Collie is a Javascript library that hel optimized animations and games using HTM both PC and mobile using HTML5 canvas an  TABLE I.  VISUALIZATION SERVER ENV  Hadoop Environment  Node 20  Mapper 10  Reducer 20  Hadoop Hadoop 1.0.4  Node Environment  CPU Duel core 2.0GH  Memory DDR2 1GB  OS Ubuntu 10  Web Server Environment  Tomcat Tomcat 6.0  Library Collie    We are visualizing hierarchies of subcla randomly generated two dataset for experi triple numbers is 200, 2,000, 20,000 and 2 height of hierarchies of classes is 10 and 20.

data were processed by the methods mention results are shown in Table 2. Processing tim are shown in Table 3. As for this result, the are no observable change with growing of t see that Hadoop is effective in processing am          consists of [Class inal data format is   n.

f the visualization ation server like a lps to create highly  ML5. Collie runs on nd DOM [9].

VIRONMENT  Hz  ass of RDFS. We iment. Generating  200,000. And max The experimental ned earlier and the  mes of each dataset e processing times triple size. We can  mount of large job.

TABLE II.  VISUALIZA  Dataset Triple Root  1st set 200 1  2nd set 2,000 1  3rd set 20,000 1,6  4th set 200,000 11,    TABLE III.  PROCESSING  Triple 200 2,0  Time (second) 36 4    We had two visualization distinguish class type and to so Each class color is that; Root green color, and other clas visualization is to make a list o structure of the selected root c overall structure of the selecte track of the child class from th same with the first visualization  Figure 5 shows a result of shows a result of second visualization such as rectangle Animation is the same.

Fig. 5. Snapshot of first visualization class type and to sort by the type.

Fig. 6. Snapshot of second visualizat list of root class and to show overall str    ATION SERVER ENVIRONMENT  t class Other class Leaf class  13 95 82  89 909 902  624 8,946 9,430  ,789 90,005 98,206  TIME WITH AMOUNT OF TRIPLE  000 20,000 200,000  40 28 32  ns. The first visualization is to rt by the type using first dataset.

class is red color, leaf class is  s is blue color. The second of root class and to show overall class. The structuring method of ed root class is a way to keep he root class. Each class color is n.

first visualization, and Figure 6 visualization. Components of  e are drawn using collie library.

n. the visualization shows to distinguish    ion. The visualization shows to make a ructure of the selected root class.



VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, we proposed a big data visualization system.

Our visualization system consists of data server, visualization server and user devices. The data server and the visualization server used the Hadoop. In visualization server, the distributed processing of the Hadoop is used by the system for visualization because the Hadoop is effective to process a big data. And visualization server provided cross platform service using web service.

We will compare performance our system and a system used existing visualization method. And we will continue the research to improve our system through such as to changing storage.

