An integrated prediction model for traffic noise in an urban area

Abstract-Traffic noise is an inevitable phenomenon associated with traffic operation in urban areas. The increasing sensitivity to environmental issues leads researchers to study and formulate appropriate models to analyze the correlations between environment-infrastructure-man. In this area of research attention has been paid to issues related to noise pollution, how is attested to by the vast amount of literature on the subject. In particular, the traffic noise of motor vehicles, as main source in urban areas, makes up part of general environment problem which inflicts serious damage to the health of human beings and lowers their labor productivity. Due the increasing number of vehicles circulating in the big cities, the noise pollution becomes a problem because of the constant traffic on the roads makes some places reach the highest level of noise.

Therefore, the control of traffic noise has become a matter of major concern for communities trying to maintain a satisfactory environment in which to live and work. To ensure a high quality environment, methods for prediction the urban traffic noise are necessary tools. In order to modeling traffic noise and selecting corresponding noise control measures it is necessary to know functional relationships between noise emission and certain numbers of traffic parameters. The purpose of this article is to study the situation in Crotone (Italy) and develop a model to predict the noise based on the data collected. The result of this research will contribute to the analyze the traffic noise in urban center as well to develop a tool to help on treatments of this urban issue, allowing future decisions to reduce the noise pollution.

Keywords-Traffic noise, Prediction models, Urban noise, Noise pollution, Territorialplanning.



I. INTRODUCTION  The noise in the living environment is becoming more of a significant size, especially in urban areas where population density is greater.

Traffic noise has become an urban problem due to the rapidly changing land use along roads in response to population growth. Road traffic is a complex system in which wide varieties of road user, vehicle and environment interact.

The presence of productive activities that have sound sources on time and, above all, the more and more consistent means of transport by land, sea and air, make major portions of   the population are exposed to noise, sometimes with permanent effects on human health.

Define the conditions of the state of the environment, taking into account the contribution of the noise, is a goal that must be achieved to ensure better living conditions in the future.

The exponential increase of vehicles makes the situation even more complex, because the noise produced by vehicles can be eliminated only by preventing their transit.

Therefore it is essential to identify descriptive models able of representing the present state by means of the indices in common use. In the present article a prediction model suitable to describe these scenarios in urban and sub-urban has been proposed, which can be a valuable tool for the adoption of subsequent noise abatement measures, in case of exceeding the legal limits.

The prediction model has been developed after using the methods of measurement defined in the [1] "Techniques of detection and measurement ofnoise pollution ", in reference to a network of testing in the province of Crotone.

A model based on a correlation between measurements of sound levels, flow characteristics, characteristics of the road network and specific urban context characteristics has been defmed and calibrated.



II. DIFFERENT PREDICTION MODELS  Traffic noise is a component of environmental noise and is the result of the sum of various types of noise from traffic sources (e.g., cars, buses, trains, etc.).

Road traffic noise is the component of traffic noise that comprises the sources of traffic on a road, whether caused by passing (circulation and parking) or by working (highway works).

The former sources are discontinuous, since the sound levels grow as the source approaches the point of observation, reaches a maximum peak, and decreases as the source moves away, until it reaches the level of background noise.

There are many parameters directly or inversely correlated with traffic noise levels.

Techniques to predict noise levels generated by road traffic from parameters such as speed, traffic flow, the slope of a road, infrastructure characteristics, etc are very useful for territorial planning.

The most important variables considered in the development of mathematical models are traffic flow rate and composition [2], [3] and [4]. Increased traffic volume, in terms of vehicles per hour, causes an increase in the noise level [5], [6], [7] and [8].

The input data are therefore known, because predicted or assumed in the design and verified during the measurement campaigns.

The most established and tested prediction models of noise generated by traffic permit to calculate the Leq in dB (A) from the data traffic flow.

Generally all methods consider the following variables:  ? traffic data (emission) as the number and composition of vehicles (light trucks);  ? vehicle speed;  ? slope and paving of the road.

The various existing forecasting methods take into account different variables. They, however, to define a model to predict the noise generated by vehicular traffic, consider:  ? acoustic energy emitted by each vehicle, for example in relation to the type of vehicle, type of road surface and the parameters of motion, identifying the main mechanisms ofnoise emission;  ? the laws of propagation of energy generated by the traffic, taking into account the characteristics of the road surface, the influence exerted by natural obstacles and / or artificial, and ifnecessary the weather.

One of the most widely used models in urban areas is provided by [9]. Based on more than 400 experimental data was developed a mathematical model that represents a regressive refinement of a similar methodology has already been tried in Germany and adapted to the Italian situation.

The model takes into account as an index of average energy noise level Leq. This model links the flows divided into light and heavy vehicle, the distance from the centerline of the measuring point and a set of correction coefficients that take into account the flow velocity, and floors of buildings without taking into account the traffic conditions present on infrastructure.

Santoboni et al. [9] propose a model with a structure similar to the above, by integrating the correction coefficients that take account of standard conditions as the presence of signalized intersections or streams at speeds below 30 km/h. This model, while integrating the former, you simply apply a standard condition of possible traffic situations without reference to the actual condition of the stream infrastructure.

More models like the one proposed by [10], the model, the model proposed by the model [11] and the Ministry of  Transport and Communication of the State of Ontario are limited to consider such variables in play: the flow and the percentage of heavy vehicles, inserting as additional variable in the analysis section of the slopes. This model, though simplistic, with a limited field of application, provides reliable results comparable to the models described earlier.

A revolution in the field of the same type of models, then, has been addressed [12] that offers the same independent variables and adding an additional parameter of the type of corrective constituted roadway.

Several models based on sound events, have had very accurate, but often constrained by the difficulty of identifying the values of sound events.

Numerical modeling of such structures have been developed by several scientific world, they are based on the foundations of the regressive models, applied to segments of the infrastructure unit, assigning point sources. Among the most representative models are proposed by the French structure CETUR [13].

Several studies on the external noise have led to the formulation of three main types ofmodels:  ? models that correlate the Leq with geometrical and traffic parameters;  ? models that assess the Leq as the sum of individual events;  ? experimental models.

The models based on the correlation between traffic and geometrical parameters, with the Leq measured in experimental studies, generally have as input the traffic flow, the composition and the average speed of the vehicular current, the slope, the ratio between the height and the distance of the buildings and sometimes the road bed conditions. Numerous indices have been defmed to describe the degree of disturbance due to vehicular traffic, among them the most significant are: Ll, L10, L50, L90, Leq. They represent the sound pressure level exceeded in the 1%, 10%, 50% and 90% of the detection time.

It should be noted that generally all the proposed models are derived from a statistical analysis of data collected and generally from the best approximation of experimental results, given the extreme difficulty or even the impossibility to develop models by analytical considerations on the phenomenon characteristics.

The models based on the correlation between traffic and geometrical parameters, with the Leq measured in experimental studies, generally have as input the traffic flow, the composition and the average speed of the vehicular current, the slope, the ratio between the height and the distance of the buildings and sometimes the road bed conditions. Numerous indices have been defmed to describe the degree of disturbance due to vehicular traffic, among them the most significant are: Ll, L10, L50, L90, Leq. They represent the sound pressure level exceeded in the 1%, 10%, 50% and 90% of the detection time.

Starting from the literature, a review has been conducted about noise model and a selection in reference to simulators used for the prediction of traffic noise has been made.

Some models have been identified and listed in Fig. 1 below.

It should be noted that generally all the proposed models are derived from a statistical analysis of data collected and generally from the best approximation of experimental results, given the extreme difficulty or even the impossibility to develop models by analytical considerations on the phenomenon characteristics.

In the second group ofprediction models the overall level is calculated as the sum of the individual sound events that occur in a time interval T. These models are based on the calculation of SEL (Single Event Level).

A third type of models for noise prediction is based on the realization of numerical models which reproduces the urban environment.

N Developed 1 Campaga & Ind. (Dynae) 2 CityMap 3 DataKustik GmbH 4 Elitra 5 IMMI  Impact  7 Iso 9613 -liz 8 LIMA 9 LIMA Light 10 Mithra 11 NMPB -Rutes-96 12 Predictor 13 Sail II Lima 14 SoundPlan 15 SPM9613 16 TNM  Fig. 1. Traffic noise models  Produced Artemis A. Farina - University Parma Cadna A Matec Wolfel Mess-Systeme, Software GmbH and Hochberg bei Wurzburg Laboratoire d' Acoustique Universite Laval, Quebec - Canada Belgium research Stapelfeldt Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH Stapelfeldt Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH 01dB CETUR CSTN LCPC SETRA D.G.M.R. Consulting Engineers Stapelfeldt Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH Braustein and Berndt Power Acustic Inc.

FHWA  ? Citymap - Disiapyr [16], because, for its genesis, should be the reference model at the national level for the prediction of noise in urban areas, but in any case its modularity should allow at any time to implement the standards required by any law;  ? NMPB Routes 96 [13], which is the interim computation method recommended by the European Directive on the assessment and management of environmental noise [17] for the road traffic noise.



III. METHODOLOGY A series of measurements were carried out in accordance  with the methodology established by the Ministerial Decree of 16 March 1998 laying down the techniques of detection and measurement of noise pollution, with particular regard to transport infrastructure in the art. 3, paragraph 1, letter c) of the framework law on noise pollution by [18].

The measurement system was chosen so as to meet the specifications in Class 1 of EN and EN 60651/1994 60804/1994. The measurements were made directly equivalent with a sound level meter "Solo 01 dB", according to class 1 of EN and EN 60651/1994 60804/1994.

For measures were used in accordance with filters and microphones, respectively, to EN 61260/1995 (IEC 1260) and EN 61094-1/1994, EN 61094-2/1993, EN 61094-3/1995, EN 61094-4/1995, and calibrated in accordance with CEI 29-4.

The entire measurement chain, before and after each cycle, was checked with a calibrator to Class 1 according to IEC 942:1988.

The photometric measurements performed were considered valid because the calibrations before and after each measuring cycle have presented very different below the maximum allowed of 0.5 dB.

For each of the listed models a specific analysis has been conducted concerning the section for input data and the schematic of the source.

It has been, in particular, taking into account the presence of the reference tables to define the properties of sound sources: in the case of software models, it's also possible to specify whether these tables are modifiable by the user. Almost all models considered have the possibility to directly enter the parameters related to traffic (average speed, vehicle type, etc.) [14]-[15]. In these cases is not necessary to indicate the sound power emitted because it is the same model to calculate it. If instead the sources of noise is specified, the analysis of the physical quantities used by the models is returned.

It was finally taken into consideration the presence of a Data Base, modifiable, related to the properties of sound absorption of the materials.

Obviously, for the activities in question, are of particular interest models that contain a data base on sound sources; based on specific considerations a further selection has then been made, which has led to the identification, at this stage, of two computational models:  All instruments used for the measures were properly controlled in a laboratory accredited by a national calibration service, in accordance with the law [19], and are therefore provided with a calibration certificate with a date earlier than two years, that certify compliance with technical specifications.

The criteria and conditions under which such measures are set forth in Annex B to the Ministerial Decree. In particular, before the measures it was essential to acquire all the information about the reference and the characteristics of the road and the urban context. The noise measurements have given the variation both for the noise sources and of their propagation. Were detected all the data that have allowed to lead to the description of environmental noise sources that affect the areas concerned by the survey.

The microphone, mounted on a support and connected to the sound level meter with a cable long enough to allow traders to place themselves at a distance not less than 3 m from it, was oriented toward the source ofnoise: in this case the direction of traffic vehicle.

All measurements were conducted outdoors, during the period between July and October 2011. In particular, three     measurement campaigns have been carried out. Each measurement campaign lasted seven days.

For this reason, where there was found in front of buildings with facade flush with the roadway, the microphone was placed at 1 meter from the building facade, while in the case of buildings with detachment from the road or open space, the microphone was placed in the interior space and usable by people, however, not less than 1 meter from the building facade.

The height of the microphone, equipped with a windshield, however, has been determined in accordance with the actual or assumed position of the receiver.

All measurements were performed in the absence of precipitation, fog and/or snow, and wind speeds of less than 5 m/s.

Since road traffic phenomena having the nature of randomness or pseudo-randomness, the monitoring of noise it produced was performed for a time of more than a week, as required by law. In that period has been detected equivalent continuous A-weighted per hour over the whole twenty-four hours of individual-level data weighted equivalent continuous time obtained were calculated:  ? for each day of the week, the equivalent levels day and night;  ? The average weekly day and night;  ? The results of the measurements were presented in the manner specified in the [1]. In reports of detection have been reported:  ? the date, place, time of detection and description of weather conditions, wind speed and direction;  ? the reference time, observation and measurement;  ? complete measurement chain, indicating the equipment used and its degree of accuracy, and verification of the certificate of calibration;  ? the noise levels measured;  ? class of intended use to which belongs the place of measurement;  ? conclusions;  ? model, type, dynamic and frequency response when using a system of recording or playback;  ? list of names of observers who were present at the measurement;  ? identification and signature of competent person who has been measured.

The monitoring carried out, based on very long detection times, allowed to have an overall view of the sound energy present at the place under investigation. In theory, the monitoring can be done with special equipment, which can be categorized as follows:  ? MOBILE STATION: consists of a number of devices with enough memory to store the data of acoustic monitoring for several days, working periodically discharge the same by hand or by using mobile phones or radio transmitters. These stations include the use of external microphones and a simplified system of self- power (battery) which allows for operation without mains electricity. The tools are normally located within mobile, specially prepared, or in appropriate cases, for use in monitoring short-and medium-term (one or more weeks);  ? SEMI-PERMANENT STATION: the equipment used have characteristics similar to those of the mobile station, with the only variation to predict a stable installation at sites previously equipped for this purpose (electricity and telephone connections). They are used in monitoring of medium and long term (several months);  ? PERMANENT STATION: consists of an enclosure for outdoor and special equipment permanently connected with the office via telephone lines or radio. This station needs for the network environment where the air conditioning electrical measuring instruments are located, as well as installation of special facilities (the post for supporting the microphone, foundation or concrete base).It is obviously used for long-term monitoring.

For the purposes of this research was carried out a campaign of short-term monitoring using a mobile station.

Three operative macro-phases based on the defmition of the characteristics influencing the sound level have been defmed in the present research.

Figure 2 describes the operational phases necessary to develop the prediction model.

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the operative phases  The following characteristics have been registered for the implementation of the model:  ? road arcs groups acoustically homogeneous according to the values of flow;  ? geometry of the road sections (number of lanes and width);  ? road surface typology;  ? the surrounding urban area (height of buildings, etc.);     ? hourly traffic flows and distribution throughout the day,  ? vehicular flow characteristics.

Specifically, model data input are relating to the characteristics of the road, the traffic flow and the territorial context determining the sound power value and the sound power value with the presence of attenuators.

In the following phase a campaign of monitoring of noise emissions in the local context of Crotone has been carried out.

The sampling time [20] has been implemented by the division of territory in elementary acoustically homogeneous areas, choosing the numerousness of each sample according to the width of the zone, the flow and the composition of the vehicular current for periods of time significantly large. The duration of this period has been proportionated to the objectives of the survey and to changes in factors that influence the environmental noise.

Once data on the monitoring campaign have been known, a specific integrated prediction model, which contains land use variables and traffic flow variables has been developed.



IV. THE PREDICTION MODEL The experimental measurements have been made in the city  of Crotone (a town of Calabria region situated in the south part of Italy), in order to test the reliability of model predictions.

The measures have been focused on the Leq, the average speed of the vehicular flow and the traffic flow. It was also observed around the urban section, in particular observing the geometry of the infrastructure and the built environment (building height). To detect levels equivalent a phonometric system type "Solo 01 dB Instrument" has been used.

A video camera associated with the system has also made it possible to evaluate the hourly flow for each category of vehicles and the speed of vehicles transiting along the main road into consideration.

In Fig. 3 the characteristics registered during the survey:  Fig. 4. Frequency distribution: residuals  Below is the specification of the prediction model and the calibration results:  /31= -2.862  /32=19.495  /33=-0.694  R2=0.724  The model specified above shows how the factors that most influence the estimate of Leq are respectively the vehicle flow V and the estimated height H  The road surface, however, marginally influence the estimate of the equivalent level, given the relatively low average speed of flow typical of the urban links.



V. THE COMPARISON BETWEEN THE SIMULATED VALUES AND THE OBSERVED VALUES  Figure 5 shows the results of a statistical test at a significance level of 8=0.05.

Section n.

Hbuilding  V v L road Mat  building heights traffic flow in daytime hours speed of the vehicular flow road section width Type of road surface (0 normal, 1 acoustic road surface)  Estimate Standard t-value p-level La. Conf Up. Conf df=497  b 1 -2.86171 0.681906 -4.19664 0.000032 -4.20149 -1.52194 b 2 19.49510 0.219796 88.69629 0.000000 19.06326 19.92694 b, -0.69421 0.162715 -4.26644 0.000024 -1.01391 -0.37452  Level ofconfidence: 95.0% (a =0.050)  Fig. 3. Typical section detected characteristics  Figure 4 shows how the residuals are distributed normally respecting one of the basic hypothesis for the estimation of model parameters.

Fig. 5. Parameter estimates  The Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 respectively show the comparison between equivalent level calculated in the observation station and the one estimated by the model and the residues with the respective values obtained from the model.

80 ..

The legislation is limited, in fact, to give an indication of the strategic planning of the territory for the preparation of zoning consistent acoustic classes depending on the intended land use. The identification parameters are generally qualitative.

Bearing in mind the addresses listed above, shows that were not considered the results of any acoustic models. These models, in fact, provide quantitative results based on traffic circulation along the arteries themselves.

Arises, therefore, the need to homogenize the two approaches related to spatial planning and forecasting analysis on acoustics.

The [21] states municipal zoning of the territories in six acoustically homogeneous classes according to the intended use planning, starting with the first class, on the more protected areas, up to sixth class acoustics, which includes the industrial areas only.

Regardless of the noise classification identified by the planning tools you can create a second zoning regarding the noise generated by vehicles traveling on transport infrastructure. For the latter are provided with the appropriate sections pertaining to acoustics of which are defmed limits to be met only by emissions from mobile infrastructure.

The legislative guidelines on the procedures for monitoring of road noise, are articulated through two important decrees of the law [18]. The first of these decrees laying down detailed rules for the realization of the sound level tests, and second, the scope of the limits to which they are subject to the emissions generated by road traffic.

The procedures to be adopted for instrumental tests are defined in the [1] and [22] are set the amplitudes of the acoustic buffer zones and their limits to be applied to road emISSIons.

0.01  0.15  0.05  0.00  oss oes  O.EO        Residuals [dBA]   -5-10  50 55  .............~.

???+???????uJ i ~80 l ,??~t???i  .....j._._.- -------,  +VtV ./?

~l~:J:  ......~~ ;::'r  ::?

.......;;7?:A?J  /V:j!l'  7 t   60 ..

50 ..............-0.......0....- ---'---'---'--''---'--''---'---1. ............

-3  -4 -15   Fig. 6. Observed vs predicted values  Predicted Values Leq [dBA]  Fig. 7. Normal Probability Plot of Residuals  :0 o :

VI. CONCLUSION Vehicle noise is a major source of noise pollution in urban  areas. Since the '70s, in industrialized countries have been enacted laws to define the permissible sound pressure levels in urban areas. The various existing laws, as indices of disturbance, have adopted the equivalent sound level.

In recent decades, for these reasons, research in the acoustic field has been directed mainly to the development of suitable correlations to the prediction of the noise produced by vehicular traffic in terms of average sound level.

The simplified methods in the literature are based on knowledge of a specific set of traffic parameters and, moreover, are not able to consider the influence of complex variables, such as the composition of traffic flow and infrastructure characteristics.

Considering the current requirements regarding the quality of life in urban areas and the complexity of the existing road networks, such predictive models are, therefore, inadequate or insufficient to assess the noise pollution due to vehicular traffic in urban areas.

The operating procedure identified by the use of the forecasting model is also a valuable tool for the assessment of noise impact within an area with a moderate population density.

The methodology described thus becomes a usefulleaming tool for the preparation of the preliminary hearing that the zoning of Italian municipalities are required to prepare.

The comparison between the acoustic classification of the land and the zoning hearing is possible to identify the areas for which programs will be developed further investigation.

The model developed and presented in this paper starts from a modeling base previously defined and validated through a survey campaign by the same research group.

The prediction model presented, continues to direct towards the development of an integrated modeling, that is to include within a single model the flow characteristics, urban surroundings and the specific road surface characteristics.

The regression model simulates, with statistically reliable results, the equivalent level Leq(V, H, Mat) by three specific variables: the average velocity of flow V the flow, H relating to the urban context and Mat relating to the road surface.

Future developments will aim to evolve the model, whereas the special boundary conditions that change the patterns of sound propagation and the specific values ofnoise levels.

In addition it will aim to develop new planning strategies through simple criteria: removal of traffic from residential streets, streets in neighborhoods with penetration tracks and features that require low-speed vehicles, parking areas protected by trees or other obstacles, the inclusion of protection buildings (eg. shops, offices, garages, etc.) between the noise sources and residential areas, changing orography of the territory so that the areas to be protected from the resulting lowered noise sources or creating embankment with a barrier function, division of territory into areas according to their use (zonning), building design criteria for noise protection.

