Keynote Talk I

Abstract With the arrival of Big Data Era, properly utilizing the power of big data is becoming increasingly essential for the strength and competitiveness of businesses and organizations. We are facing grand challenges from big data from different perspectives, such as processing, communication, security, and privacy. In this talk, we discuss the big data challenges in network traffic classification and our solutions to the challenges. The significance of the research lies in the fact that each year the network traffic increase exponentially on the current Internet.

Traffic classification has wide applications in network management, from security monitoring to quality of service measurements. Recent research tends to apply machine-learning techniques to flow statistical feature based classification methods. In this talk, we propose a series of novel approaches for traffic classification, which can improve the classification performance effectively by incorporating correlated information into the classification process. We analyze the new classification approaches and their performance benefit from both theoretical and empirical perspectives. A large number of experiments are carried out on two real-world traffic datasets to validate the proposed approach. The results show the traffic classification performance can be improved significantly even under the extreme difficult circumstance of very few training samples. Our work has significant impact on security applications.

Bio Dr. Yang Xiang received his PhD in Computer Science from Deakin University, Australia. He is currently with School of Information Technology, Deakin University. He is the Director of the Network Security and Computing Lab (NSCLab). His research interests include network and system security, distributed systems, and networking. In particular, he is currently leading his team developing active defense systems against large-scale distributed network attacks. He is the Chief Investigator of several projects in network and system security, funded by the Australian Research Council (ARC). He has published more Security and Forensics, and IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. One of his papers was Systems. He has published two books, Software Similarity and Classification (Springer) and Dynamic and Advanced Data Mining for Progressing Technological Development (IGI-Global). He has served as the IEEE TrustCom 11, IEEE HPCC 10/09, IEEE ICPADS 08, NSS 11/10/09/08/07. He has been the PC of Journal of Network and Computer Applications. He is a Senior Member of the IEEE.

xxxi    Keynote Talk II  INCoS 2013   Research Progress on Ciphertext Access Control for Cloud Computing   Xiaolei Dong  Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China Research Progress on Ciphertext Access Control in Cloud Computing  Email?dong-xl@cs.sjtu.edu.cn    Abstract Cloud computing emerges as a new computing paradigm that aims to provide reliable, customized and quality of service guaranteed computing environments for cloud users. However, as the cloud service providers cannot provide fully trusted data storage, when storing their confidential and private data in the cloud, the cloud users have to restore to other mechanisms to protect these sensitive data while enjoying the cloud services. In this talk, we suggest the cloud users store ciphertext instead of plaintext in the cloud, and introduce several access control methods on the ciphertext in cloud computing. We will focus on four aspects of the major scientific problem in this topic. (1) Traceability. How to design attribute-based encryption (ABE) schemes that simultaneously support the traceability of malicious users who leak their keys and the highly expressive policies expressed in any monotone access structures. (2) Revocability.

How to revoke the illegal access privilege? This includes key revocation, attribute revocation, and access ability revocation. (3) Trustfulness. How to design secure multiple-authority ABE schemes that completely prevent individual authorities from decrypting ciphertexts? (4) Efficiency. How to design short ciphertext ABE schemes and short signature attribute-based signature (ABS) schemes? How to increase the security level or efficiency of these schemes without setting any trade-off on the security level or efficiency?

Bio Xiaolei Dong received her Ph.D. degree in mathematics from Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 2001. From 2001 to 2003, she was a postdoctoral researcher with Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), Shanghai, China. Then, she was with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, SJTU. She is currently a professor with SJTU. Her primary research interests include Number Theory, Cryptography, Trusted Computing, etc. Since 1998, she has published more than 70 academic papers, among which 24 are cited by SCI, 27 by EI. As the first author, Prof. Dong has two textbooks published by Science Press and China Machine Press. She won the first prize of Science and Technology Award for Chinese Universities in 2002, the second prize of Shanghai Nature Science Award in 2007, and the second prize of Nature Science Award by the Ministry of Education of China in 2008.

Currently, she is hosting the National 973 Program by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China and the National Information Security Special Project by the National Development and Reform Commission. Prof. Dong has visited University of Waterloo, University of Tsukuba, Hong Kong Baptist University, and Nanyang Technological University for academic activities. She is an associate editor of Security and Communication Networks (John Wiley) and also serves as technique program committee       xxxii    Keynote Talk III  INCoS 2013   The Theory and Practice in the Evolution of Trusted Computing   Dengguo Feng  The Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ISCAS), China    Abstract Trusted Computing is an emerging security technology based on hardware trust chips, attempting to overcome the computer system?s vulnerabilities. It establishes trust relationships of every computer component from TPM the hardware trust root by integrity measuring and verifying. The theory and practice of Trusted Computing has been quickly developed in the last few years. TCG a not-for-profit organization puts forward the trusted computing technology and specification since 2003. It has upgraded the specification to TPM 2.0 this year. Many IT products like PC, notebook, smart phone, server etc. has supported Trusted Computing. In China, TCM a similar specification was released with the support of Chinese own cryptographic algorithms and PKI infrastructure. TCM has the significant impacts on development and evolution of trusted computing due to its own features.

In this talk, I will introduce our work according to evolution clue of theory and practice for Trusted Computing. On theoretical aspect, we propose the first ECDAA protocol scheme based on q-SDH assumption, present other practical cryptographic protocol for TPM/TCM, and analyse the DAA protocol in the method of model checking. On practice aspect, we break through the core technologies of OS measurement, trust chain, remote attestation, and trust network connection. Based on principle of trust chain, we build the trust system on PC, virtualization server, smart phone. We also design and implement the test and evaluation system on trusted computing for TPM/TCM. As far as we know, the testing system is the first one putting into practical application for TPM and TCM in China. It provides the comprehensive tests on cryptographic algorithms, TPM/TCM command interfaces and trust software stack.

Bio Dengguo Feng is professor, doctoral tutor at Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences.  From 2000 to 2012 he is the director of State Key Laboratory of Information Security, National Computer Network Intrusion Protection Centre, and the member of the National Advisory Committee for information Technology. Currently he is always engaged in information and network security research and development work, received his Ph.D. for Communications and Information Systems in June 1995 and his Ph.D. dissertation was the first National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation. He was selected in One- hundred talent program of Chinese Academy of Sciences in November 1997.

