Software Engineering for the Industrial Internet  Situation-Aware Smart Applications

Abstract? With the rise of the Industrial Internet the world entered a new era of innovation. At the heart of this new industrial revolution is the convergence of the global industrial system with computing power, low-cost sensing, big data, predictive analytics, and ubiquitous connectivity. The growing proliferation of smart devices and applications is accelerating the convergence of the physical and the digital worlds. Smart apps allow users, with the help of sensors and networks, to do a great variety of things, from tracking their friends to controlling remote devices and machines. At the core of such smart systems are self-adaptive systems that optimize their own behaviour according to high-level objectives and constraints to address changes in functional and non-functional requirements as well as environmental conditions. Self-adaptive systems are implemented using four key technologies: runtime models, context management, feedback control theory, and run-time verification and validation.

The proliferation of highly dynamic and smart applications challenges the software engineering community in re-thinking the boundary between development time and run time and developing techniques for adapting systems at run time. The key challenge is to automate traditional software engineering, maintenance and evolution techniques to adapt and evolve systems at run time with minimal or no human interference.

Hitherto, most developers did not instrument their software with sensors and effectors to observe whether requirements are satisfied in an evolving environment at run time.  One way to break out of this mold is to make the four key technologies readily accessible at run time.

Keywords?smart systems; self-adaptive systems; runtime models; context management; feedback control; run-time verification and validation  BIOGRAPHY Hausi A. M?ller is a Professor in the Department of  Computer Science and Associate Dean of Research in the Faculty of Engineering at University of Victoria, Canada. He is Chair of the IEEE Computer Society Technical Council on  Software Engineering (TCSE).  His research interests include software engineering, software evolution, smarter commerce, self-adaptive and self-managing systems, situation-aware and context-aware systems, service-oriented systems, reverse engineering, reengineering, and program understanding.

He is a principal investigator in the NSERC Strategic Research Network for Smart Applications on Virtual Infrastructure (SAVI). The main research goal of the SAVI Network is to address the design of future applications platforms built on a flexible, versatile, and evolvable infrastructure that can readily deploy, maintain, and retire the large-scale, possibly short-lived, distributed applications that will be typical in the future applications marketplace. The SAVI partnership involves investigators from nine Canadian universities and 13 companies bringing together expertise in networking, cloud computing, applications, and business.

In 2011 Dr. M?ller?s research team won the IBM Canada CAS Research Project of the Year Award. He was the founding Director of BSEng, a CEAB accredited Bachelor of Software Engineering degree program in the Faculty of Engineering.  He serves on the Editorial Board of Software Maintenance and Evolution and Software Process: Improvement and Practice (JSME). He served on the Editorial Dr. M?ller is General Chair of ICSM 2014, the 30th IEEE He was General Chair of SEAMS 2012, the 7th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Software Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems in Z?rich. He was General Chair for ICSE 2001, the 23rd ACM/IEEE 2001) in Toronto. Dr. M?ller is a Fellow of the Canadian Academy of Engineering (FCAE) and a Professional Engineer (PEng) registered with APEGBC. He received a Diploma Degree in Electrical Engineering in 1979 from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Z?rich and MSc and PhD degrees in Computer Science in 1984 and 1986 from Rice University in Houston, Texas, USA.

