A New Metric for Basic-Block Level Rough Energy  Estimation for Power-Gated VLIW Data-Path Model

Abstract?This paper proposes a new metric for basic-block level rough energy estimation for fine-grained power-gated VLIW (Very Long Instruction-set Word) data-path model.

Power-gating (PG) brings a big benefit for leakage power reduction, but it makes an instruction scheduling difficult because applying PG usually takes dozens or hundreds of NOP cycles. To estimate the energy consumption of such power-gated VLIW data-path, an optimization of instruction scheduling for minimization of energy consumption is necessary. However, such instruction scheduling usually takes long time. This paper proposes a new metric for rough energy estimation taking into account power-gating effect. Proposed metric is constructed by application, architecture parameters, and power-gating parameters. Experimental results show that the correlation coefficient between proposed metric and energy consumption taking into account PG effect was more than 0.84, and the energy estimation by proposed metric is obtained less than one second.



I. INTRODUCTION Leakage energy reduction is an important problem, and  various researches have been done. Power-gating (PG) technology is a promising circuit technology to reduce leakage energy drastically, but it suffers from performance penalty.

Ikebuchi et al. [1] designed a MIPS-base processor with fine- grained PG, and demonstrated that runtime power management by fine-grained PG reduced leakage energy by 24%. Thus applying PG is one of effective approaches to reduce leakage energy at processor architecture level.

High performance and low energy consumption are common goal for leading edge embedded systems. To realize such systems, very long instruction-set word (VLIW) processor is proposed [2]. VLIW processors have multiple instruction slots, and the instructions are simultaneously issued and executed on each functional unit (FU). A compiler exploits instruction-level parallelism (ILP) or data-level parallelism (DLP) of given application, and generates these instruction sequences. Exploiting ILP/DLP supports effective utilization of FUs, and it realizes effective parallel execution.

Since the compiler strongly optimizes software beforehand, VLIW architecture is simple. This is why VLIW architecture  is suitable for an embedded systems required high performance and low energy consumption.

A customization of such VLIW architecture is effective for further improvement energy efficiency, and various researches have been done [3, 4]. Then, fast and accurate architecture exploration is necessary. However, the architecture exploration is usually time-consuming because of two reasons: 1) the design space is huge, and 2) accurate estimation of performance and energy for each architecture candidate takes a long time. Especially, the reduction of estimation time is critical because the architecture exploration iterates estimation for the various solutions. Uchida et al. [5] developed a fast and accurate energy estimation method based on SA, and almost optimal results can be obtained in practical time. However, it still takes several tens of seconds for each architecture. Using the SA-based energy estimation for the architecture exploration, it is still obvious to take very long time.

In this paper, we propose a new metric for basic-block level rough energy estimation for fine-grained power-gated VLIW data-path model. We propose a new metric such that the metric correlates highly with energy consumption considering PG effect. This metric enables fast energy estimation, and fast and accurate energy estimation for power- gated VLIW data-path is expected.

Rest of paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes fine-grained power-gated VLIW data-path model and its energy model. Section 3 proposed a new metric for rough energy estimation for power-gated VLIW data-path model.

Section 4 demonstrates an efficiency of proposed new metric, and finally Section 5 concludes this paper.



II. FINE-GRAINED POWER-GATED VLIW DATA-PATH MODEL  A. VLIW Data-Path Model In this research, we suppose fine-grained power-gated  VLIW data-path model as shown in Figure 1. The VLIW data- path model is composed of register file, loop buffer, instruction decoder, and heterogeneous functional units (FUs).

Each FU is connected with register file and loop buffer, and  2013 13th International Symposium on Communications and Information Technologies (ISCIT)     sleep transistor to control PG. The sle controlled by some instructions.

Since PG is applied to each FU, the FU ?active? and ?standby.? The active FU, the F can execute instructions with leakage ener The standby FU, the FU in standby state, ca instructions. However, in standby state, th consumption for the FU is drastically reduced  The data-path model has two extra instr PG: ?shutdown? and ?wakeup.? A shut transits the FU from active state to stan wakeup instruction transits the FU from stand state. Both shutdown and wakeup in performance and energy penalties. In th propose a new metric to estimate energy VLIW data-path model.

B. Energy Model Let I and FU be a set of instructions a  respectively. The energy model can be constr    where DE, LE, and BE mean a total dynam leakage energy without PG, and energy bene When we describe de(f, i) as a dynamic ene by instruction i on the FU f, the total dynam calculated as follows:  ? ? where I(f) means a set of instructions execute  Let Smax be a maximum cycle to exe When we describe al(f) and sl(f) as an activ for one cycle on FU f [J/cycle] and standby l one cycle on FU f [J/cycle], LE is calculated a  ? ?  Figure 1.    Fine-Grained Power-Gated VLIW D  eep transistor is  U has two states: FU in active state, rgy consumption.

annot execute any  he leakage energy d.

ructions to control tdown instruction ndby state, and a dby state to active nstructions bring his research, we y consumption in  and a set of FUs, ructed as follows:  (1)  mic energy, a total efit earned by PG.

ergy [J] consumed mic energy DE is  ,  (2) ed on FU f.

cute applications.

ve leakage energy eakage energy for as follows:  (3)  Let nPG, cPG(i), and fPG(i) be th scheduling, the number of cycles ap applied i-th PG, respectively. When cycle level PG benefit on FU f [J/cy as follows:    Then BE is calculated as follows:  ? ? where Eo(f) means the energy overhe  In this research, we propose a metric correlates highly with the ene section. The energy model in this instruction scheduling taking into instruction scheduling takes non- becomes huge overhead in the Therefore, proposed metric realizes taking into account PG without tim scheduling.



III. A METRIC FOR ROUGH E This section proposes a new m  estimation for fine-grained power-ga  Let M be the metric for rough en can be defined as follows:    where RLE is a rough leakage en defined in Equation (2).

Let nOP and nNOP be the numb except NOP instructions and the num respectively. When we suppose the the execution, following equation mu  ? | | Notice that |FU| means the number o  Let nNOP_act and nNOP_stb be the nu in active state and in standby state can be described as follows:  _ Now we assume a parameter ? a instructions. Then nNOP_act and nNO follows:  _ ? _ 1  Then, we define RLE as follows:    Data-Path Model  he number of PG in the pplied i-th PG, and a FU  n we define dEbft(f) as an ycle], dEbft(f) is calculated  (4)  (5)  ead of FU f by PG.

new metric such that the ergy model defined in this s section is obtained by account PG. Usually the -negligible time, and it architecture exploration.

rough energy estimation me-consuming instruction  ENERGY ESTIMATION metric for rough energy  ated VLIW data-path.

nergy estimation. Then M  (6)  nergy. Notice that DE is  ber of issued instructions mber of NOP instructions, maximum cycle Smax for ust be hold:  (7)  of FUs for the architecture.

umber of NOP instructions , respectively. Then nNOP  _  (8) as a ratio of active NOP OP_stb can be described as  ?  (9) ?  (10)     ? _ ? _  (11) where alave and slave mean average active leakage energy and standby leakage energy for FUs, respectively. Then alave and slave are defined as follows:  | | ?  (12) | | ?  (13)  Calculating M for each architecture with appropriate parameter ?, rough energy estimation is available.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS To demonstrate an efficiency of proposed metric M for  energy estimation, we calculate M for various architectures, and compared with energy value based on the energy model explained in Section 2. Computational environment is AMD Opteron quad core 2.5GHz with 4GB memory. Benchmarks are a handmade example, cavity detector, motion estimation, and QSDPCM. Handmade is an example where the DFG were created artificially by hand. Cavity, Motion, and QSDPCM are all real application kernels, and the DFGs are constructed by each segment of kernel code. Cavity is from cavity detector which is an image processing application. Motion and QSDPCM are from motion compensation and quad-tree structured difference pulse code modulation which are used in video codecs.

Energy model is based on UMC 90nm process, 200MHz execution. To apply PG, we assume that PG takes 10 cycles, and standby leakage energy becomes one-tenth of active leakage energy. Additionally, a maximum cycle to execute application (Smax) equals 150 cycles.

To evaluate M, we also performed instruction scheduling taking into account PG for the same architectures. We used Uchida?s SA-base instruction scheduling algorithm [5] based on the energy model explained in Section 2. Uchida?s method obtains almost optimal result, and we regard the results by Uchida?s method as true estimation results.

Table 1 shows the number of evaluated architectures. We prepared various architectures under the variety of the number of FUs and instruction assignment to each FU. The number of FU was from one to three, and we prepared five primitive instructions: add, sub, shift, mul, and mod. To prepare architecture instance, 15 FU patterns having unique combination of instructions are prepared, and the pattern is randomly assigned to each FU. Then we applied evaluation only for feasible architectures.

Table 2 shows that the coefficient correlation between proposed metric M and energy consumption obtained by Uchida?s instruction scheduling. For each benchmark, the evaluation is performed under the variation of parameter ?.

From Table 2, we can observe that for all cases, the coefficient of correlation is relatively high, and proposed M has highly  correlation with energy consumption obtained by instruction scheduling taking into account PG effect.

Table 3 shows relative error between proposed metric M and energy consumption obtained by Uchida?s method. We can see average, max, and min value for each trial. When we focus on average error in Table 3, the most average error become large for larger parameter ?. In this experiment, the real ? values for each case are relatively low, and this is why the error becomes small for smaller parameter ?.

Table 4 shows that SA based instruction scheduling obviously takes long time more than 40 seconds for the architecture, but calculation of metric M takes less than one second. These results obviously show that proposed M will contribute to reduce energy estimation time.

Figure 2 and Figure 3 show that the relation between proposed metric M vs energy consumption for Cavity and QSDPCM, respectively. For each benchmark, we prepared three figures in case ?=0.0, 0.5, and 1.0. X-axis means proposed metric M, and Y-axis means energy value obtained by Uchida?s method [5].

TABLE I.  THE NUMBER OF EVALUATED ARCHITECTURES  Cavity Handmade Motion QSDPCM 179 133 61 219    TABLE II.  COEFFICIENT OF CORRELATION BETWEEN M VS ENERGY  ? Cavity Handmade Motion QSDPCM 0.0 0.85 0.93 0.97 0.88 0.2 0.85 0.94 0.96 0.88 0.4 0.85 0.93 0.94 0.87 0.6 0.84 0.93 0.92 0.86 0.8 0.84 0.92 0.91 0.86 1.0 0.83 0.92 0.90 0.85    TABLE III.  RELATIVE ERROR BETWEEN M VS ENERGY [%]  ? Cavity Handmade Motion QSDPCM  0.0 Ave: Max: Min:  13.0 68.9  0.0  Ave: Max: Min:  8.9 34.6  0.0  Ave: Max: Min:  4.3 22.9  0.1  Ave: Max: Min:  5.2 38.2 0.0  0.5 Ave: Max: Min:  46.7 183.6  7.0  Ave: Max: Min:  39.5 91.7  8.1  Ave: Max: Min:  38.3 132.2  6.1  Ave: Max: Min:  25.6 110.6  2.8  1.0 Ave: Max: Min:  97.5 306.8  14.1  Ave: Max: Min:  86.0 180.7  19.5  Ave: Max: Min:  76.9 241.5  12.9  Ave: Max: Min:  52.0 191.2  5.6    TABLE IV.  ENERGY ESTIMATION TIME [SEC]  Cavity Handmade Motion QSDPCM SA [5] 43.0 40.4 40.4 63.3  Proposed M <1.0 <1.0 <1.0 <1.0      For all cases, we observed that the metr partially correlate very closely. On the other M and energy do not correlate closely so m cases. Changing the parameter ?  larger, plot  (a) ?=0.0  (b) ?=0.5  (c) ?=1.0  Figure 2.    Relation between Metric M vs Ene  ric M and energy r hand, the metric  much for larger M tted points tend to  be clustered. These results are affect ?, but also by the other features applied PG, the architecture, etc.

ergy (Cavity)  (a) ?=0.0  (b) ?=0.5  (c) ?=1.0  Figure 3.    Relation between Metric M  ted not only by parameter such that the number of        M vs Energy (QSDPCM)     Notice that architecture with minimum M also consumes minimum energy for all cases, and it is expected that the feature is useful for the architecture exploration with proposed metric M.



V. CONCLUSTIONS AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, we proposed a new metric for basic-block  level rough energy estimation method for fine-grained power- gated VLIW data-path model. We proposed a new metric such that the metric correlates highly with energy consumption considering PG effect. This metric enables fast and rough energy estimation, and is useful for architecture exploration for power-gated VLIW data-path model. Experimental results show that proposed metric has highly correlation with energy consumption obtained by instruction scheduling taking into account PG effect. The correlation coefficient between proposed metric and the energy consumption was more than 0.84, and the calculation of metric takes less than one second despite more than 40 seconds for instruction scheduling base energy estimation. Therefore, and drastic speed up is achieved for the energy estimation.

Motivation of this research is fast and accurate architecture exploration for fine-grained power-gated VLIW data-path model. This paper only demonstrates the primary results for the challenge of energy estimation with PG effect only by calculating the metric, and of course, we still have a lot of future works. Especially, to improve accuracy of proposed  metric, further analysis on the relations among metric, energy, application, architecture, PG condition, etc. is necessary.

Additionally, a method to determine parameter ?, which represents applicability of PG, is crucial. When we obtain correct parameter ?, more accurate energy estimation will be available. Another future work is new architecture exploration method with proposed metric.

