Implementing Conceptual Search Capability in a Cloud-Based Feed Aggregator

Abstract? Modern society is producing more information at a  faster pace than ever before.  There is an increasing desire to  use this massive amount of collected data to solve real world  problems. But given the vast size of the data involved and the  resource intensive nature of rapid large-data processing, the  need for more advanced methodologies in this regard is  increasing.  This phenomenon has given rise to the term ?Big  Data? which references these types of data intensive problems;  problems that are typically beyond the ability of traditional  tools and methodologies to effectively address. This paper  documents the means by which a problem of this type has been  addressed using agent-oriented software engineering  methodologies and commercial cloud technology. The Feed  Analyzer is a conceptual search based Web feed aggregation  system deployed to Microsoft?s Windows Azure cloud  platform.  Work of the type documented within this paper will  become of greater important as cloud technology is  increasingly used to address these types of data intensive  problems.

Keywords-Agent Based Systems, Design Patterns, Cloud  Computing, Big Data

I. INTRODUCTION  The evolution of data management technology has aided the ability to collect, store, access and analyze data about the most minute to the most significant of activities. But the world?s increasing computerization and interconnected nature means that more of this information is being produced faster than ever before and used in a multitude of contexts.

Identity and behavioral information for instance, aggregated from any number of disparate sources, is increasingly used to aid law enforcement in identity deception scenarios [1] while also providing predictive models of potential criminal activity [2]. This information may be similarly used to aid in fraud prevention both for online as well as traditional ?brick and mortar? retailers.  This overall phenomenon has given rise to the term ?Big Data? which generally refers to often multi-sourced volumes of aggregated information that are ?too big, too fast, or too hard for existing tools to process? [3].

The rise of these Big Data problems has resulted in the need for tools and methodologies that address the challenges inherent in the rapid processing of large volumes of aggregated information. This paper documents an attempt to address one of these Big Data problems within the context of  a Web feed data aggregation system call the Feed Analyzer.

The Feed Analyzer implements a type of semantic or concept-based search capability with the aim of more broadly identifying potential feeds of user interest while also attempting to minimize the return of extraneous data with minimal relevance to the user?s identified topic(s) of interest.

The development of this application using agent-based software engineering methodologies and cloud technologies provides evidence to support the contention that both may aide in the solution of Big Data problems of this type.



