Rehabilitation Database Based on   Haptic Signal Processing

Abstract? The growth of the internet brings up new  keywords for the information technology, such as cloud computing and big data. The increasing data in the information society has a potential to offer new insight into the real world. On the other hand, the increasing demand for rehabilitation of aged people has resulted in increased demand for physical therapy robots. Therefore, this paper proposes the construction of rehabilitation database extending the concept of medical cloud technologies. We discuss the possibility of establishing a new validation methodology by generating database created using the data collected with rehabilitation equipment. Statistical processing was applied to the data collected using the rehabilitation equipment, for investigating an example of a validation method. The results show that a new knowledge for physical therapy can be extracted through a statistical evaluation with database compiled from quantitative sensor information.

Keywords? physical therapy robot, movement therapy, haptics, biarticular muscle, pneumatic artificial muscle.



I. INTRODUCTION Owing to an increase in the disabled population, there has  been increased demand for rehabilitating aged people, with provision for movement therapy to prevent muscle contracture.

While movement therapies are generally guided by physical therapists (PTs), face-to-face sessions may not always be possible owing to time constraints. Therefore, physical therapy robots have been developed by various research groups for reducing the workload of a PT [1][2][3].

Kahn et al. have shown that the use of rehabilitation apparatus for upper limbs is effective in mitigating spasms[4].

Krebs et al. have reported outstanding results for training with an upper limb rehabilitation device using a two-dimensional force display system [5]. Pneumatic artificial muscles are attractive for rehabilitation robots since they are light weight and compliant [6]. Impedance control strategies are also common for generating a compliant motion by a low- backdrivability rehabilitation robots [7].

Although the feasibility of using medical equipment for aiding movement therapy has been studied, the problem related to sharing information between PTs has not been addressed. Since a PT can gather only limited information from patients, the physical therapy education is time-intensive.

Hence, medical robots have been proposed for assisting medical students in training [8]. Introduction of the medical  cloud concept may enable efficient information sharing and the development of new next-generation physical therapy techniques.

The information used by a PT is based on force. Therefore, specific equipment is necessary for recording and saving the required information. Physical therapy robots, which can be classified as rehabilitation equipment, have the ability to record and save information because most of them are digital equipment. Focusing on this characteristic, this study attempts to generate rehabilitation database using physical therapy robots. Some previous studies have succeeded in recording and compressing kinematic information of human motion in motion database [9]. The rehabilitation database needs to record not only kinematic information but also force information. Shimono et al. have proposed a method to store a bilateral force information to a force sensation recorder [10]. In view of safety in force sensation recording, the authors have developed an accurate force control system using pneumatic actuators [11].  Signal processing technologies in haptics are necessary for solving the issues of rehabilitation database.

Command recognition [12] and personal identification [13] based on haptic information can be extended for classification of rehabilitation data. A method for extraction of the range of motion using a rehabilitation robot has also been proposed [14].

Due to the recent growth of the internet, a great deal of rehabilitation data can be gathered if the physical therapy robots are connected via the internet. One of the largest advantages of using robots for movement therapy is that the quantitative assessment of the therapy is available.

Furthermore, statistic analysis of movement therapy will be available by adding the advantage of data gathering through the internet. Note that it is quite difficult for therapists to gather data of large number of patients in different medical organizations. In sum, development of rehabilitation database may enhance researches in the area of movement therapy by realizing quantitative and statistic analysis of movement therapy. Therefore, this paper extends the abovementioned studies to rehabilitation database and show the validity through some examples of database utilization.



II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP  A. Mechanics of the Experimental Device The rehabilitation robot used in this study is designed to  execute a training of the upper limb. The robotic arm is  This work was supported in part by PRESTO grant from Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST).

IEEE R10-HTC2013 Sendai, Japan, August 26-29, 2013      Table 1. Details of experimental devices.

Force sensor  Manufacturer Model number Load rating   WACOH-TECH Dyn Pick Fz-axis: 200 N Mx, y-axis: 1.5 Nm  Encoder Manufacturer Model number Resolution  SIKO GmbH MSK5000 0.005 mm  Proportional valve  Manufacturer Model number Reaction time Linearity Pressure range  HOERBIGER tecno easy 20[ms] < 2.5% 0?8 bar  Pneumatic artificial muscles  Manufacturer  Size Maximum power Shrinking percentage  KANDA TSUSHIN KOGYO 0.5 in 400 N 34% (unloaded)     J1 f3  e3  f2  e2  f1  e1  J1  J2  x Fx  y Fy  ?1 ?2  T2  T1  x  y  l1 l2   Fig. 1 Muscle arrangement in the robotic arm.

positioned horizontally for eliminating the effects of gravity while it is also possible to tilt the arm. Table 1 shows the details of the devices used in the experiment. The robotic arm is driven by three pairs of antagonistic pneumatic muscles in order to simulate the muscle arrangement of a human arm (Fig. 1).

B. Simulation of Human Muscle Arrangement This section shows the model of the muscle arrangement in  the upper limb of a human and discusses how to simulate it in the robot arm. Muscles that affect the limb movement are called functional effective muscles [15]. This paper introduces a model of functional effective muscles into the robot arm. Fig.

3 shows three pairs of antagonistic muscles ( 1e  and 1f ; 2e  and  2f ; 3e  and 3f ), which are functional effective muscles.

Mono-articular muscles span one joint, and hence exert  force only on a single joint. Since these muscles supply force only in the contraction direction, they are usually arranged antagonistically for supplying positive and negative torque at the joint. Therefore, these muscles are called antagonistic muscles. Variables 1e  and 1f  denote antagonistic monoarticular shoulder muscles, whereas variables 2e  and 2f denote antagonistic monoarticular elbow muscles.

Bi-articular muscles span two joints in series, thus exerting force on both joints. 3e  and 3f  represent antagonistic biarticular muscles.

Stiffness ellipses show the distribution of stiffness in the two-dimensional surface at the tip position. Stiffness ellipses for a human at the tip are different from those for common robots driven by motors placed in each joint. In the case of robotic arms driven by rotary motors placed in each joint, the shape of the stiffness ellipses changes with posture variation caused by external forces. However, in the case of robotic arms that simulate the muscle arrangement in the upper limbs of a human and have three pairs of antagonistic muscles, the direction of force does not change because of the variation in the stiffness ellipse. This has been shown theoretically and confirmed experimentally using robots [16][17]. This characteristic is quite important in view of safety since the robot may generate force in undesired direction without the characteristic.

C. Control Method Fig. 2 shows the control system used in this study. The  system includes stiffness control, position control, and force control for satisfying the performance conditions for physical therapy.

The uppermost component in Fig. 2 is the stiffness control component that directs the open loop input from kcmd to P+. A method for stiffness ellipse configuration using pneumatic artificial muscles [11] is implemented. The method is based on the fact that the stiffness of a pair of pneumatic artificial muscles depends on the average input air pressure. P+, the average input air pressure, is determined using  [ ]Tcmdbcmdecmdscmd kkk=k , the antagonistic stiffness input, and (1), which is formulated on the basis of the air pressure? angular stiffness characteristics. The subscript s denotes the monoarticular muscles of the shoulder; e, the monoarticular muscles of the elbow; and b, the biarticular muscles.

Coefficients a, b, and c are identified from the preliminary experiment.

++ ++ ++  ==  +  +  +  +  b cmd bb  cmd bb  e cmd ee  cmd ee  s cmd ss  cmd ss  b  e  s  ckbka ckbka ckbka  P P P     P    (1)  The position control component implements feedback control on the basis of the position information collected by optical encoders. The control stiffness is assigned the same value as the mechanical stiffness generated by artificial muscles. Thus, position control is achieved with arbitrary control stiffness against an unknown external force. The position control component determines the difference in the input air pressure, and the stiffness control component determines the average input air pressure. Then, the input air  IEEE R10-HTC2013 Sendai, Japan, August 26-29, 2013     Pneumatic artificial muscles  Direct kinematics  cmdx cmdx  act  -1J vk refrefx  actx  actx pk  s  pref ?k  actF  fx fk  Input shaping  1?= Fkx  ( )kfP =+  ( )?+= PPfp , s  +P  ?P  cmdk  cmdF  + +  +  + + ?  ?   Fig. 2. Block diagram of the control system.

(a) Database generation    (b) Visualization of intrinsic data   Fig. 4. Framework of the rehabilitation database.

Fig. 3. Concept of the rehabilitation database.

pressure of each pneumatic artificial muscle is calculated from the sum of the difference and the average air pressure.

In Fig. 2, ?Input shaping? denotes the control component, which accomplishes force control with input shaping on the basis of equations (2) and (3). The constant Vmax is the maximum velocity of the resistance movement. It changes the command of the arm tip position xcmd by the difference between the absolute value of the external force Fact and Fcmd.

The direction of the command change vector Vcmd is the same as that of external force vector Vcmd. Because Vmax is constant, if the absolute value of the external force Fact is greater than Fcmd, xcmd increases by a certain amount of Vmax. The velocity is independent of the absolute value of Fact. In addition, this control system automatically stops when the subject stops moving.

= cmdcmd Vx  ......................................................... (2)  > =  otherwise  FV cmdact act  act  cmd   max F F F  V  ........................... (3)  In this control system, the direction of input shaping may be different from the direction of the generated force.

However, this problem is resolved by appropriately configuring the stiffness ellipse at the stiffness control component with bi-articular muscles.



III. METHODS FOR CONSTRUCTING REHABILITATION DATABASE  A. Concept of Rehabilitation Database Fig. 3 shows the concept of rehabilitation database. As  mentioned in the first section, most rehabilitation equipment can record and save movement therapy data. Hence, database for a number of patients can be generated by integrating the rehabilitation equipment with a rehabilitation server via a network. Here, a rehabilitation server saves and maintains database of movement therapy data. It also extracts knowledge by statistical processing of the database.

Although this study uses a physical therapy robot with pneumatic muscles, rehabilitation equipment with electric motors are also applicable as long as the robot satisfy the required accuracy of data recording.

Fig. 4 shows the framework of rehabilitation database. The rehabilitation equipment, which is composed of a robot and its  control processor, sends the sensor output in time series to the server, and database is generated. Simultaneously, some other intrinsic data produced by certain signal processing methods are added for effective data mining. For example, the efficiency of safety evaluation and investigation will be enhanced by introducing the contraction force data pertaining to each muscle in the database(Fig. 4(a)) by introducing an estimation method for muscular force distribution[18]. Fig.

4(b) shows a photo of displaying muscle contraction force of each muscle on the human arm. More effective training is expected by visualizing qualitative data. Further, the database is used for generating new sets of data through knowledge extraction by statistical processing. For example, a new type of classification based on the quantified maximum contraction force of each muscle may be proposed for patients. This study shows one of the simplest examples of this framework in the following sections.

IEEE R10-HTC2013 Sendai, Japan, August 26-29, 2013        Fig. 5. Image of whole-body force sensing    Fig. 6. Experimental image.

B. Force Sensing Mechanism of Rehabilitation Robot The rehabilitation robot has to acquire force information for  evaluation of exercises. A 6-axis force sensor is fixed on the arm tip for sensing. External force observer [19] is one of the candidate without a force sensor. This study does not use the method because the external force observer needs more motors and optical encoders for 6-axis force sensing. In general, the force sensor can?t be used for safety assurance because it only detects the force on the end-effector. However, it is also possible to detect force at any point on the robot arm by making the end-effector to a cover shape [20]. Fig. 5 shows the image.

C. Construction of Database of Exercise Therapy Fig. 5 shows the experimental image. The experiment was  conducted with ten healthy right-handed male adults in the age group 21?24 years as the subjects. Although the purpose of this study was the construction of a database for patients, we first examined healthy subjects due to safety issues. The subjects were seated on a chair and their wrists were fixed on the robotic arm using the force sensor. The arms of the subjects were suspended to eliminate the effect of gravity.

In the first 5 s of the experiment, each pneumatic artificial muscle was slowly filled with air with the pressure calculated at the stiffness control component. Then, the robotic arm moved to the base posture ( 1 = -0.067 [rad] and 2 = 1.308 [rad]). The force command was Fcmd = 2.5 [N] and Vmax = 0.12 [m/s] at the force control component. A monitor placed in front of the robot showed the target and the tip position. The subjects moved their arm to follow the target after the robotic arm started position and force control. The tip position was measured by angular encoders, and the force at the tip position was measured by a force sensor.

The movement patterns of the target were a longitudinal straight line (x-axis), clockwise and counterclockwise rotation.

The initial postural tip position ( 1 = -0.067 [rad], 2 = 1.308 [rad]) was set as the center of all of these movement patterns.

The period was 10.0 s or 5.0 s and the amplitude was 0.08 m.

These six movements were performed once a day for 10 days.

D. Results and Examples of Statistical Analysis The following paragraphs show the advantage of the  rehabilitation database by statistical evaluation of some simple database compiled on the basis of the results of the experiment described above. Since the first part of the experiment does not provide any information relevant to the evaluation, the results after 10 s were evaluated. Fig. 6 shows the image of the experiment. Fig. 7 shows the root-mean-square position errors in target tracking. The plots denote the average of the position errors in the case of the ten subjects and the bars denote the variability of the ten subjects by standard deviation. Fig. 8 shows the average arm tip force in a similar manner to the case of Fig. 7. The position tracking errors gradually reduced from the first day to the tenth day in all experiments because the subjects became familiar with the experimental procedure  by the tenth day. On the other hand, the average force value did not vary much in the experiments. Although large force was observed in several instances during the first 3 days, the number of samples was small. When the period was 10.0 s, the average force values was smaller than 2.5 N because the force controller based on input shaping worked when the external force was greater than 2.5 N. On the other hand, when the period was 5.0 s, the average force values were greater than 2.5 N because the velocities were greater than Vmax 0.12 m/s at the force control component.

Fig. 9 shows the average of velocity spectrum during the 5.0 s period motion. It shows that the velocity spectrum, which strongly depends on the control architecture and the control gains, did not have a noticeable change. It infers that the control architecture and its feedback gain of the human arm did not change a lot.

The simple database based on the experiments performed for 10 days indicates that the tracking efficiency improves gradually because subjects become familiar with the robot and its operation mode by the tenth day. On the other hand, the improvement in maneuverability is much lesser.

Another interesting result discovered from the database is the difference between clockwise and counterclockwise rotation. Counterclockwise rotation resulted in larger force with smaller tracking error. For further investigation, the tracking error was verified in each direction of the movement in Fig. 11. The distance from the center denotes the average error on the direction. The result indicates that the error is larger when subjects are executing pulling in motion.

IEEE R10-HTC2013 Sendai, Japan, August 26-29, 2013             0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  R M  S[ m  m ]  days  10[s]  5[s]        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  R M  S[ m  m ]  days  10[s]  5[s]        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  R M  S[ m  m ]  days  10[s]  5[s]  (a) Longitudinal (b) Clockwise rotation (c) Counterclockwise rotation   Fig. 7. Experimental result ? tip position error           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  Fo rc  e[ N  ]  days  10[s]  5[s]        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  Fo rc  e[ N  ]  days  10[s]  5[s]        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  Fo rc  e[ N  ]  days  10[s]  5[s]  (a) Longitudinal (b) Clockwise rotation (c) Counterclockwise rotation Fig. 8. Experimental result ? tip force average      (a) 1 5 times (b) 6 10 times          0 0.5 1 1.5 2  am pl  it ud  e[  3 ]  frequency[Hz]  6th 7th 8th 9th 10th          0 0.5 1 1.5 2  am pl  it ud  e[  3 ]  frequency[Hz]  1st  2nd  3rd  4th  5th   Fig. 9. Average of velocity spectrum during 5 s period motion    Although the number of subjects are not enough to conclude that pulling in motion generates larger error, this result shows that a new knowledge for physical therapy can be extracted using database compiled from quantitative sensor information.

These experimental results show only one case that included a small number of samples. However, stronger proof based on statistical evaluation can be obtained only when using rehabilitation database that gathers a greater number of results through a network. Additionally, this paper presents the results  IEEE R10-HTC2013 Sendai, Japan, August 26-29, 2013     patient     15 [mm]  CW CCW     Fig. 10. Tracking error in each direction of motion.

of only normal subjects; verification of the database on real patients may be required to acquire new knowledge that would contribute to the development of physical therapy.



IV. CONCLUSION Physical therapy robots, a class of rehabilitation equipment,  have the ability to record and save information because most of them are digital equipment. Focusing on this ability of physical therapy robots, we attempt to generate a rehabilitation database. A method for the utilization of database in physical therapy was proposed and verified experimentally. The results show that a new knowledge for physical therapy can be extracted through a statistical evaluation with database compiled from quantitative sensor information.

