Scheme of User Privacy Protection Applied  to Online Marketing

Abstract?Research has shown the incredible evolution of mobile marketing and, on the other hand, has also revealed that email marketing is still widely used. Online marketing has evolved considerably in recent times and is becoming a key for companies wishing to ensure their survival in the online market. Online behavioral advertising (OBA) is a tool that has leveraged the evolution of digital marketing, but it is causing a big debate on the Internet. Many say that when OBA is implemented, user privacy is seriously compromised, since the tracking of user information, without their consent, is key to the OBA implementation. Based on past and current needs of new marketing trends and trying to balance the dilemma of privacy versus OBA, a scheme was developed to safeguard user privacy, as well as allow for the continued evolution of the OBA.

Marketing Online; Mobile Marketing; E-mail Marketing; Privacy; Online Behavioral Advertising; Secutiry Tool; Privacy Scheme

I.  INTRODUCTION Online marketing [1] is now considered a major source of  advertising for many businesses in various sectors.

Attracting the interest of the users through the Internet or through messages sent to their email or their mobile devices has become an important task, both economically and socially. In addition to financial returns, companies that do not have the practice of performing online marketing are somehow excluded from the interest of a good part of the population that does most of their shopping virtually. The evolution of marketing [2] shows an adaptation to new technologies. Before performed only on the Internet or through e-mail now goes through a revolution. Cell Phones, tablets and smartphones, among other devices have created new ways to present the marketing pieces to the user. The changes also follow along with online behavioral advertising (OBA). This trend is gaining customers due to its main feature to present the user just what he/she is interested in seeing, or just ads targeted to their interests are presented.

Online behavioral advertising [1, 3] is characterized by tracking the preferences and interests of users, enabling the display of more relevant ads based on browsing behavior.

Although this type of advertising trend now and it is more efficient than conventional advertising, it gave birth to a dilemma of privacy. The tracking of users without consent has generated a controversy around this type of advertising, which motivated the creation of several groups and discussions for and against the new practice.

Before, less considered in online marketing, security has become an important topic of discussion due to this dilemma presented by OBA versus privacy. Users have approved the idea of receiving only what interests them, but have not revealed themselves very well prepared to accept the fact of having to provide personal information in exchange. The security scheme presented here is an attempt at a solution, a kind of "middle ground" to this privacy dilemma. Other studies have also attempted to find a solution to similar problems and will be discussed later.

The scheme in question involves two very important types of marketing today: the marketing at mobile devices, also known as mobile advertising [4], and Email Marketing [5]. While the former is considered an evolution of online marketing and combines several concepts and restrictions, the latter is one of the earliest forms of online marketing and continues to this day, but it has some significant problems.

The proposed scheme generates benefits for both and will thus be further analyzed separately.

As mentioned above, the proposed scheme is presented as a solution to the dilemma of privacy previously seen. Using cryptographic techniques one can develop a form of communication between entities with the primary goal of ensuring the security of user information as well as supporting the flow of ads.

According to research conducted by TRUSTe [6] and published in 2011, 94% of consumers consider online privacy important and think about it often. Another important point of the survey is that 70% of people are aware of the existence of OBA, but 54% of them do not like the idea because they believe that their personal information is tied to the concept, or believe they need to provide some kind of personal information for the benefit of OBA. The favorability of consumers regarding OBA doubles when   DOI 10.1109/TrustCom.2013.48     they are assured that no personal information will be provided.

Whether or not one is worried about such statistics, one cannot overlook the problem especially when on is aware that there is the level of concern of users with the security of their information. In most current schemes, somehow some kind of information about the user is given away. The scheme proposed in this paper also some user information is also given away, but rather differently in an important aspect. For one thing, the user is not personally identified, but their preferences are passed on to the search engine tools. One problem encountered in current schemes refers to inferring what the user likes or is interested in. Current schemes try to infer the user navigation history through the user interest, but do not always get it right. In our proposed scheme the user himself declares his/her preferences and these are sent securely through the entities of the model without identification. The concept of Separation of Duties - SoD [7] is used as the primary means to ensure the security of the scheme.

Our work. Amid a major controversy over the dilemma of privacy versus behavioral targeting [8, 9], which leads one side to radicalize and say that online behavioral advertising cannot exist if there is privacy, there emerged some models and / or applications that attempted to create a middle ground solution, where some level of privacy could be preserved while improving the targeting of online ads.

Models like Adnostic [10] and Privad [11] have offered schemes which brought about new concepts and attempted to balance this dilemma. They all work with action monitoring and user navigation, which falls into some problems, since these parameters do not necessarily reflect the user's interests. Problems such as redirecting the user to another website without his/her consent, other people using the same user session, or even the user might have accidentally clicked on some ad leading to false positives that impair the formation of the profiles for these models [10, 11]. Besides, none of these tools is focused on marketing to email.

Identifying with 100% certainty the user' interests is a task whose only solution comes when the user himself informs his preferences, but how to do that while protecting the user identity? Our scheme, called AS (meaning "Advertising Search"), presents a solution to this issue.

The user's identity is preserved, while his profile is also preserved and still allowing him to receive targeted ads of his interest. One of the strengths of our model is the considerable reduction of messages received in the mailbox user and in the mobile device (push messages). This is done by generating a single periodic message with all the ads and the execution of the opt-out of advertisers' lists related to AS.

The motivation of AS is to form a secure service of targeted ads via email/application that initially presents a specific solution, but that may in the future, be adjusted for a more general situation that can meet all ad networks.

Advertisers who wish to provide a safe service of targeted ads to users can register in the ad-network that implements AS and make their ads available. The tendency here is that users who rely on the service and they only receive periodic ads about items they want to receive and which are not saturated with messages have a much better chance of making a purchase. The architecture of AS is described in section IV.



II. ONLINE BEHAVIORAL TARGETING OBA (online behavioral advertising) [1, 3] is  characterized by tracking the preferences and interests of users, enabling the display of more relevant ads based on users browsing behavior. This type of advertising is much more efficient than the conventional one and generated the aforementioned dilemma of privacy versus relevance. The tracking of users without consent has generated a controversy surrounding this type of advertising, which sparked a heated controversy and a movement against the new practices.

Online advertising currently presents a complex structure involving several parties and which in turn dictate different rules. The parties involved are: Advertiser: an advertiser that wants to post his ad on web pages and is willing to pay for it.

Publisher: the publisher who owns a web page or web site and wants to post ads of other in exchange for a payment.

Ad-network: intermediate part, which collects payments and ads from various advertisers and publishes the ads in editor's pages or site.

Content Distribution Network (CDN): entity that provides a hosting service that most ad networks use to serve their ads.

Trusted third party: a reliable service provider that does not collaborate either with the ad network or with any other party.

Currently, a publisher that wants to use the services of a particular ad-network needs to embed in his pages a link to the ad-network, usually in the form of an iframe, a transparent image of a pixel or some other type of image, to perform user tracking.

Through this link, when a user accesses a web page, the browser contacts the servers of the ad-network; this is enabled for that user tracking across all publishers associated with it. The segmentation algorithm chooses the ad-network ads that will appear in the pages of the Publisher. Google AdSense, for example, users can be tracked through about 91,000 unique domains [12].

Our scheme uses a structure similar to the presented earlier. AS also works with Advertisers, Publishers, Ad- networks and TTPs.

As seen, the tracking of users according to the previous structure of parts is characterized through the requirement of the ability to associate an identifier with a user through various publishers and through various visits. There are     several ways to perform tracking, such as: HTTP cookies from third party, IP Addressing and User-agent strings.

Based on the types of tracking, the next items are the types of data that a user would like to protect:  ? Clickstream: list of visited URLs ? Behavioral Profile: short description of the user  profile, inferred from the clickstream ? Ad impression history: List of all ads displayed to  the user ? Ad click history: List of all ads that the user clicked AS does not need any of those items to perform its  functions. The user provides all information and his profile is protected by the tool.

All the tools discussed so far use at least some of the information above to create the user?s profile, but, as stated earlier, these parameters do not identify with 100% certainty the current interests of the user. Problems such as having the user redirected to another website without his consent, other people using the same user session, or having the user click by mistake at some ad, these all lead to false positives that impair the formation of his profile.

The association of OBA with e-mail marketing and mobile devices has become necessary because of the flood of users with messages advertising unprepared and many of them legitimate, i.e. the user has requested or accepted the message.

A. Privacy and Threats Privacy and OBA are conflicting points considered in  the schemes and communication tools today. To target ad without compromising user privacy is a complex and necessary task to ensure the development of the market. The complexity focuses on the fact that there are multiple agents involved in advertising. The guarantee that information will not be leaked between these various agents is a fragile thing from the standpoint of the schemes presented so far. AS aims to remedy this, even if the scheme has to count on the involvement of many agents.

An important agent that is part of the AS scheme is the TTP (Trusted third party). This is a reliable service provider, typically involves encryption, and presumably does not collude with any other agent. If the TTP is compromised, then it does not preserve the user?s preferences. Building on the concept of SoD, none of the agents have the full information necessary do identify the preferences of a specific user. The TTP is an essential part of the proposed scheme in ensuring user privacy to be described in section V.

Concerning the user?s personally identifiable information, the AS does not capture any of it. The information is provided by the user himself, but he is not identified. There is an option that allows the AS to monitor users' preferences commonly as the other tools do. The Ad- network knows only user preferences, but does not know who the user is. He holds an IDuser, identifying only the user?s ?number? but without knowing his email address or  other personal information. Parameters of the user's browser such as clickstream, behavioral profile, ad impression, ad click history need not be disclosed to the Ad-network, it will work perfectly without them. Not so with the other tools that need by one of these parameters to generate a good user profile.

The aim of AS is providing a service for advertisers who want to gain an audience which is concerned about privacy, segmentation and at the same time want to reduce the huge amount of incoming messages daily in their mailboxes and mobile devices. It provides the distribution of advertisements optimally and securely.

Some attacks are also evaluated in the use of AS, such as click fraud [13] and replay attacks [14]. Using the AS is not possible to perform a click fraud attack, for example, as the information flow is done by an application installed on the client, the ad-network and a TTP, where several checks are made with respect to user identity, encryption and digital signature of the entities involved, the attack is unsuccessful.

Another attack also considered in the interactions between the agents of the model is the replay attack, where an attacker could save the packets transmitted by a communication between two entities and then reuse them in an attempt to forge a new communication. For most communications between agents in our model digital signatures and timestamps are used, the latter carrying day and time of communication, for example, to make sure that the replay attack becomes infeasible.

B. Incentives and Justifications for the  use of AS In present days where privacy is a hot topic and more  people want to be protected, especially in Internet communications, it is often necessary to pay a price.

Users and advertisers are not obliged to adhere to a model like the one we are proposing, but if the goals of AS presented above fit the needs of the market, it can become a viable solution. To adhere to the model, users need only install the application, while advertisers need only enroll in the ad-network that is registered in our scheme. The service of TTP is maintained by the ad-network to ensure the safety of the model.

We will discuss some of the reasons for joining AS, both by the user, as by advertisers, in contrast to other models that probably will not offer the same level of privacy.

User Privacy. Users will have their preferences and identity preserved by the scheme. Through the concept of separation of duties (SoD) [7], where more than one entity is required to complete a task. This concept has as its primary objective the prevention of fraud and error and is achieved by disseminating the tasks and associated privileges for a specific process among multiple users.

Service that aggregates multiple security concepts. The scheme proposes to solve various problems, including security-related, found in online marketing. For this,     specific problems encountered in e-mail marketing and mobile marketing have been identified and solutions proposed.

Reduction of messages. Regarding the e-mail marketing, daily, most e-mail users receive dozens, even hundreds, of legitimate messages that are not of his interest. Initially, to allow an advertiser sends ads that are of the user interest at that moment, he does not imagine that over time increasingly more messages will be received, sometimes several of them throughout the one day, and even with matters that are not of interest of the user. AS provides a reduction of advertising messages through the execution of opt-out of user from lists of advertisers associated with it.

Even with the opt-out being performed, AS carefully selects messages that are of interest to the user and forwards them safely in a single message; the user when creating your profile defines the period of the receiving messages. In relation to mobile marketing, the amount of push messages sent to mobile devices is also reduced. This type of message interrupts the user's attention immediately, generating dissatisfaction among users who receive several of them a day. The scheme proposes to send just such a message informing the arrival of targeted ads to be displayed in the installed application. In this situation, the opt-out is also made of advertisers, and the user also defines the period in which to receive messages.

Segmentation in private browsing mode. Currently, most browsers bring a feature called private browsing, in which no information about the browsing activity is stored outside the session, nor even cookies. In Firefox this function is called Private Browsing or Incognito mode in Google Chrome. When it is active, the user's session cannot be linked to their previous activity, thus hindering the behavioral targeting. Since AS works with a profile that is provided by the user, this mode does not interfere with targeting information.

User Control through a centralized interface. The AS application installed on the user's browser provides a centralized interface that allows updating his profile and his options whenever the user wishes, unlike the schemes today, where users need to change their profiles in each ad network separately [15].

Categorization standardized. AS uses the categories of the Google Ads Preferences as an attempt to standardize this categorization; since currently ad networks use their own categories. This lack of standardization causes doubts for advertisers and users who often think they are selecting correct ads. In 2004, Tacoda [16] first proposed a scheme to standardize the categorization that was not successful. In 2009, the scheme Adnostic [10] also made an attempt to standardize categories locally on the user's browser, but the ad networks would have to adopt the scheme to provide a uniform interface to the user. This scheme closely approximates the schema used by AS; it is also based on the categories of the Google Ads Preferences.

There is no problem with users using the same session. In the specific case of AS, this problem does not exist, since the ads are sent encrypted to the user's e-mail and, consequently, are seen only in the browser when the user select the link of ads inside the mail message received.

Security problems in mobile devices are reduced or solved.

The advertising via mobile devices can be made in different ways. Each one has security flaws or problems involving their use. In the case of SMS and MMS, for example, it is necessary to know the telephone number of the user's mobile device to be sent some publicity. In the case of notifications of push, the emergence of these excessive notifications disrupts the regular user activity with the device. The scheme AS did not disclose user information in addition to reducing the amount of incoming messages.



III. POSSIBLE OBJECTIONS AS involves many concepts and deals with several issues  that are part of the reality of Internet users and e-mail.

Based on these points, consider a few important items.

Cryptographic overhead. During some important transactions in the communication process of the AS scheme is necessary to use encryption. An overhead is unavoidable but is reduced to a minimum, since it does not harm privacy. One solution was to reduce the overhead, instead of encrypting all ads sent to the user, create codes associated with them and only these codes are encrypted.

Elliptic curve cryptography is used in all processes as a means to ensure greater speed and shorter keys.

Change the user habits. The user is used to seeing ads when he opens the e-mail sent to this end, and this practice leaves the user vulnerable to the tools of e-mail marketing, as well as other threats. Receiving a message stating that there are ads of interest and presenting a link that has some encrypted codes, may seem strange to him. Changing this habit does not seem so difficult when compared to the benefit of the security it brings.

Bandwidth. The communication process AS requires the exchange of information between the various agents of the model. Imagining an environment where traffic such information is somewhat intense, one should consider analyzing the bandwidth for such a situation. To minimize the impact of this situation, AS does not send ads directly to the user or TTP; only a link with the codes of the ads is sent encrypted to agents. In the browser, after the process of decrypting the link, just some ads, selected by the user's browser, are linked to the web page for display.

Effectiveness of behavioral targeting. A significant problem that can occur is if there are no ads compatible with the user profile in that period he asked to receive ads? This situation can be hard to happen, since the user provided their own preferences, i.e., the tool is not trying to bring the behavioral profile of ads captured by it, but looking for ads that fit perfectly into what the user wanted to receive. A case in particular would be when the user selected only one     item categorization presented to him. In this case, the chance of the problem occurring is considerable. Typically, users select several items of categorization, which reduces the chance of the problem happening. One solution to the problem would be to allow the user to decide whether, in that case, he/she does not want to receive any messages within a specified period or does not want to receive ads with similar items.

Regulation of TTP. As the TTP is a key agent in the schema, some considerations are necessary in relation to their identification. Issues such as whether the TTP would be a public agent or private should be considered and discussed. Currently, the entity that most closely resembles the TTP is VeriSign [17] for the provision of specific services. The fact is that this agent should be fully trusted, i.e., should not collude with other agents. Leaking some information of this kind of entity would be something unacceptable.



IV. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE The diagram in Fig. 1 shows 6 agents forming the  proposal of a secure application focused on targeted advertising in online marketing. Below is a description of each agent.

Figure 1.  Agents for Proposed Model  User: the person that receives the message containing advertisements of n advertisers.

Advertisers: usually a company that has items to advertise.

CDN: Content Distribution Network is an entity that provides the service hosting the content. Most ad networks currently use this type of service to deliver their ads.

Ad-network: intermediate part, which collects payments and ads from various advertisers and publishes the ads in editor's pages or site.

Application AS: tool for performing tasks the user's local AS and distributes between the TTP and Ad-network.

TTP: Trusted Third Party responsible for the security of the scheme. It is often contacted to ensure the secure flow of  information. Despite being a reliable part of the scheme, it is not aware of user preferences.

Conceptually, AS is an online tool that supports the creation of profiles for users. The advertisers feed the database with metadata of their ads that may be stored in a content server, as shown in Fig. 1. AS provides an application that should be installed by the user to carry out the registration process and transmit information securely.

The following are the procedures for registration and submission of information through the agents of the proposed model.

A. Registration Process To make the register in AS, the user, first, installs the  application. In the process of registration the following information are populated by the user:  User Email: To maintain the security of the scheme, this email address is sent only to the TTP.

User Preferences: the user selects as many categories as he/she wants based on the categories of the Google Ads Preferences [18].

Auto Update: the user can choose whether he wants his profile to be automatically updated by AS or not. As the user accesses new content, the application AS can capture user preferences and send them to AS for an online profile update. AS does not know who the user is, just his preferences.

Opt-out of advertisers: If the user wishes not to receive further messages from advertisers who have private profiles on the Ad-network, selecting this option will cause it to set it up so that from then on he will only receive messages from advertisers targeted by AS and he will no longer receive several messages a day from the same advertiser with irrelevant advertisements.

After filling in the user options, the application generates a pair public/private keys for the user. The application also has the public keys of TTP and AS to protect the transmission of information.

Following the registration process, after the selection of options by the user and generation of keys by the application, this sends to the TTP the user email encrypted with the public key of TTP. In possession of user email, the TTP generates a IDuser and sends it, along with its digital signature (DA), back to the application. Thus, it receives IDuser + DA (IDuser), ensuring that the ID was actually sent by the TTP.

The application sends the  IDuser to the ad-network, user preferences,  the public key (pkuser) and the digital signature of all previous parameters, i.e., DA (IDuser, preferencesuser, pkuser) are also sent, ensuring that the information was actually sent by the user?s application. Note that the user email remains only in possession of TTP. The ad-network owns just IDuser and his preferences, as well as its public key. Thus, the ad-network does not know who the user is,     just the TTP knows. Moreover, the TTP does not know the user's preferences, only the ad-network knows. The exchange of information related to user preferences between these two agents is done encrypted and only the user's application can decrypt.

B. Process for Generation and Transmission Message Periodically, to be set by the user, the ad-network selects  n ads according with the IDuser profile. Since it will not know who the user with ID is, it queries his preferences, performs the search for listings of interest and encrypts the identifiers of n ads to be sent to the user.

The user receives the message generated by the ad- network through the TTP. The ad-network generates a message to be sent to the TTP containing an HTML that includes the IDuser and encrypted list of ads in addition to such information DA (IDuser, HTML, TimeStamp) is generated to ensure that the information was sent by the ad- network.

The TimeStamp presented in the generation of the digital signature of the ad-network is needed to prevent a replay attack. If the timestamp was not added to DA, an attacker could intercept the message sent by the ad-network to TTP and always generate the same information and send it to the TTP, thus, a true message sent to the TTP could be overlapped by an intercepted message by third. With the inclusion of TimeStamp, which could be the current time, for example, the attack would fail, since a different time would not be accepted by the system, moreover, due to the digital signature, the message would be signed again, which would not be possible, since the attacker does not possess the private key of the ad-network.

In possession of the message sent by the ad-network, TTP recovers the user mail address and forwards the message in HTML with the ads to the user. To ensure the safety of shipping, the TTP signs the message being sent with S/MIME [19], in the case of e-mail marketing. In the case of mobile marketing, the application is updated with the ads and a push message is sent to the user informing that action.

C. Process of Receiving Message The user receives the message with HTML format  containing the link that represents the list of encrypted announcements. The structure of the link is as follows:  HTTP://domain.com.br/ad1=xxxx&ad2=yyyy&...&adn=zzz  Where domain.com.br represents the area where the ads are stored and xxxx, yyyy and zzz represent the identifiers of the encrypted ads.

By accessing this link, the user is directed to your browser or application, where the tool installed will perform processing it as follows:  ? Initially the domain is identified by the tool, which checks whether a valid address of content storage is. If not, no processing is performed.

? If the domain is identified correctly, the tool performs a function of randomization. This function is performed m times, according to the configuration of the AS algorithm which forces the tool to choose only m out of n advertisements sent to him as a way of not revealing which ads were viewed by the user. Based on the values generated the order of the ads that will be decrypted and displayed to the user is chosen. A practical example would be: given n = 10 and m = 3, the function would be generated randomization three times. Assuming that the resulting values of randomizations were 2, 5 and 7, then the plugin would select the parameters and decrypt ad2, ad5 and ad7 the link sent to display to the user.

? After the selection of ads for display to the user, the plugin generates a vector encrypted in form v = {0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0} (corresponding setting the example given above) representing ads that were actually viewed by the user and sends it to the AS so that it can perform the correct charging of advertisers.

D. Process of Advertisers Billing To perform this function and maintain safety, the Ad-  network is oriented to use the billing scheme presented in Adnostic. Thus, after its regular search, it builds the message to be sent to the user with n ads, where each one is identified by an IDDA. Along with each ad, The Ad-network stores in its database an encrypted counter, denoted by CIDad.

At the beginning of the billing, say at the beginning of the month or when the announcement is initially charged to the Ad-network, the encrypted counter is initialized to zero, i.e. the it defines CIDad ? E (pk, 0) for some public key pk.

When the user receives the message containing the n ads, the installed tool chooses m out of n advertisements sent. An encrypted binary vector v containing the information which ads were visualized by the user is generated. Each component of v is encrypted using a public key pk, to be defined later, to generate a vector of cipher texts as follows:   (E(pk, v1), ?, E(pk, vn))  Periodically, the ad-network chooses n ads to send to the user, according to the registered profile. It verifies the IDs of ads chosen and sends these n ads to user as an ordered set. Thus, the data sent to the user consist of (ad1, ad2, ad3, ..., adn). The tool chooses m ads to display and then generates a binary vector v = (v1, v2, v3, ..., vn) ? {0, 1}n.

The encrypted vector is then sent to the Ad-network.

Through this vector, it will be able to charge the advertiser     correctly, without having the information that the user chose.

The tool sends the encrypted vector for the Ad-network along with a zero knowledge proof [20] of the following facts:  ? First, for i = 1, ?, n the quantity vi is 0 or 1, and ? Second, the sum ?i=1nvi is m.

Once the ad-network receives the vector with n cipher  texts (E (pk, v1), ..., E (pk, vn)) along with zero knowledge proofs, it checks the evidence and rejects the response if the evidence is invalid. In this case, the tool is not following the protocol and none of the advertisers will be charged by the announcement. If the evidence is correct, then the Ad- network knows that the vector represents m ads. It multiplies the vector by the scalar c representing the cost of each ad. The result is a vector:   (E(pk, cv1), ?, E(pk, cvn))  All these quantities are an encryption of zero except for m components that are encryptions of c. The Ad-network then uses the additively homomorphic property [21, 22] to add the encrypted values to the encrypted counter for each ad. That is, for i = 1, ?, n, the cipher text E(pk, cv1) is added to the CIDi where IDi  is the ID of the ith ad.

The end result of this process is that the quantity c is added to the counters of the advertisements shown to the user.

The security of the public key cryptossystem ensures no one knows which counter was modified.

At the end of the billing, the Ad-network needs to charge the advertiser for every ad displayed to users. To do this, he needs to decrypt the encrypted counter associated with all ads pertaining to the advertiser. The TTP (Trusted Third Party) is responsible for decrypting the counters for all ads.

It is most often offline, during the billing period, and is contacted only once per cycle of taxation. The secret key corresponding to the public key pk is maintained in TTP.

The ad-network needs to send encrypted counters for TTP at the end of each cycle of taxation. It decrypts and sends the response to the ad-network, possibly along with a zero knowledge proof showing that decryption was done correctly. The role of the TTP fits the business model of organizations such as VeriSign.

An important modification in the AS scheme, performed in relation to the process used in charging advertisers by Adnostic, refers to low rating campaigns. In Adnostic, this type of campaign allows an ad-network to learn users' interests. Consider an ad that is rarely sent, i.e., it is sent to a user only during a full cycle of taxation. If at the end of the billing cycle, the encrypted counter to that ad is 1, then the ad-network understands that the ad was shown to a particular user and identifies his interest in the subject of that ad.

The AS scheme proposes that ranges of values are established for the amounts of ads to be agreed between the TTP and the ad-network. An example of this proposal can be seen in Table I.

Table I shows only sample values. In that table may identify that for low campaigns hearing, the value to be returned by the TTP to the ad-network is not 1, but would be 10, indicating that for a total viewing from 1 to 5, for a given ad, its weight would be 10.

TABLE I.  EXAMPLE OF VALUE RANGES BY AMOUNT OF ADS  Ranges Value 1-5 10  6-20 20 21-40 30 41-60 40

V. SCHEME ANALYSIS AS has a well defined model conceptually, as shown in  section V, and it was implemented in Objective-C [23] (used in application for iOS system of Apple), that is a superset of the C programming language, with characteristics such as object orientation and dynamic runtime, and XUL - XML User Interface [24], developed by Mozilla, it is based on XML and allows you to create rich applications resources, compatible with multiple platforms and can be performed with or without Internet connection.

These two languages were necessary to construct an application for mobile devices, oriented toward solving the problems with mobile marketing, and an extension for Firefox, oriented toward solving problems with e-mail marketing.

Estimates and tests conducted with the contribution of two real users of email showed an initial satisfactory result for the scheme.

More tests will be performed to check items such as speed of communication between the agents of the model and rendering speed of the ads at the end of the process of development. Several types of ads will be tested. Ads with loading heavy, very heavy, light and very light will be compared throughout the communication process. Tests for mobile devices still are performed at the end of the development process.

The following discussion refers to the number of messages received in a period of only two months of two common real users of email; users considered that receive few advertising messages. Users 1 and 2 signed up to receive emails from ten companies known in the market work with e-mail marketing.

The Table II shows the report of messages received during the period 01/19/2013 to 03/19/2013 by users 1 and 2, including the total number of messages delivered by the companies.

TABLE II.  RECEIVED MESSAGES BY USERS 1 AND 2  User/Month  13 days of  January February  days of March  Total per 60 days  User 1 29 124 102 255 User 2 56 207 146 409  Total per Month 85 331 248 664   Assuming that all the companies adhere to the AS schema and the users wished to receive advertisements every day, we see the scenarios in Tables III.

TABLE III.  RECEIVED MESSAGES BY USERS 1 AND 2 WITH  REDUCTION  User/Month  13 days of  January February  days of March  Total with reduction  User 1 9 28 19 56 User 2 11 28 19 58  Total per Month 20 56 38 114   In the scenarios presented in Table III, users would receive only a daily message containing the advertisements.

The advertisements of some companies may or not be present in this message, depending on the behavioral targeting and user randomization process from the user's application.

A reduction of approximately 78,04% for user 1 and 85,82% for user 2 is very satisfactory considering that these two users receive messages from ten different companies each. The general total is 82,83% of reduction for the two users.



VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK   Our work seeks solutions to some problems we live daily.

Chief among them is the tradeoff between privacy and behavioral advertising. We have seen that it is possible to protect and target information, requiring a set of agents and acceptances, mainly by advertisers. AS tries to address all the points that could cause a leak of information while keeping the scheme viable. We address specifically the case of e-mail marketing and mobile marketing, which are fundamental tools, responsible for much of the earnings of companies and we believe that even with the advent of social networks and other tools, the scheme continues to perform strongly. We proposed a security scheme to allow for the flow of information in a targeted marketing campaign online through e-mail and mobile devices. As future work, we shall perform a detailed analysis of the tests related to mobile devices and other important variables for email marketing and mobile marketing.

