Catching the Wave: Big Data in the Classroom

Abstract?Many diverse domains?in the sciences, engineering, healthcare, and homeland security?have been grappling with the analysis of ?Big Data,? which has become shorthand to represent extremely large amounts of diverse types of data. A recent Gartner report predicts that around 4.4 million IT jobs globally will be created by 2015 to support Big Data, with 1.9 million of those jobs in the United States. Therefore, understanding approaches and techniques for handling and analyzing Big Data from diverse domains has become crucial for not only in computing but also engineering students. The mini- workshop will make use of active and collaborative learning exercises to introduce faculty in computer science, software engineering, and other disciplines to concepts and techniques involved in managing and analyzing Big Data. Approaches for incorporating Big Data into the engineering and computing curricula will also be presented.

Keywords?big data, data analytics, data mining, data-intensive applications

I. MOTIVATION Big Data has become a catchphrase to describe data so  large that it is not amenable to processing or analysis using traditional database and software techniques; such Big Data is noted for its volume, varieties of data types, and rapid accumulation. IBM estimates that 2.5 quintillion bytes of data are created daily, and that 90% of the data being used in the world today was generated in the past couple of years [1]. The advent of Big Data poses considerable enterprise challenges: what portion of this Big Data get stored; how is this storage managed; how quickly can this Big Data be analyzed to enable enterprises to take quick action on enhance productivity, meet or change directions, reduce risk, and more; how can this data be stored securely; what data privacy issues are involved; and so on.

A 2011 McKinsey Global Institute research report projected that the United States needs 140,000 to 190,000 more workers with ?deep analytical? expertise and 1.5 million more data-literate managers, whether retrained or hired [2]. Since then, Gartner predicts that 4.4 million IT jobs globally will be created by 2015 to support big data with 1.9 million of those jobs in the United States [3].  Big Data, or ?large-scale, diverse, and high-resolution data sets? [4] is found in business, science, engineering, healthcare, critical infrastructure management, and a variety of other domains.  A partial list of directorates and agencies from the NSF program solicitation on Big Data contains engineering, mathematics, geosciences, computer science, biological sciences, education, National  Cancer Institute, National Human Genome Research Institute, the Office of Polar Programs, and more [4].  Therefore, exposure to Big Data and its analysis would greatly benefit students in engineering and computing programs.

This session will provide an introduction to Big Data and how it can be brought into the classroom. The rest of this paper will present a description of the workshop including the planned workshop agenda; the proposed workshop learning outcomes; and the professional preparation and background of the presenters.

The goals of this mini-workshop on Big Data align with FIE 2013?s third focus area: interdisciplinary programs. The workshop provides its attendees with ?collaborative learning experiences at the frontiers.?

II. WORKSHOP DESCRIPTION This mini-workshop will demonstrate methods to  incorporate concepts, topics, and assignments in Big Data management and Big Data analytics in computing and engineering courses.  Drawing on their experience with teaching large scale data management and mining, the presenters will highlight Big Data?s characteristics, supporting technologies, and scope.

Table I outlines the tentative agenda for the mini- workshop.

TABLE I.  TENTATIVE WORKSHOP AGENDA  Event Duration  Presenters and participants introductions 5 min  Introduction to Big Data using a relevant exercise 10 min Big Data technologies (Hadoop, AWS, etc.), demo, and a relevant exercise 20 min  Big Data analytical techniques, demo, and a relevant exercise 25 min  Incroporating Big Data into the curriculum 15 min Big Data: participant discussion moderated by the presenters 14 min  Conclusion 1 min    The presenters will introduce typical issues in collecting, preparing, storing, and analyzing Big Data for use in teaching applications.  Next, participants will work with sample course modules and exercises covering technologies such as high-     performance file systems (e.g., Hadoop and Google File System); NoSQL database systems; cloud computing and storage; programming models (e.g., MapReduce) used in data- intensive applications; and data mining platforms such as Weka, Rattle, R, and Mahout.

Participants will then work through a short analytical exercise using a large data set.  Finally, the workshop will conclude with a participant discussion on issues in embedding Big Data topics into existing classes and the influence of Big Data on careers for their graduates.  The session will include demonstrations of software and data analysis techniques for Big Data as applied in inter-disciplinary settings, and discussions of sources for domain-specific data.

Attendees will be provided with sample lecture materials and exercises, which will consist of course modules that may be used in their own teaching practice.



III. WORKSHOP LEARNING OUTCOMES The learning outcomes for this mini-workshop are as  follows.

? Attendees will explain the main issues and concepts in Big Data management and analytics.

? Attendees will discuss the influence of Big Data in different fields and identify career opportunities in Big Data Analytics for their students.

? Attendees will identify ways to incorporate Big Data management and analytics topics and assignments in relevant computing, engineering, and engineering technology courses.

? Attendees will apply skills needed to implement a Big Data management and analytics environment that can be used for pedagogical purposes.



IV. QUALIFICATIONS OF THE PRESENTERS The two presenters are members of the PhD faculty in  Computing and Information Sciences at Rochester Institute of Technology. The PhD program is an interdisciplinary use- inspired program that applies computing to solve specific problems across multiple domains.

Dr. Romanowski is an associate professor with RIT?s Center for Multidisciplinary Studies, and conducts research in large-scale data mining, particularly in engineering design,  product lifecycle management, and critical infrastructure. In addition to teaching undergraduate and graduate Computer Science courses in data mining and data cleaning, she teaches courses in quality management, design of experiments, statistics, history/manufacture of siege weapons, and new product design and development. She received her PhD in Industrial Engineering from the University at Buffalo (SUNY).

Dr. Raj is a professor in RIT?s Computer Science department, and his current research interests currently include in large-scale data management, distributed/mobile computing, security, and critical infrastructure protection. He is also interested in computing education methodologies, and is involved in program assessment, evaluation and accreditation.

Dr. Raj teaches courses in database systems, cloud and large- scale data management, distributed systems, and security. Prior to RIT, he was a software designer, developer, architect and manager in the Information Technology Division at Morgan Stanley, where he architected, built and managed globally distributed database infrastructures for financial applications handling Big Data. He received his PhD in Computer Science from the University of Washington, Seattle.

Both faculty members are experienced teachers who use active learning techniques extensively and teach in multiple settings: traditional classroom, online learning, and blended settings. They jointly taught a course on Big Data Analytics in the spring term at RIT. They also led a team of multidisciplinary faculty (including industrial engineering, computer science, software engineering, computing security, and information technology & sciences) who developed an advanced graduate certificate program in Big Data Analytics.

