Discovering Massive High-Value Users from Sina  Weibo Based on Quality and Activity

Abstract?This paper proposes a method to discover the high-value users who are both high-quality and high-activity.

First, a Trust Transfer Model is introduced to capture users with high-quality in Sina Weibo that is a social web in China. Then, analysis and discussion are shown to identify the users are high-quality. Next, fresh users who are busy reposting are captured into the dataset filled with the high-quality users.

Considering that reposting stands for the high-activity, hence the four degrees including reposting are proposed to judge one user?s quality and activity. We discuss the effects of the four degrees.

And then, the method called ?WeiboRank? based on the four degrees is proposed to mine the high-value users. Finally, testing for the degree of coverage based on the ?Top10 Hot Microblog? in Weibo presents a relatively high credibility of our dataset. The evaluation indicates that the users mined in this paper are quite high-quality and high-value. In conclusion, we will continue efforts to discover the high-value users in microblog and believe that discovering and maintaining a dataset filled with the high-value users which is not too big is quite significant for both academic research and business applications.

Keywords?WeiboRank; microblog; data mining; high-value user; quality; activity; weibo

I.  INTRODUCTION Microblog has been widely applied as a popular platform of  online social networks. There are many researches about microblog focusing on contents, relations and even business applications [1-3]. Although users are the core resource is well known to people, researches devoting to discovering a dataset of high-value users in microblog are infrequent, especially for Chinese microblog.

This paper attempts to mine the high-value users in Sina Weibo which is the most popular microblog site in China. The high-value user mentioned in this paper is somewhat different from the important user and active user. Important user often acts as an opinion leader with a high status [4-5] (unfortunately the number of important user is too small for the whole microblog platform), while active user is elected only for surfing or interacting with others in microblog recently [6-7] (many active users are abnormal, such as marketing users). In contrast, high-value user is high-quality, trustworthy and holds a normal social circle in microblog, and usually is important and active too.

Furthermore, most methods for discovering interesting  people are just ranking by special indicators in special fields.

It?s infrequent to find a method which can really discover enough interesting people from a whole social web. There?re two challenges for solving the problem: 1) a whole social web is usually quite big and complex which is hard to capture the efficient and complete data; 2) user and content in the social web update continually, so in order to discover massive interesting people, the method should last for some time(NOT accomplish in an action).

This paper proposes a method called WeiboRank to discover the high-value-user based on quality and activity which can overcome the two challenges mentioned above. The high-value user mined based on WeiboRank is quite significant for both academic research and business applications.



II. RELATED WORKS In order to discover high-value users, one popular idea is  calculating a weight for each user for ranking just like the famous PageRank [8]. FollowRank (FR) is simply based on the number of one?s followers, which is clear and intuitional but not comprehensive enough [9]. TunkRank (TR) firstly extends PageRank to microblog [10]. Because TR is based on two too simple assumptions, XinRank (XR) is proposed to improve it by introducing an AL(X) which means ?expected number of messages that user X posts and reposts every day during a certain time period? [11]. XR is dynamic, and can give a ranking list different from FR and TR. Unfortunately, in [11] XR is used to find the most influential users and only present Top 20 users in some certain periods. A user weight algorithm based on the improved HITS for Weibo is introduced in [12], but the calculation is too time-consuming for a real microblog platform. Reference [13] proposes a machine learning based method to identify important users. However, the core data comes from a voting system which results in a small dataset and depends on the specific events. Reference [14] analyzes the user?s weight based on user influence and active degree. But the final test is composed by only 508 users from the same node (the author of the paper); hence it?s hard to estimate the effect on a whole microblog platform. Specially, TwitterRank is proposed in [15] to find topic-sensitive influential twitters which is good to identify the influential users from microblog, but it?s based on text, while this paper not. In conclusion, there?s still no effective method for discovering the high-value users on a real microblog platform and maintaining a big enough dataset full of high-value users.

* Corresponding author.

Email address: rfbie@bnu.edu.cn (Rongfang Bie).

DOI 10.1109/CyberC.2013.42

III. ANALYZING FRAMEWORK The purpose of this paper is to mine high-value users in  Sina Weibo-not only to rank some certain existed users, but also to discover fresh users and updating WeiboRank for each user and then construct a dataset full of high-value users.

A. Initialize 1) Capture the high-quality users: The high-quality users  in are trustworthy, important and hold a normal social circle in Weibo. Since March 16th, 2012, users who wish to express opinions must be identified in the real-name system in Weibo.

What?s more, most celebrities and organizations have applied for a ?V? mark (yellow ?V? for individual while blue for organization). That means, maybe you can?t know every follower of yours, but you should know well and trust your friends in Weibo. Therefore, Weibo has been constructed to be a trustworthy environment as described in [16][17]. Hence, Trust Transfer Model (TTM) can be implied to discover the high-quality users when some seeds are chosen who are the high-quality as well-known. That means, we get the friends of the seeds (such as Kaifu Lee, Yao Chen etc.), then get the friends of their friends, and so on. Up to the programmes, Breadth First Search (BFS) is used to implement a crawler following the TTM. After the crawler?s hard working, 20 million high-quality users are captured to fill the dataset.

2) Analyze and evaluate the high-quality users: First, basic characteristics of the dataset are shown to explain the users in this dataset are somewhat different from commons. Then, one special indicator called Coincidence Ratio (CR) is proposed to show the changes along with the crawler?s footsteps. Finally, the coverage ratio based on the testing set ?Top10 Hot Microblog? which contains various typical microblogs indicates high credibility of the high-quality users discovered by the BFS crawler based on TTM.

B. Update: capture fresh users with high activity The 20 million users are high-quality, but they are  single-source-only from ?friends of friends? based on TTM.

The relations of friends are static relatively, and it?s difficult to judge their activity degree. In order to ensure the high activity of the users in our dataset, fresh users are captured from the reposts list of the recent hot microblogs.

The number of the fresh users is not as big as the high-quality users, but we expect to obtain good results after the fresh active users? joining.

C. WeiboRank Firstly, four indicators which will be used in WeiboRank  are introduced. And then, ideas about the WeiboRank computing are explained preliminarily.

1) Influence degree (ID): Influence means the transmission capacity-if user A posts or reposts a microblog, how many users will see and respond about it? A simple answer is to find the followers of user A. That because the followers will see the posts or reposts from their friends  directly. That means, we can judge one?s influence degree just based on his/her followers.

2) Standing degree (SD): High-quality users are not only hold many followers- This doesn't mean everything. So for example, user A and B hold the same number of the followers, but the friends of A is much less than B. That means, although A don?t follow as many friends as B, A holds as many followers as B. Obviously, A is more charming than B. In other words, A has a higher standing in Weibo. In this paper, we use the proportion of followers amount to friends amount as one?s standing degree.

3) Reposting degree (RD): Repost which is called ?Retweet? in Twitter plays a very important role in activities in Weibo. It?s because that, every microblog user is able to see such many microblogs that user must choose which one reading carefully and which one roughly. Users don?t repost all microblogs. In other words, if one user reposts a microblog, he/she must concern it and want more users to see it. So, ?reposting degree? is a good indicator for activity degree.

4) Hot-repost degree (HD): If you not only repost others? microblog, but also post a hot microblog which is reposted widely by others, fortunately you hold a ?hot-repost? microblog. The more reposts following your microblog, the more important and influent the you are. So, the reposting count of the hot-repost microblog is one kind of notable indicator for estimating one user?s high quality and high activity.

5) WeiboRank computing: Just like PageRank acting on the pages in networking, WeiboRank acts on the users in Weibo. The purpose of WeiboRank is to give a value for each user in the dataset. In this paper, four degrees mentioned above are considered as the parameters to the functions of WeiboRank. A certain amount of fresh users are put into the dataset full of high-quality users, then WeiboRank function starts working for the whole dataset including both old high-quality users and the fresh active users. As the result of WeiboRank computing, every user gets a new WeiboRank value. Next, some evaluations can be made based on the dataset with WeiboRank value. Obviously, WeiboRank is a kind of iterative process.

D. Evaluate Some evaluations are made based on the users captured by  the crawler via Weibo APIs. First, the basic information and effects of the four degrees of influence (ID), standing (SD), reposting (RD) and hot-repost (HD) are evaluated and compared with each other. Then, the WeiboRank function is confirmed based on the evaluation mentioned above. Finally, after every time?s iteration of WeiboRank for the fresh users, the coverage degrees on the certain testing dataset are calculated and compared with each other. The improvement ratio of the coverage degrees will be shown after iteration.

Fig. 1. The distribution of users? followers with timelin

IV. EVALUATIONS Through the crawler?s hard working, first  20 million high-quality users? profile data ba Weibo. Then, fresh users with high activity the Top Hot microblogs of recent periods wh every iteration. We save the data and some pr into database. All analyses are based on the d  A. Basic analyses about the initial high-quli We focus on the number of user?s frien  What?s more, each user?s friends list is the research. Table  shows the basic informa full of users captured based on TTM.

TABLE I.  THE BASIC INFORMATION ABO  Item Sum Average Max  Friend 6,973,930,750 332.93 2  Follower 100,951,965,848 4819.37 43,3  Total users 20,947,137  D  According to our statistics on the dataset, to 98.66%) hold less than 10,000 followers honorable 1.34%, extreme polarization existe hold more than 50,000 followers each whi less than 50,000 for each. Comparing 1,000 average number of followers for the whole in Table ), That's a huge difference betw because high-quality users contribute their nu to the average.

B. Followers analyses about the initial high In Fig.1~2, X-axis shares the same defini  shares a similar computational procedure.

X = xt  Equation (1) is the definition of X-axis. X the BFS crawler walks to time ?t?, the numb users comes up to xt. In this paper, xt is se 10,000. That means: 2,094 x values are s range of the whole trust transferring.

Fig. 2. The Coincidence Ratio (CR) one of BFS.

tly we capture over ased on TTM from are captured from  hile about 500,000 reprocessed results  dataset.

ity users nds and followers.

core data for our ation about dataset  OUT DATASET  ximum Minimum  2,000 1  360,972 0  Data updating:  March, 2013.

most users (up for each; even the  ed- some (23.57%) ile most (76.43%) 0 and 4819.37 (the dataset mentioned  ween them. That is umerous followers  -qulity users ition, while Y-axis  (1)  X=xt means, when ber of high-quality et with the step of selected evenly in  In Fig.1, Y-axis (follower_a number of users? followers (foll  Y = follower_avg(xt)  In consideration of the fact distribution is extremely polari and comparable result, the f 5,000 is cut to 5,000 uniformly the follower_avg(xt) preproce exponential curve-fitting to the  Even the followers of high noteworthy result is presented earlier by the crawler are quite the latters. Generally, the high followers they will hold. In high-quality users waiting for crawler reduces quickly when the effect of trust transfer clear that the crawler?s working ac expect.

C. Coincidence Ratio analyses users When the BFS crawler get  insert them into the database, co is that friends new-found have they have been found earlier. T the new-found is called Coincid  New-found friends are called earlier-found friends are called  CU(T) = (cut1,cut2,?,c  EU(T) = (eut1,eut2,?,e  Equations (3) and (4) are t set of new-found users at time T earlier-found users at time T. T be estimate with the function cf  of users? friends with timeline of BFS.

avg) is the average value for the lower_count).

= ? ???????? ????????????  ???????   (2)  mentioned above (the followers? ized), in order to present a clear follower_count(xt) greater than y. In Fig.1, green dots stand for essed, and the red line is an  all follower_avg(xt).

h-quality users are weakened; a clearly in Fig.1: users captured different (more followers) from  her-quality users are, the more other words, the number of  r being discovered by the BFS time goes by. Also we can see  rly. Hence, the red curve reflects chievement lives up to TTM?s  s about the initial high-qulity  ts one user?s friends and try to onflict will be found. The reason already existed in the database-  The ratio of the existed users in dence Ratio (CR).

d CU (Candidate User), while EU (Existed User).

cutm), (t1<t2<?<tm<T) (3)  eutn) , (t1<t2<?<tn<T) (4)  time-relevant. CU(T) means the T, while EU(T) means the set of  Then, whether conflict or not will f(t,i).

Fig. 3. The averages of ID, SD, RD and HD with timeline of BFS.

????? ?? ? ??? ???  !  "#???$? ???  %  "#??? (5)  Equation (5) means that if a new-found user ???  has existed in set EU(t), the ????? ?? value will be set 1; if not, set 0.

For the whole set CU(t), every user ??? will be estimated with ????? ?? . Then, the total counts of conflict will be calculated with the function cc(t).

????? ? ? ????? ??&?'(  (6) Through the cc(t), the absolute number of conflict is  obtained. In order to compare CR expediently, the function cr(t) will be used.

?)??? ?  ??*+,??* ?   ??  ?  (7)  It?s a hard work to calculate all cr(t)s for the whole dataset.

For the same reason, cr(t)s are processed with the function cr_avg(xt).

cr_avg(xt) = ? ?????????  ???????  (8)  All cr_avg(xt)s are marked as green dots and the red line is an exponential curve-fitting to the all cr_avg(xt)s in Fig.2.

According to the definition described above, the CR will increase theoretically. However, in a real environment, the CR will not increase strictly all the time, just like in Fig.2. Even so, the trend of CR along with the BFS crawler?s working is quite clear showed in Fig.2. In fact, the fact of increase is not the key point, but there are several interesting things really notable:  1) The rate of CR increase is much faster where xi<10m than xi>10m: As we all know, a normal user will follow high-quality users more likely than commons. That means, high-quality users will contribute more to the CR than commons. Therefore, the CR will increase much faster when a certain amount of high-quality users are discovered than the same amount of commons. In Fig.2, considering the rate of CR increase so fast where xi<10m, obviously the BFS crawler discovers many very high-quality users quickly from the starting when the most high-quality users were chosen as seeds.

2) The rate of CR increase becomes relatively stable where xi>10m: In fact, it?s still increasing where xi>10m, although quite slow. It indicates that the quality of high-quality users is quite low, while the quantity quite few. What? more, the CR stabilizes around at 70%. If a high standard is set for the rate of CR increase and considering a high enough CR, we can decide that most high-quality users have been discovered up to xi=10m. Of course, these two standards can be set freely. This problem will be discussed in future research. That means, high-quality users are not so many actually, so only high-quality is not enough for mining high-value users, fresh users should be imported into the dataset.

D. Four degress: influence(ID), standing(SD), reposting(RD) and hot-repost(HD) As mentioned above, the high-quality is simply according  to the TTM which is somewhat qualitative. Hence, four quantitative degrees are proposed to compute the degrees of the quality and activity for each user in dataset. The computing methods for the four degrees are described as followings.

ID(x) = -./ ?011023)	?0?4??5? (9)  SD(x) = -./ ????????? ???????????6 ?????? ? (10)  RD(x, T) = )37807??49	?0?4??5? :? (11) HD(x, T) = -./ )37807?7 	?0?4??5? :? (12)  In (9) ~ (12), x has the same meanings, which stands for the user x. ?011023)	?0?4??5?  and ?)?34;	?0?4??5?  have been mentioned above. The )37807??49	?0?4??5? :? means user x reposts  )37807??49	?0?4??5? :?  times during the certain period T. Similarly, )37807?7	?0?4??5? :? stands for the total count of user x?s microblog(s) reposted by others during the certain period T. (9), (10) and (12) use the log, while (11) not, it?s because the values in which are much more polarized than)37807?7	?0?4?. ID and SD are static relatively while RD and HD are dynamic. In particular, fresh users all comes from the Top 200 Hot microblogs every day.

Fig.3 shows the average of ID, SD, RD and HD during the period from beginning to 20 million high-quality users discovered by the BFS crawler based on TTM. As discussed above, the quality decreases with the timeline, which is similar to the ID and SD. That means, ID and SD are the notable indicators for confirming one user?s quality while SD is more notable than ID judging from the trend lines showed in Fig.6.

What?s more, ID and SD are similar with each other, but they can play different roles. For example, A and B both hold 2,000 followers, while A holds 100 friends and B 1,000-as we all know, B is more attractive and holds a higher standing than A; in this case, ID(A)=ID(B), but SD(A)<SD(B)-which agrees with the facts. Another example, A holds 2,000 followers and 200 friends, while B holds 100 followers and 10 friends-obviously, A is much more influent than B; in this case,     Fig. 4. The averages of ID, SD and RD with X order by WR where < ? ?? ?$? ?$$.

SD(A)=SD(B), but ID(A)>ID(B)-which also agrees with the facts. That means, take into account both ID and SD can be more effective for computing one user?s quality.

Meanwhile, it?s more random and uniform for RD which is green line as shown in Fig.3. As mentioned above, reposting stands for one?s activity during a certain period. However, high-quality users are not always active, even silent for a quite long time. Usually, a silent or dead user has little value for either academic research or business application. For example, A is a little more high-quality than B (higher ID or SD), but B is much more active than A, in this case, it?s unwise to conform that A is more high-value than B. In fact, B is often higher value than A more likely. That means, RD stands for the activity and is quite important for improving users? value.

Considering the high-quality users? activity is random and uniform, RD has a special effect for mining high-value users based on the high-quality users.

Finally, HD is quite sparse relatively  and usually gets large value when the users are the most high-quality. That means, commons have much less opportunity to post a hot microblog. From another point of view, if one common user gets a high HD, he/she maybe will become a new high-quality user. That means, although HD is quite sparse, there?s special effect for mining active and new high-quality users.

E. WeiboRank: give high-value user a high-value As mentioned above, ID and SD stands for quality, while  RD stands for activity. Distinctively, HD acts as a ?star hunter? to mining new high-quality users, even the high-value users.

WeiboRank (WR) gives user a high-value score based on mixing with ID, SD, RD and HD. A function called WR(x, T) is proposed to describe the relations between WeiboRank and the four degrees.

WR(x,T)== > ?@AB	CDE F G > HB  HB	CDE F I > JB  JB	CDE F K > LB  LB	CDE(13)  XD_AVG means the average of all users? XD, the effect of which is normalization. Obviously, the key point is the proportion arguments. Because we have got 20 million users with high-quality based on TTM, ID and SD are not so sensitive for WeiboRank here, just give them = ? ? MNO P ? ? to maintain the high-quality of the whole dataset. HD is important, but too sparse here. Like the ID and SD, just give  it Q ? ?. RD is the brightest star, which can improve the high-quality users? activity. With the help of SD, it?s of great promise that users in the dataset become both high-quality and high-activity. Then, we are on target of mining high-value users. However, is < the larger the better for WeiboRank?

Three different values are tried, and the result is shown in Fig.4.

Fig.4 (a) shows the average of ID with x order by WR where < ? ?? ?$? ?$$. It?s clear that ID increases stably where < ? ?? ?$, and just the same for most time. On the contrast the green line which stands for < ? ?$$ is quite naughty. The WR where < ? ?$$ disturbs the ID badly. Fig.4 (b) shows the similar result as Fig.4 (a). Fig.4 (c) does not shows the difference until the WR is large enough, when the WRs where < ? ?$? ?$$ increase too rapidly. Meanwhile, the blue line which stands for < ? ? acts calmly. Considering the ID, SD and RD, the blue line does well all the time. That means, SD don?t need a very large weight, and SD can play an important role in mining high-quality and high-value users effectively and stably.



V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS Testing set is based on the ?Top10 Hot Microblog? in a certain period. Then we get the lists of the users who repost the microblogs. Next, the count and ratio of reposting users who have been mined based on WR will be calculated just like (5~7). In order to avoid suspicion, the ?Top10 Hot Microblog? selected is intact and not originated from the seeds of the crawler. We add the fresh active users six times while about 500 thousand fresh men are added into the dataset. Then, every time, WR works hard for each user in dataset and give each one a WR score. Finally, only 20 million users are selected by WR as the high-value users. After WR iteration every time, some stronger users will squeeze into the high-value dataset, while the weak will be cleared out. The process is dynamic. That means, you have the opportunity to become a high-value user if you?re becoming more high-quality and active. On the contrary, bad luck will come to you when you?re not so high-quality or not active.

Table  shows the statistics based on the ?Top10 Hot Microblog? whose topic and repost count cover widely. It?s     clear that the ratio of coverage is becoming larger after the updating every time.

TABLE II.  THE COVERAGE DEGREE BASED ON THE WR ITERATION  Weibo mid* 0** 1 2 3 4 5 6  1: zm3QbFsoO 0.498 0.551 0.578 0.602 0.631 0.653 0.667  2: zlQK19a8N 0.395 0.457 0.493 0.522 0.559 0.576 0.585  3: zlTcyljyP 0.427 0.483 0.512 0.536 0.571 0.590 0.598  4: zm48tccgS 0.427 0.482 0.507 0.531 0.563 0.586 0.600  5: zot5SthIL 0.341 0.400 0.426 0.448 0.473 0.493 0.507  6: zo0kphAlA 0.414 0.496 0.522 0.549 0.573 0.591 0.606  7: zm3XAxhZw 0.471 0.526 0.545 0.563 0.591 0.610 0.621  8: zmU3gqMzL 0.422 0.493 0.520 0.543 0.566 0.582 0.601  9: zmrZH2383 0.504 0.581 0.622 0.637 0.656 0.666 0.679  10: zmaacb1bc 0.519 0.597 0.636 0.657 0.684 0.707 0.712  AVG 0.442 0.507 0.536 0.559 0.587 0.605 0.618 * Top 10 Hot Microblogs in Weibo, March 2013;,mid:message id based on base62  **0 stands for the original users discovered by the crawler based on TTM    It?s clear that the ratio of coverage is greater than 60% by an absolute majority even greater than 70% for one microblog.

The average ratio of coverage is 61.82%, so we deem that the ratio is greater than 60% stably.

Fig.5 shows the improvement ratio of coverage with the six WR updating. It?s clear that the improvement goes down after each updating generally. That means, fresh users are absorbed with high-efficiency.

Generally, after 3 million fresh users are put into the dataset, the WR updates six times and make the coverage ratio improves from 44.2% to 61.8%. The result indicates the 20 million users are really high-quality and high-activity: they are high-value users.



VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK This paper introduces TTM to discover the high-quality  users in Weibo. TTM and BFS algorithm are both very simple.

However, the BFS crawler based on TTM works well and captures over 20 million high-quality users. Through analysis and discussion, we proved that statistical data (especially CR) indicates the BFS crawler walks along the right way following the principle of TTM. Then fresh users are put into the dataset with high activity. Four degrees are proposed to make sure the high-quality and high-activity of the users. WeiboRank is proposed based on the four degrees to rank the users in the dataset. 20 million users are selected order by the WeiboRank to evaluate the coverage ratio on the testing set ?Top10 Hot Microblog? which contains various typical microblogs. The result indicates high credibility of the high-value users discovered by the mechanism proposed in this paper.

Although less than 4% [18] users being able to cover more than 60% reposts is a gratifying result, we deem there?s still much space to improve. In our next research, more methods will be considered for discovering high-value users dynamically and improving the coverage ratio steadily. We also believe that discovering and maintaining a dataset filled with high-value users which is not too big is quite significant for both academic research and business applications.

