Pastoral Care and Student Support:  Developing a Method of Retention

Abstract?The transition from High School to first year Engineering at University can be very difficult for many students. Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand (VUW), developed an early warning system for student grade performance: Big Sister, and a system of Pastoral Care within the School of Engineering and Computer Science. This paper will discuss how Big Sister supports the identification of at risk students and how this system is integrated into the delivery of effective Pastoral Care. Importantly, this paper will also discuss the information gained from student interviews by the Pastoral Care staff member. In particular, we discuss the findings in relation to student self-efficacy and success and how this is being used to improve the first year teaching and learning environment.

Keywords- engineering retention, pastoral care, student support, teaching and learning

I.INTRODUCTION The Bachelor of Engineering (BE) at Victoria University of  Wellington (VUW), New Zealand, is a relatively new degree which recently received full Washington Accord accreditation in 2012. This BE has specializations in Electronic and Computer Systems Engineering (ECEN), Network Engineering (NWEN) and Software Engineering (SWEN). The BE programme is the outcome of support from the New Zealand Government which has targeted funding for tertiary engineering programmes to increase the number of tertiary qualified engineers to meet industry demand.

The majority of students gain entry to the BE having passed through the National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA) system which operates throughout New Zealand High Schools. Potential engineering students are required to have moderate final year grades in High School calculus and physics.

Students are required to obtain an above average B grade (65% or above) over their core first year engineering subjects in order to progress further with the BE. Since its introduction in 2007, the BE programme has had a 60-70% failure rate of students not achieving this B average in their first attempt.

In 2009, the New Zealand Government funded a project at VUW to investigate the barriers to success and retention for first year university engineering students. The project conducted grade analyses of High School results, VUW course marks, student focus groups, surveys and curriculum analyses.

This project uncovered that much of the failure could be attributed to poor academic preparation by students entering the BE directly from High School. The project also identified a disturbingly poor level of engagement by students with the numerous available support services, and poor engagement with first year courses.

To reduce the high attrition rates and improve student engagement, the School of Engineering and Computer Science (SECS), developed several key initiatives.

A significant development was collaboration with the Te R?p? ?whina wh?nau (?whina) programme in the creation of ?Big Sister?, an at risk student early warning and progress system. The paper will explain how Big Sister fits into the overall student academic performance analysis at VUW and how it allows our pastoral care staff member (a position created in 2012) to identify at risk students through poor grade performance across their first year courses. Pastoral care in our context refers to the efforts made by our staff member to directly contact students and meet with them to discuss any difficulties they may be facing and offer guidance and support.

These interviews often lead to follow up meetings throughout the study year.

Crucially, this paper will then detail the findings and solutions developed as a result of the information gathered by the pastoral care interviews with students identified through Big Sister. Importantly, these interviews have some limitations as research data since they have produced what amounts to field notes resulting from the 50 minute intervention interviews, with the primary task of the interview to assist the student rather than gather research data. The interviews notes are taken by hand and shown to the participants during the interview but are not audio recorded and transcribed and then coded for emergent themes as is the case in many qualitative studies, such as the commonly used grounded theory [1].  That said, the interview notes were examined for comparative and consistent themes.

Despite these limitations the interviews have revealed many possible factors affecting student progress, for example, student and teacher teaching and learning behavior in High School     NCEA, coupled with generational factors makes the university?s reliance on NCEA as a method of entry assessment criteria for engineering students problematic. Student self- efficacy, or belief in their own ability to succeed, a crucial factor in continued success, can be falsely high as a result of the NCEA assessment criteria and actually form a barrier to student success when they are faced with difficult first year courses.

These findings have been a major contributor to the review of the first year BE programme and have influenced a significant redesign of first year mathematics and engineering courses.



II.CONTEXT To explain Big Sister it is important to understand the  context in which it functions as part of the overall work undertaken at VUW to investigate and resolve factors affecting student academic performance. The overall aim of conducting Student academic performance analyses and associated pastoral care at VUW is to:  ? Further our understanding of barriers to students in achieving the B average required in first year core courses  ? Accumulation of student performance data and trends ? Offer course advice and assistance to students  experiencing difficulty in achieving the mandatory B average across core papers first year  ? Activate student engagement with support services  Student performance analyses of students during their first year of study at VUW has two main aspects: Immediate analysis and On-going analysis. The first, Immediate analysis takes place within the first two weeks of a student beginning the BE. In the students? first week of classes we conduct Mathematics and Physics Diagnostic Testing. This takes the form of a one hour test. Currently this is only for ECEN students and is primarily used to give students Math and Physics course advice as soon as possible and redirect students into courses more appropriate for their ability.

The diagnostic also functions as a ?wake-up call? activating student engagement with the reality of course demands in the first week of study. The main issues with the diagnostic test is that no comparable test exists for the NWEN or SWEN students whose pathway does not automatically include the stringent physics or mathematics of the ECEN major, but rather includes a large amount of programming courses which the students have no preparation for at Secondary School.

In addition to the diagnostic test, by the end of week two, we obtain a full grade and performance report that details all engineering students? NCEA final year results. A student?s final year NCEA results are the main university measure for student entry to the degree. From our earlier analysis these have no ?real? predictive value [2]. However, they do often form a background of a student?s ?potential? ability in first year tertiary papers and when combined with an ECEN student?s diagnostic test result does form a partial predictor of student  success in Part I. Yet, as already reported, this is statistically too small to be used as a stand-alone method [2]. NCEA remains the only form of student academic background available for SWEN and NWEN students.

Students who received marginal to low marks in the diagnostic and those who appear to be lacking in NCEA physics and mathematics at level three are invited to attend a Pastoral Care interview and a study plan is discussed and the student is made aware of suitable help available at VUW.

After conducting the Immediate analysis and as students begin to get immersed into trimester one, we begin On-going analysis. On-going analysis has several key aspects:  ? Student surveys of first year engineering students conducted at the start and end of the study year  ? Collection of Big Sister grade data,  identification and contact made with at risk students  ? Analysis of at risk student interviews  ? Follow up interviews with students who have been seen and results incorporated into analysis  ? Continuation of the grade data comparison between NCEA and performance in first year courses

III.BIG SISTER Big Sister forms a major component of the On-going  analysis and is a means of identifying students who perform poorly. It is a database reporting system which gathers student assignment and test grade data from all course coordinators in the first year of the BE in near real-time.

Picture I. Snapshot of Big Sister      On the screen the student?s results run across all of their first year courses (not shown here). For each student, results are displayed to the right of the student ID number. In this instance some students are shown doing COMP102 and COMP103, two first year programming courses. The boxes represent individual assignments, tests or labs results and are color coded. Green is a good pass, yellow a marginal pass, red is a fail and black is where a student has not submitted the work. These can be read in this format or in a grade weighted format. This system also allows subcategories such as individual courses to be examined and also allows for a comparison at a glance of the class performance.

During the creation of Big Sister one of the main challenges we faced was obtaining permission to access the grade data from course coordinators. The first year of the BE is taught across several departments such as Engineering and Computer Science, Mathematics and Physics. Despite gaining ethical approval from the University Human Ethics Committee many course coordinators were of the opinion that the student data still had confidentiality issues and remained the ?property? of the relevant course coordinator and department.

After two years of negotiation this issue was resolved in 2012 and Big Sister could begin across all courses relevant to the BE in first year.

A second major challenge in setting up Big Sister was obtaining the data in a timely manner. The university system does not dictate the manner in which course coordinators store course grades until all grades are finally transferred to the VUW grading database. For example, we encountered lecturers who stored grades in excel spread-sheets, moodle grade books, and on the Blackboard grade system. As such, a staff member must import the results into a common format for uploading to Big Sister. This slows the availability of timely grade data.

In addition, the assignments and tests have to be marked within a short timeframe in order to enable the pastoral care staff member to contact the student and begin assistance. In practice some course coordinators are better than others at providing speedy data. A major outcome of this knowledge has been a new SECS policy from the Dean and Head of School for marking to be conducted at the latest within a two week turn- around.

The Big Sister data report now gives us relatively (within one-two weeks after a grade has been given) up-to-date information enabling us to identify at risk students by examining grade performance across all the courses an engineering student is doing.

After a student is identified as being at risk, the Pastoral Care staff member contacts the student with an offer of assistance and an interview. This is done via email or by phone, and if necessary severely at risk students can be contacted at labs or tutorials.

Students attending the (up to 50min) interview are asked to sign an ethics form allowing the Pastoral Care staff member to record, in note form, the details of the interview. The notes are written in full view of the student and the student is asked to read the notes at several stages throughout the interview and  make any changes they feel comfortable with. If a student does not sign the form the interview goes ahead without notation.

The outcome of this interview usually results in students being given advice and appropriate support service and encouraged to use it. Some of these support services include, ?whina, Student Learning Support Service, Peer Assisted Study Support (PASS) Scheme, Tutorials, the Lecturer, Course Coordinator or Dean of Students. In some cases student counseling, disability support and student health may be contacted.



IV. INTERVIEWS Throughout trimester one, 2012, the pastoral care staff  member interviewed over 80 students deemed ?at risk?, with 60 agreeing to have information recorded in note form, of 152 first year BE students. An ?at risk? student in this case was a student who showed continued poor performance or who suddenly declined in performance in one or more courses. These interviews produced information on student attitudes and abilities. These themes were grouped together and a selection of common themes, those that occurred in over 80 percent of the participants interviews, identified. Common student interview themes were:  ? A belief they are academically prepared by High School for Tertiary study  ? A belief that NCEA assessment at High School was easy  ? A huge workload increase from High School  ? A disconnect with Math, Physics and Engineering lectures, both in content and style  ? A lack of understanding about what engineering at VUW is and what subjects are required to study it  ? Teaching (lecturing) style very different to School across all of university  ? Assessment is completely different from NCEA  ? A new realisation that they are not prepared but lacking the motivation to remedy  ? A lack of desire to put the work in if it does not interest them  ? Computer Science first year courses perceived as hard but more interesting and gets more study attention  ? ?Game-playing? course work to achieve a pass  ? Students perceive of themselves as lazy ? but justify this by claiming boredom with courses-material and lecture style  ? Students are not comfortable (fear) accessing support help - its help designed for ?our? system  ? They are stressed with non-academic issues which compete on an equal footing for their attention with course work    Conclusions gained from the pastoral care interviews point to ?huge? differences between the expectations we have of students and those they have of us, academically, environmentally and behaviorally. It must be emphasized that we can only indicate conclusions for this particular group of students based on their self-reported perceptions and viewpoints.

Students believe the NCEA teaching and assessment system they have experienced prior to university is the norm and for many of these the lack of motivation and transition difficulties could be attributed to patterns learnt while studying NCEA.

A recent study of NCEA noted:  ? Teachers and parents were positive about the overall impact of NCEA on many students, particularly those who were low achieving.

? Teachers and parents felt that high achieving students would work hard no matter what.

? Teachers and parents had concerns that some aspects of credit accumulation and assessments could motivate students to ?do just enough? rather than do their best.

? Teachers and students were concerned about the possibility that assessment could drive teaching and learning rather than the curriculum.

? There was some concern by teachers that assessment could fragment subject understandings in some areas where integration, synthesis and/or evaluation across standards were seen as critical [2].

While it is clear that not all students struggle in the transition to university, our poor pass rates indicate a widespread problem and it is possible that the NCEA system is not adequately preparing potential tertiary students for the level of motivation for academic success or independent learning style, presumed by the manner of teaching at VUW.

University engineering, mathematics and physics (all core first year BE) courses at VUW predominantly revolve around students attending lectures taking notes and then attending labs or tutorials where the emphasis is often on completing assignments and going over lecture material. The teaching component of these classes as it relates to personalizing the learning environment is low and in many cases non-existent.

Motivation is also generally left to the student with the assumption similar to that mentioned above: ??high achieving students would work hard no matter what? [3].

Our ?teaching? and learning environment/culture does not always help. It is designed for our perception of teaching that fits into one of Ramsden?s pervasive tertiary teaching myths that: ?[teaching] consists in presenting or transmitting information from teacher to student, or demonstrating the application of a skill in practice; and that students in higher education must not be too closely supervised, lest the bad habits of dependent learning they are supposed to have acquired at school are reinforced? [4]. Ramsden makes the further salient point that: ?It is said in support of this myth that able students understand and apply the skills and information  they have been exposed to. If the rest don?t learn, they have a difficulty that the teaching cannot be blamed for; after all, they are in higher education now? [4]. Statements of similar content can be heard throughout meetings of academic staff at VUW.

Zepke?s research into student perceptions revealed  that  out of the three factors affecting students? success; ?teaching, motivation and external influences, teaching is the most important?[5]. Yet Zepke, argues that while teaching was the most significant factor, that understanding student engagement was not that simple and was always a complex interplay between teaching, motivation and external influences and as such it is difficult to point to only one factor as the pre-eminent causation of poor student academic performance. Zepke describes the findings of the research in an interesting manner:  ? ?Student engagement is complex. It comprises nodes (e.g. teaching, motivation, external influences) clustered into larger nodes (e.g. student engagement) clustered yet into larger nodes (e.g. research orientations). Each node is understood as a network in its own right linked to other node networks. This means that teaching, motivation and external influences each form a complex network connected with every other node in the system. Simultaneous connection and distinction is a feature of this network.

? Since teaching, motivation and external circumstances are distinct, these nodes can be investigated separately and compared. But researchers need to be aware that by doing so, they are not taking into account the simultaneous connections between these nodes and therefore they are oversimplifying the results.

? The finding that teaching is more important than motivation, then, cannot be taken at face value. While useful, it neglects the complexity that underpins the relationships between these terms? [5].

Importantly this leads to the conclusion by Zepke that there are many nodes or node networks beyond those listed above affecting student engagement. The pastoral care interviews point to NCEA as a node potentially affecting student performance. Another significant node was a lack of understanding about what it was they were going to study in engineering at VUW. This confirmed much of the work done by the Engineering Pathways Project at VUW [6].

The more we investigated retention issues the more it became apparent that the complex interplay of factors, or as Zepke describes it nodes, makes any single solution problematic in terms of effectiveness across the whole student cohort, which in turn increased the importance of targeted individual pastoral care.  For example, an interesting finding of the interviews was the unwillingness to access help or support services when students found themselves in a difficulty node.

This node then has a network of related causes. Students expressed a general reluctance to access help stating comments such as, ?I thought I could catch up?, or ?I didn?t think I needed any help?. Other student comments included a general acknowledgement of fear in accessing help. This was related to a general perception of help indicating that they were academically inferior to their peers and also fear of being part    of a ?help group?, preferring anonymity. Awhina support was largely rejected by our predominantly male students of European descent who felt put off by the Maori and Pasifika face presented by Awhina.

The interviews and the intervention of the pastoral care provides access to the complex node networks allowing for immediate connection with the individual student regarding their difficulties and also allows for some broader understanding of common barriers across the main student cohort.



V. OUTCOMES While it is difficult to directly attribute the pastoral care  interviews with student improvement we believe these interviews resulted in some positive outcomes for student engagement in the core engineering paper Engineering Fundamentals (ENGR101). Feedback was given to the course coordinator throughout the process of the interviews and subsequent changes were made in the structure and teaching of the course [7]. Many students who had attended interviews showed a grade improvement in the weeks following the interviews. Overall, the results were that the pass rates significantly improved from 52% of the students gaining a B or greater in 2011 to 63% in 2012.

At least 20 students changed their major or degree as a result of the pastoral care interviews to better suited educational pathways.

In addition, there was a significant increase in the uptake on accessing ?help? in the Peer Assisted Student Support (PASS) Scheme. PASS groups are study groups run by a good student who did the course the previous trimester. These have been run successfully by the Student Learning Support Service at VUW for many years in several faculties. In 2011 Engineering set up a PASS group for Math 151 (an introduction to linear algebra) and had a poor uptake, with only 2 students out of the 58 enrolled in MATH151 attending PASS. This suggested that students were poor at accessing help and reluctant to take independent responsibility for their own learning.

With the advent of a Pastoral Care staff member in 2012 we saw an increase in the uptake of students attending PASS groups for MATH151, with 28 students out of 64 attending.

The academic results of PASS were however disappointing with only 6 out of 28 students (21%) receiving a B or better grade for Math151.

Feedback from students attending the PASS group indicated that it was not assisting in developing increased mathematical ability in the attendees and focused on solving tutorial or assignment questions. PASS groups are led by a student who has done the course within the previous couple of years. As such, we had great difficulty in obtaining PASS leaders who had sufficient knowledge of math to answer difficult questions of the material and who also understood good teaching practice.

PASS group leaders do undergo training and also have access to mentoring but we feel that a more experienced tutor would yield better results.

The 2012 end of year grades have been received and the results have improved. Table I below details the data collected  on first year students? progress with Part One of the BE over its first six years. The numbers represent actual first year students in calendar years so all students starting in trimester two will show up as an earlier student when they complete. In 2012 the number of new entrants completing Part One in their first year is up 46% on the best previous year and a corresponding increase in grade average performance with 40 students achieving an A- average. There is also a substantial trend of students now completing in their second year.

Table I. Student Performance in Part One of the BE 2007-2012   2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012  Students completing at least  one Part One course  104 92 111 120 108 172  Students completing all  required courses for their Part One  major.

40 40 54 48 42 72  Students passing all required courses for their Part One  major 23 22 31 36 26 54  Students achieving a GPA ? 4.5 in  their Part One courses  38 46 46 54 42 77  Students achieving a GPA ? 6.5 in  their Part One courses  18 20 18 33 13 40  Students passing Part One 22 21 31 35 25 51  Earlier students completing Part  One.

9 18 14 21 23  Total students completing Part  One 22 30 49 49 46 74    In addition, we have made steps to disseminate our findings and actively involve lecturers and support staff in the challenges we face. This has led to a gradual interest across the faculty. The interview findings have also been the subject of several seminars at VUW.

One of the major outcomes of the Pastoral care interviews and Big Sister programme has been an informed motivation to revamp first year engineering, mathematics and physics papers to meet student expectations and academic ability. Suggested changes include the complete overhaul of the core mathematics courses currently taught by the mathematics department. The proposed change aims to introduce three papers that have as their principal concept the belief that the course must be interesting and show engineering relevance to students through project based learning.

Alongside the proposed changes to first year papers already mentioned, the School of Engineering and Computer Science has recently (at the time of writing) received approval to appoint an additional academic staff member to assist directly in the teaching of first year papers and a tutor to assist in developing ?new? tutorials in support of  difficult first year courses. It is also planned that this tutor will run one-on-one and group sessions for students identified through the pastoral care. Discussion has been active on whether these tutorials should or could be compulsory.

While we are confident in the success of the intervention of Pastoral Care and analysis provided by Big Sister we realize that we have a long way to go. Many questions remain:  ? How do we educate the students in what is required at university in first year without using the sink or swim approach?

? How do we increase the pass rate without decreasing the quality of students progressing?

? How do we ?more? get students to attend currently available help?

? How do we get students to take responsibility for their own learning?

? How do we get ?all? lecturers and courses engaged in pedagogy and improving the teaching and learning experience?

It is hoped that in the future we will have the answers to some of these questions and be able to report further on developments made. We also look forward to any feedback from the conference participants on how we might continue to improve our support.

