Effective Clusterization of Political Tweets  using Kurtosis and Community Duration

ABSTRACT Exploration of voter opinions is important for policy making.

While opinion polls have long played an important role in this process, big data analysis of social media, i.e. ?social listening?, is becoming important. This is because social listening involves the collection of a huge amount of data on opinions that are transmitted spontaneously by people in real time. The amount is so huge that the data needs to be aggregated and summarized. Graph theory is an effective way of aggregating into groups network structured data collected from social media such as Twitter.   However, there are two challenges. One is to combine the groups, i.e.

?communities?, into clusters because the granularity of the community is too fine for understanding the big picture. The other is to distinguish insignificant clusters from those that contain relevant information. In this paper, we describe a method for community clustering that is based on kurtosis and duration in time series of each community.

Keywords? social media, Twitter, election, kurtosis

I. INTRODUCTION Social listening, or social media listening, is a means of grasping public opinions and trend among peoples? life by collecting and analysing a large amount of data. Social media includes blogs, micro-blogs, and knowledge communities. Social listening is used not only in the commercial domain but also in the political domain for policy making, election campaigning, etc.

Social listening has attracted much interest because social media provides a great amount of data on opinions that are transmitted spontaneously by people in real time. In contrast to data collected by polling, the data collected from social media is free of the framework created by the poll taker, a framework that comprises the poll taker?s intentions and unconscious orientation. In addition, social listening is done  in real time and the data is suitable for time-series analysis, unlike with conventional polling.

Of course, social listening is not a panacea. First, the sample population is not as clear-cut as it is in a public opinion survey through a telephone or in-person questionnaire.

Second, the sample population is inherently biased as it is mainly people who use the internet and social media and who may be in the ?vocal minority?. Despite these problems, social listening is commonly used for analysing  political and election activity because of the various benefits mentioned above.

Because social listening involves the collection of a huge amount data, a method is needed for aggregating and summarizing the data to an understandable level. Graph theory is an effective way of aggregating network structured data such as social media data. A graph structure based on graph theory is a network consisting of nodes and edges connecting the nodes.  The use of modularity calculation on a graph structured database provides an elegant means of neighbourhood analysis. The modularity process classifies each node by the degree of similarity based on the distance between nodes and generates a set of node groups called ?communities?. The visualization of communities provides more information and leads to discovery.

However, a tool based on graph theory tends to generate too many communities, which makes the granularity of the communities too fine. It is thus necessary to combine communities into clusters.

In this paper, we present a method for community clustering that is based on kurtosis and community duration.



II. RELATED WORK Various studies have focused on the use of social  listening for political and election purposes. Some have investigated the use of Twitter to predict election results, such as by analysing the correlation between the number of  SocialCom/PASSAT/BigData/EconCom/BioMedCom 2013  DOI 10.1109/SocialCom.2013.144     votes and the number of tweets [1], [15],[18],[21],[22],[23].

Some have reported on the limits of social media analysis [5],[8],[9],[10],[14],[20]. Various techniques for and experiments on extracting political sentiments and trending topics from Twitter have been reported [2],[3],[6],[7],[24]. A couple of studies investigated the use of a graph structure for microblog mining [17],[12]. The use of trending time, duration, and kurtosis have been studied and reported [4],[11],[13],[16],[19].

In contrast to the many studies on prediction using Twitter data, the aim of this study was not prediction but data analysis.   Several studies on Twitter data analysis used the time series variables implicit in Twitter data, and several used kurtosis, but only for one segment, not for all segments in the data. Our study fills the gap between these preceding studies and contributes to reducing the analysis workload.



III. METHOD Aggregation Factors The political topics discussed over a long period of time are generally more significant. Conversely, topics discussed intensively over a short period of time are generally less significant. We thus focused on the intensiveness of transmission and the duration of discussion. We used the kurtosis index as a metric for the intensiveness and the duration in time series of each community.     Kurtosis index and duration of communities are utilized as input to clustering algorithm for the generation of clusters.

Kurtosis Kurtosis is a measure indicating the degree of detachment from the normal distribution. When the kurtosis index indicates a positive value, the data are more concentrated around the mean and have a higher peak than normal.

When the kurtosis index indicates a negative value, the target data set has a flatter distribution than the corresponding standard deviation data set. An index of skewness is also available when calculating kurtosis. Skewness indicates the deviation of the data. A positive value means the peak is in the first half, and a negative value means the peak is in the second half.

One limitation of kurtosis is that if the data values are four or less or if the standard deviation is zero, kurtosis value is not able to be calculated. This means that communities with a few tweets are to be neglected. However, such communities are insignificant, so this limitation is meaningless here.

Duration We defined ?time bucket? for measuring trending  duration.

We set four-hour time buckets for each community, and the duration of a community was the number of buckets in which a tweet was transmitted. For example, if one or more tweets were observed in a time bucket, that bucket was counted. If an empty time bucket was between two counted buckets, the total count was two, not three. That is, there was no interpolation in this study.

Fig. 1 Example screenshot showing IDG semantic map

IV. EVALUATION Data source  We used Twitter as the data source. Twitter enables users to post 140-character messages, i.e. ?tweets?, and thereby share their thoughts with other users. Twitter?s  ?follow? function enables users to see the tweets of specific users. The ?retweet? function enables users to pass on the tweets of other users along with their own comment. Users can categorize their tweets by using the hashtag function, which facilitates searching for and tracking tweets on particular topics.

Test target Our test target was the Japanese national election held at year end in 2012. The Japanese Diet is a bicameral legislature, consisting of an upper house (the House of Councillors) and a lower house (the House of Representatives). Members of the lower house are elected through a combination of single-seat constituencies and proportional representation. The 480 seats were contested by more than 1500 candidates representing 12 parties. The election was announced to the public on December 4, and voting ended on December 16.

Data collection and sample data extraction Using the Twitter API, we collected data from tweets related to the election during the 12-day election campaign, from 00:00 a.m. December 4 to 12:00 p.m. December 15. More than 1.4 million tweets were collected. The keywords used for selecting tweets were the names of the political parties, the abbreviations of the political party names, and the names of the party representatives and party leaders.

We randomly extracted 10% of the total data collected for use as sample data. The raw sample data (143,696 tweets) were pre-processed by morphological analysis (natural language processing) to divide text phrases into words.

Community generation     The results of the morphological analysis were imported into a graph structure database. The IDG integrated complex   Fig. 2 Kurtosis vs. community duration for clusters A?H  network analysis and visualization tool software (Insight Digger) [25] was used for graph structured data storage and community generation through modularity calculation. Fig. 1 shows an example screenshot of the visualized data. The nodes represent tweets, and the edges indicate semantic association. The similarities were calculated using the root words in the tweets. The root words are weighted using the TF/IDF method. The IDG software enables communities to be generated from about 15,000 tweets in a single operation.

For this reason, the sample data were divided into ten data sets by random sampling, and community generation was performed ten times. As a result, it is possible that similar tweets were classified differently between community generation runs. This is not a concern here because the communities were to be aggregated on the basis of content similarity. As a result of the 10 generation runs, the IDG generated 6,748 communities in total.

Extraction of clustering coefficients The clustering coefficients were extracted by randomly sampling 250 community data points and calculating the kurtosis and duration for each community.

The communities were then aggregated into clusters by automatic clustering based on the calculated values. The Ward method, a furthest neighbour method, a nearest neighbour method, a group average method, and a centroid method were used. The Ward method provided the best result, i.e. the least overlap between clusters on the scatter diagram.     We used a dendrogram for fixing the number of clusters.   A dendrogram visualize an arrangement of clusters hierarchically and supports fixing a number of the clusters that fits an investigation.  The optimized number of clusters resulting from using a dendrogram was eight.

Clustering all data A scatter-gram showing the results of clustering all the data is shown in Fig. 2. The vertical axis represents the kurtosis  index, and the horizontal axis represents the total duration of the community.

Fig. 3 Categorization of 50 most frequently used words in each cluster   To clarify the difference between clusters, the frequency of word (noun) use in each cluster was counted, and the 50 most frequently used words in each cluster were categorized into Party/Candidate, Politics/Election, Diplomacy, Media, and no relation with any of the above.  The results are shown in Fig. 3.



V. DISCUSSION From the kurtosis-duration scatter diagram and the word  categorization chart, we made the following observations.

? The low-kurtosis-index and short-duration clusters (A,  B, C, and D) had similar contents and contained several words not relevant to politics or elections.

? Cluster F had the same configuration of word classification as clusters A, B, C, and D, but its duration was medium length. The high-kurtosis-index and short-duration clusters had a higher rate of words not relevant to politics and elections.

? The low-kurtosis-index and long-duration cluster, G, had a unique configuration of words. It was the only one containing diplomatic words, and the balance of its configuration was moderate.

? Cluster H, which was hiding among the clusters with a middle of low kurtosis index and a short duration (B, C, and D) contained a high rate of words (> 85%) unrelated to politics or elections. This cluster was insignificant in terms of political analysis.

These observations show that the proposed method, which uses kurtosis and community duration for aggregation, works as expected and it can be used to distinguish insignificant clusters from those that contain relevant information.

Particularly remarkable is its high sensitivity to insignificant clusters, as shown by its ability to pinpoint cluster H as insignificant.



VI. CONCLUSION This research had two goals: effectively aggregate  communities generated by modularity calculation in graph     theory into clusters and identify the insignificant clusters.

Our proposed method meets both goals by using kurtosis and community duration. The communities generated by the modularity calculation are aggregated into clusters. The effectiveness of the proposed method was confirmed through the observation of word frequency analysis.

