Crowdsourcing, Big Data and Homeland Security George Markowsky

Abstract?This paper discusses ways that crowdsourcing can help homeland security. It reviews some successes in this area, suggests some directions and points out some obstacles. Short abstract

I. INTRODUCTION  In the aftermath of the Boston Marathon bombing, the FBI twice appealed to the public for help. The first time the appeal was for all photos and videos that the public had of the Boston Marathon environment. The second time the appeal was to help identify the two suspects whose fuzzy images were produced from the set of data collected in response to the first appeal. The public responded quickly and provided valuable information both times. The public?s help was essential in the rapid identification and apprehension of the perpetrators.

We also discuss the difficulty that the police and FBI have had in acting on intelligence when it is available before a terrorist act. Our analysis is that this is based in part on inadequate resources available for analyzing and tracking information. We argue that that both homeland security and crime fighting will benefit from giving the public a larger role. Of course, there are difficulties and concerns in doing this, but in our opinion the benefits of creating a national Web Neighborhood Watch far outweigh the drawbacks, especially at this time of constrained budgets.

In addition, we discuss the relevance of Big Data to home- land security and fighting crime which we consider a part of homeland security. We show how some of the ideas from Big Data can be used for organizing the Web Neighborhood Watch.

We also provide some simple examples of how the public can deal with public databases and suggest that a national Web Neighborhood Watch initiative could be used to educate people about computing and allow the natural creativity of citizens build a better and safer country.



II. CROWD SOURCING  In this section we discuss two recent examples where crowdsourcing contributed to identifying and apprehending the perpetrators. The first case is that of the Boston Marathon bombers while the second case is that of a mugger in New York City. We discuss these examples in detail since they will set the stage for all subsequent discussions.

A. The Boston Marathon Bombing  At 2:49 pm EDT on April 15, 2013 two bombs exploded near the finish line of the Boston Marathon. The explosions  killed 3 people and injured another 264 people [1]. On April 16, the day after the bombing, FBI special agent in charge Richard DesLauriers appealed to the public to submit any photos or videos that they might have to the investigators for review [2]. The expectation was that the FBI would be flooded with material since the Vancouver riot in 2011 brought 1,600 hours of video to that city?s police department for review [3].

In addition the expectation was that this could not be done automatically and would require many hours of human labor [4] .

At the same time that the authorities were working on the problem of identifying suspects, the general public got very interested in the problem. This interest took many forms. Some people posted their own photos in a variety of forums [5] and [6]. A number of sites devoted to ?solving? the Boston Marathon Bombing were set up on sites such as reddit [7, No longer public] and 4chan [8]. A guide to these efforts was posted by Adrian Chen [9]. In addition there were discussions about whether the amateurs would be able to ?crack the case? as well as some discussion about how long it might take for the authorities to solve the case [10].

During all this, the Boston Police and the FBI were quite busy working on the thousands of tips that it received [11].

On April 18, the FBI held a press conference at which it announced that they had identified two suspects and once again appealed to the public to help identify the two suspects and announced the creation of a special website for tips, bostonmarathontips.fbi.gov [12]. Adam Geller [13] described the response as electric.

The details of the final capture included another murder and the lockdown of parts of Boston. The result was that one suspect was killed and the other captured on April 19, 2013 [14]. The materials released were accurate enough for people to identify Dzhokhar Tsarnaev and Tamerlan Tsarnaev and inform the police, and for three friends of Dzhokhar to recognize him and try to destroy evidence that would point to him [15].

By supplying information, the public played a key role in solving this case. First the public supplied the photos and videos that led to pinpointing the suspects. Second, once the information about the suspects was released to the public, the perpetrators were forced out of hiding since it was clear to them that they would soon be recognized. It would be optimal if we could say that the suspects were identified by computer software running on all submitted data, but this does not seem     to be the case according to Steve Cherry [16].

In the Boston Marathon Bombing it appears that the public  helped by supplying the authorities with photos and videos and then identifying the perpetrators from the images presented by the authorities. It does not appear that the public was able to select the images from the ones publicly available. It also seems clear that releasing the images caused the Tsarnaev brothers to panic and reveal themselves through their actions.

In subsequent sections we will discuss the possibility of getting more help from the public given the current need for human labor to analyze crime scenes.

B. The Brooklyn Mugging  On Saturday March 9, 2013 a woman was mugged at 2:40 am as she exited the 18th Avenue F-train stop in Brooklyn NY. Fortunately she escaped without serious injury and also it was fortunate that there was adequate quality surveillance video of the incident. The police investigation stalled and on Tuesday April 2, 2013 the police released the video to the general public via the New York Times [17], the New York Post [18] and YouTube [19]. By April 3, 2013 members of the public had identified the perpetrator and left messages on the New York Times site [17, Comment 5] and the YouTube site [19, Comment 5]. A more complete discussion can be found on Gawker [20]. In summary, after a month without success the perpetrator was identified within less than 24 hours by multiple people who thought of doing some research on Facebook. The link to the original Facebook page can be found at [21].



III. USING INTELLIGENCE DATA  Our primary response to terrorist and criminal incidents seems to be reactive. A crime or terrorist incident must happen before our law enforcement infrastructure can react to it. It is all well and good that the public can assist in apprehending miscreants once they have committed their depredations, but it is in the best interests of everyone that they be stopped before they are able to carry out their plans. In principle, people expect that once we have information about possible suspects we can do something about them. Unfortunately, both recent and ancient history suggest that there are both psychological and legal principles that stand in the way of effectively using intelligence about suspicious people. This section presents some situations where clear warning signs were ignored.

A. Boston Marathon Bombing, April 15, 2013  The Boston Marathon Bombing provides an example of where warning were given, but not heeded. In 2010 the Russian Intelligence service became interested in the activities and communicated with the US. The events of 2011 are very interesting and are described in [22].

In 2012 Tamerlan traveled to Russia and spent 6 months hanging out with radicals some of whom were killed in battles with the Russian authorities [23]. Upon his return he created a YouTube channel on which he posted radical videos [24].

For more details about Tamerlan see [25].

Dzhokhar left less of trail [22]. The one item that is known about his is that he downloaded bomb making instructions from an Al-Qaeda website [26].

B. Columbine Massacre, April 20, 1999  Some interesting background on the Columbine High School Massacre can be found in Wikipedia [27] and in the CBS report [28].

To see a reproduction of Eric Harris?s webpages consult [29]. The affidavit described in [28] can be found at [30].

Finally, an informative video made by National Geographic about the Columbine massacre can be found at [31].

C. September 11, 2001  According to Philip Shenon [32] the internal conflict within the FBI prevented it from moving in a timely manner to mitigate the September 11 attact. Apparently the FBI knew quite some time before 9/11 that terrorists linked to Osama bin Laden were receiving flight training in the US and abroad [33]. Nearly a decade after that revelation it appears that things have not improved much [34].



IV. CONSTRAINTS  There are many similar instances of warning signs being ignored with subsequent bad results. It is worrisome to think that even if warnings are detected we are often unable to act effectively on them. Since we believe that in most cases the people ignoring the warning are not eager for the disaster to unfold we must assume that the reasons for ignoring warnings lie elsewhere. We believe that the following factors figure prominently in our ability to act effectively in the presence of warnings.

1) A legal system that is designed to punish criminals after they commit a crime, but makes it difficult to detain people before they commit crimes. This is obviously a complicated legal question, but we could perhaps begin by making it illegal to download instructions for building bombs and accept other limitations on ?free speech? if it aims is to injure or kill people.

2) We have insufficient resources for the job. This story can best be told via statistics that compare countries in several different categories. These statistics all come from International Statistics on Crime and Justice [35].

Most of the statistics are from about 2006/2007 although some come from 2000. First, the median number of police officers in countries around the world is about 303 per 100,000 of population [35, p.115]. The US rate is 224 per 100,000 [35, p. 136]. The US has 9 prosecutors per 100,000 of population [35, p. 138] and 11 judges per 100,000 of population [35, p. 140]. Unfortunately our incarceration rate is 762 per 100,000 of population [35, p. 164]. This rate is much higher than the rest of the world. The closest country to us is Russia with a rate of 613 per 100,000 of population [35, p. 165]. Most European countries have an incarceration rate of under 155 of 100,000 of population [35, p. 165]. Finally, we     have approximately 138 correctional personnel for each 100,000 of population [35, p. 141]. For comparison, the per capita number of correctional personnel in Germany is 44 per 100,000 and in England it is 85 per 100,000 [35, p. 140].

3) Acts of terrorism have a low rate of occurrence. While terrorist acts can be quite horrific, they happen relatively infrequently, so they tend to get obscured by common, everyday events.

The relatively low number of police and the high number of prisoners suggests that the legal system is focused on crime and is understaffed to handle that alone. With the highest per capita prison population in the world, the understaffed police force has insufficient resources to handle its main task.

Low probability events do not receive the attention they need.

According to the FBI website [36] there are 13,785 special agents and 22,117 professional staff. By comparison, in 2008 there were an estimated 400,000 distinct individuals listed in the Terrorist Database. This works out to 29 people per special agent. This, of course, is in addition to any other work that the agent must do. Since the staffing levels are not reasonable for what we expect the FBI to do (note that the special agents are only 38% of the staff) it is not surprising that they are not able to follow up all the leads that come to them.

It is clear that giving a greater role to the public can bring some much needed resources to the task of monitoring potential terrorists. This course is not without its own perils, but it needs to be considered. In addition, getting the public involved might generate more concern on the part of potential terrorists causing them to make more mistakes and thus reveal themselves more visibly. Another benefit from getting the public more involved is that it might improve the legal climate for dealing with these issues. We need to find ways to reduce the extremely high rate of incarceration in the United States so that more resources can be focused on the fight against terrorism.



V. NEIGHBORHOOD WATCH  The Neighborhood Watch program, now known as USAonWatch.org, was started in 1972 by the National Sher- iffs? Association to engage citizens in the fight against crime and to help communities bond together. There are neighbor- hood watch programs all over the country and you can find them using the ?Find a Program? button on the homepage of the main site [38].

USAonWatch provides a lot of training materials, holds conferences and does all it can to train people to run their programs safely and effectively. They have created a handy manual that can be downloaded from the Web [39]. They have already moved into the area of homeland security and view the fight against crime as part of the homeland security mission. For more information see [39, p. 1]. Chapter 8 of [39] is entitled ?Neighborhood Watch?s Expanded Role.? It deals with emergency preparedness and homeland security.

Recently a cloud has been cast over the Neighborhood Watch program because of the fatal shooting of Trayvon  Martin by George Zimmerman [40] who was a Neighborhood Watch Captain at the time of the shooting. George Zimmerman was not on Neighborhood Watch duty at the time of the shooting. Unfortunately, he ignored the instructions of the police to not confront Trayvon Martin. The Neighborhood Watch manual [39, p. 17] is even more explicit on this matter.



VI. WEB NEIGHBORHOOD WATCH  In 2003 we presented a paper entitled ?Web Neighborhood Watch,? [41] in which we proposed the creation of an ex- tension of the Neighborhood Watch program to encompass the web as a tool to fight crime. We noted even then that the Web had already been used to catch criminals in a case in which 1,200 quarters were stolen in a home burglary and neighborhood banks were placed on alert to look for someone with lots of quarters [42]. We are happy to report that the ideas presented in [41] have come to fruition through the evolution of the Web and technology and not because of the paper.

For example, USAonWatch.org, which was discussed in Section V, now has an app that runs on Android, iOS and Blackberry smartphones. The app is available on a different website [43] and costs $1.99. While the cost is minimal, it is disappointing that the app is not available for free to encourage its widespread use. Fortunately, there has been a lot of interest in this area. Both the Google Play Store and the Apple App Store feature many free and low cost apps that deal with reporting crimes, suspicious activity and infrastructure that needs attention. The Windows App store had only one app in this area, but the number is bound to increase rapidly. An interesting approach is taken by the Canvas company which permits businesses to create their own apps that run on all major mobile platforms. They have a number of security apps available on their Public Safety Application Store [44].

There has been an increase in online neighborhood com- munities. Two popular sites are i-Neighbors.org [45] and Nextdoor.com [46]. The Sacremento California police Depart- ment has spearheaded the use of Nextdoor.com in Sacremento and used it to capture some criminals [47].

The concept of a Web Neighborhood Watch includes the concept of observing websites of individuals and organiza- tions. We noted in Section III that there were warning signs for both the Boston Marathon Bombing and the Columbine High School Massacre. Terrorist organizations such as Al Qaeda [48] and Aum Shinrikyo, the instigators of the 1995 Sarin nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system [49], have main- tained and continue to maintain websites for communicating with their followers. Aum Shinrikyo, which now calls itself Aleph, has a website dedicated to the ?the liberation of soul? and the ?age of benevolence? [50]. Interestingly, this website acknowledges the past criminal behavior of Aum Shinrikyo and seeks to atone for its actions [51].

Al Qaeda websites tend to come and go in response to government pressure and quarreling within the extremist com- munity [52]. It was from an Al Qaeda website that the Boston Marathon Bombers learned how to make the bombs that they used [26].

Once the public gets involved many surprises can ensue. An operator of an adult website ended up highjacking the main Al Qaeda website at one point and was able to collect all the traffic for a period of five days [53]. Additional details are available at [54] and [55].

The Web Neighborhood Watch is being built even as we watch. With guidance and organization it can become a powerful tool in the fight against crime and terrorism. Perhaps people can help by keeping watch on lonely places to prevent crimes like the Brooklyn mugging we discussed in Section

II. Of course, it is important to make sure that the watchers do not physically interact with the watchees as happened in the Martin/Zimmerman clash. Perhaps this can be done using geolocation. In [41] we discussed an approach for geolocating IP addresses. This idea has been carried to a new level in [56].

There must also be the ability to submit tips anonymously, but responsibly. This is certainly a topic that needs to be further developed. Finally, we should mention the concept of Open-source warfare which is increasingly taking place in cyberspace [57]. A notable example of this can be found in the ?Beginner?s Guide to Cyberwarfare? which sought to affect the outcome of the 2009 Iranian election [58]. To the extent that computer systems control physical infrastructure it is possible for cyberwar to develop a kinetic component. A Web Neighborhood Watch can help secure systems in open- source warfare.



VII. BIG DATA  The term ?Big Data? is widely used and seems to mean different things to different people. Rather than defining Big Data in terms of a fixed amount of data, we use the term to mean having more data than you are able to handle effectively.

In short, you have a Big Data problem if you cannot effectively act on the data you have collected. For example, if you chronically have three data related tasks to carry out but only have the time and resources to carry out two of them, then you have a Big Data problem. As was discussed in Sections III and IV, the Homeland Security sector has a Big Data problem. It should be clear that with the proliferation of smartphones, high speed Internet connections, high speed wireless connections, the proliferation of sensors, it is very easy to overwhelm yourself with data to the extent that it is impossible to get anything done in a timely manner.

Big Data interests us from several perspectives. First, there are the technical issues of how to how to create large collec- tions of data. Second, there are the technical issues of how to analyze these large collections of data. Third, there are problems associated with acting based on the results of the data analysis.

Collecting data is the least of our problems. In general getting lots of data is quite easy as anyone who has done a Google search can attest to. The much harder part is analyzing the data and drawing useful conclusions. Even when useful conclusions are drawn, it is difficult for many people and organizations to take effective action as we have seen in  Section III. For the remainder of this section we will focus on the data analysis problem.

Two terms that are often heard in connection with analyzing Big Data are Map Reduce and Hadoop. Map Reduce is a technique for dividing certain large problems into small pieces that can be analyzed in parallel by ordinary computers in such a way that the analyses from the separate computers can be easily glued together to give the final answer. Hadoop is a particular software implementation of the Map Reduce approach that is proving to be very popular. We need to apply the Map Reduce principles to the extent possible in creating the Web Neighborhood Watch.



VIII. SOCIAL NETWORKS  So far we have mentioned Facebook and YouTube as valuable sources of information. They are especially valuable because people can?t help revealing a lot about themselves and there is no need for any special permission to access their information. Social networks enable you to follow your favorite terrorist without asking for search warrants or vio- lating the Constitution. At most you might need to join some networks. Furthermore, not only do you get access to valuable information, but the comments and other interactions allow you learn much about a person?s network and interests.

Another social network that deserves some mention is Twitter. People who use Twitter are everywhere and constantly snapping photos and videos and uploading them. Furthermore, many of the tweets contain geolocation information. It has been observed that Twitter affects the way that the news is reported and how quickly people expect results [59] and [60].

A very interesting use of tweets from the Boston Marathon Bombings was constructed by a team from Syracuse Univer- sity who arranged the geolocated tweets they received around the time of the bombings and arranged it on a map of Boston.

The map is interactive and you can see what the various tweet- ers had to say [61] and [62]. Twitter encourages people to use their materials and has a site devoted to developers with useful information that applies to a wide range of platforms and programming languages [63]. We should note that Facebook [64] and YouTube [65] also encourage developers to use their offerings.

A valuable social networking site that we have not men- tioned so far is Flickr. Its value comes from the fact that it starts its users off with a full terabyte of space and encour- ages them to upload their high resolution photos and videos without compressing them in any way. High quality images are especially valuable for homeland security. Like the other social networking sites it also has a developers? site [66].

There are new social networks springing into being con- stantly and each has its own twist. We discussed some of them in Section V. In addition, there are additional social media networks that should be considered [67].

Besides the social networks discussed in this section, there are still the powerful search engines such as Google, Bing and Ask. These can be harnessed directly. For information on doing this with Google look at [68]. Google Translate     will provide rough translations of websites so people without skills in a particular language are able to search through web materials in other languages [69].



IX. PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE DATABASES  In addition to all the information available through the social networks discussed in Section VIII there are some very useful databases available to the public that we want to discuss briefly in this section. The University of Maryland hosts what it refers to as the ?world?s largest unclassified database of terror attacks.? It permits users to search its archives and to download information in the form of CSV files. In principle you could download the entire database. The site also provides insightful reports, videos and other useful materials For more details see [70] and [71].

Another site worth mentioning is the Combating Terrorism Center located at West Point. It is an independent, privately funded, research and educational institution that provides material and conducts research on how to combat terrorism.

For more details see [72].

There are two noteworthy websites that deal with report- ing crime: CrimeReports [73] and SpotCrime [74]. In 2010 CrimeReports sued SpotCrime [75] and in 2011 an out-of- court settlement was reached [76]. SpotCrime has made its database of over 15 million crimes available to researchers and has partnered with US media companies to bring its crime data to the general public [77], [78].



X. RECOMMENDATIONS  This is an extraordinary time in the fight against terrorism and crime. We hope that this paper convinces the reader that never before has so much valuable data been available to the public. In addition, there seems to be great interest on the part of the public to help secure their communities. With these points in mind we make the following recommendations.

A. The Federal Government Should Coordinate Activities  There seems to be a proliferation of social networks and apps that are all collecting useful information. Unfortunately, they do not seem to be talking to one another or sharing data easily. Some planning and organziation might be very effective. The ideal situation would be that the Federal gov- ernment would help get the area organized and set up an independent leadership structure to run a clearinghouse for homeland security and crime information. This could be the command center for the National Web Neighborhood Watch program. Another area that would help would be to design a national homeland security app that would run on all major cellphone platforms and that would provide a uniform method of communicating data that would go to a national depository.

Everyone would be free to make use of the information.

People might argue that making the information freely avail- able would help terrorists and criminals who might tap into this information source. A counter argument to this is that it would complicate the lives of terrorists and criminals and perhaps discourage them when they saw how much is being collected.

Besides, we would rather use up the time of terrorists and criminals on IT issues rather than give them more time to build bombs and hurt people.

It is important for homeland security professionals to take the public?s help seriously. There are a number of very success- ful programs that feature cooperation between volunteers and professionals. Three that come to mind are the Civil Air Patrol [79], the Amateur Radio Relay League (HAM operators) [80], and the Citizen Corps [81] (the main FEMA readiness site is at [82]). The Civil Air Patrol is referred to as the United States Air Force Auxiliary. Perhaps the Citizen Corps can take the lead in organizing the public effort in Homeland Security.

B. Make Better Use of Smartphones  The modern smartphone is a very powerful computing plat- form with an extensive array of sensors along with impressive audio and video capabilities. It is a highly mobile platform capable of generating immense amounts of data that could be very useful for homeland security applications. We need to make sure that our plans make full use of the capabilities of these devices.

C. Resolve Legal Issues  As noted in Section III we have often had intelligence about terrorists and criminals, but have not always been able to act on it. This suggests revamping the legal system so that we can take bolder steps in detaining people who have the potential to cause harm. We should be able to take action before disaster strikes.

We need to examine the entire area of anonymous submis- sions to make sure that we can act on anonymous tips and yet discourage irresponsible or even criminal submissions.

We need to make it easier for the good guys to take action against bad guys in cyberspace. Right now there are many obstacles to enforcing regulations that discourage responsible cyber defenders from scanning and taking other actions against the enemies of the people. We discussed in Section VI the success that Jon Messner had in hijacking an Al Qaeda website. If we keep the terrorists busy in cyberspace, it reduces their effectiveness in physical space.

We need to make sure that we provide both legal and phys- ical security to volunteers in these citizen oriented homeland security programs. The Martin/Zimmerman case shows some of the areas that need to be addressed.

D. Open Up More Data Sources  There are many webcam feeds that are currently kept under wraps. It might be beneficial to make some of those available to the public. For example, volunteers can help watch over people who need to travel at times when there are few other people around. They might be able to engage people in conversation both to reassure worried citizens and to let potential perpetrators know that they are being watched. We can make sure that the watchers are physically separated from the sites they monitor. Perhaps people in California can monitor subway stations in NY and vice versa. The Internet     opens up a realm of possibilities that need to be thoughtfully explored. For many people activities like this can replace some of the ?reality shows? that are so popular.

There are probably all sorts of databases that can be put before the public. Many of the arguments for keeping information hidden are weak and keep many creative minds from helping to analyze the data. As we have demonstrated the resources available for data analysis are inadequate which has led to people creating automated schemes of dubious legality.

We should let the public help in this effort which will expand the available analysis greatly and get more buy-in from the public.

E. Set Up An Educational Program  Clearly a lot more needs to be done in educating the public about hazards and protection. There needs to be a concerted effort made to integrate disaster preparedness and security concerns in public education to better prepare for disasters and to spot dangers. Two recent stories show how Tilly Smith, a 10 year old British girl [83], and Martina Maturana, a 12 year old Chilean girl [84], saved hundreds of lives with their knowldege of Tsunamis. This educational program can also instruct citizens in the basics of cybersecurity, which many citizens would find quite useful.

F. Make Better Use of Higher Education  Many faculty members and students are eager to contribute to the security of the nation. They just need opportunities.

Many are extremely capable and would benefit greatly from some real-world experience. Having been director of two cyberdefense competitions that produced national champions [85], we can attest to the fact that motivated students are willing to devote a great deal of time and can accomplish amazing things when properly directed and supported. These sorts of efforts need to be created more broadly.

G. Final Thoughts  Israel has had to live with a great many threats and attacks.

We should study the lessons they have learned [86] and adapt them to our own circumstances. The time has come for us to broaden the participation of the public in homeland security.

