Advances in information technology for Smart Grids

Abstract? This article discusses recent trends in Smart Grid technology. Three selected aspects are (1) distributed information technology (IT), used for smart metering and multi- agent based controls, (2) big-data, resulting out of metering, sensors and other IT-enabled sources of information, and (3) an intelligent demand side, where demand response serves as contribution to grid services. New elements in the grid, most notably large numbers of fluctuating renewable energy sources, and new functionality like markets make it necessary to introduce methods and technologies from other domains that already faced such changes.



I. INTRODUCTION  Smart Grids [1-8] are a dynamic field of research and development and we are currently witnessing a phase where research ideas are brought to the ground and first installations are successfully rolled out. One of the first concepts borrowed from IT was data management: smart meters are rolled out around the globe to improve the performance of the distribution grid, to ease customer management, billing, feedback information and finally contribute to efficiency via better understanding of customer processes. Distributed intelligence [9], implemented in Multi-Agent Systems is another powerful ingredient for smart grids. Both lead to massive amounts of data that need to be transported, processed and understood. However, one of the most important players that gets enabled via IT is the customer.

Previously a passive element that is included into decision via its statistical behavior, the customer now becomes an active market player, a seller and buyer and might even team up with other customers to increase his significance.

This article covers the current state of these aspects and analyses its main challenges.



II. ADVANCED METERING INFRASTRUCTURE AND SMARTPOWER ROUTERS  Advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) or smart meters collect data in intervals (e.g. half hour) to send for data processing, usually for analysis or billing. Another important usage is for remotely controlling and limiting throughput, controlling distributed generation or detecting faults or misusage. Suppose that everyone in a neighborhood arrives home at 6 pm and put their electric vehicle to charge at the  same time. The resulting collective load could exceed transport capacity and impact operations. On the other hand, if the grid can recognize and sequence, enforcing slight delays in when it begins delivering electricity for the plug-ins, the same system could operate without overload. Such simple application of intelligence must be available locally, and the grid could define an EV by a typical electrical load signature.

With distributed intelligence, data is captured at the edge of the smart grid, at the point where electricity is consumed.

Distributed intelligence is the direction the grid will go, and it will amplify the benefits of smart grid technologies. In addition, such (hybrid) EV?s can produce (or at least store and feedback) power, and even services at the distribution level. There is a radical change when traditional consumers (residential, commercial or industrial) produces power in addition to only consuming power. This bidirectional entity is typically called a prosumer. Smart meters are expected to offer benefits to consumers and utilities, such as energy saving through active participation from consumers, fault detection and forecasting, more reliable energy supply in spite of energy generation from various sources such as renewable sources, and dynamic pricing schemes [10]  Since the prosumer sources and loads are not necessary located at the same electric point, the prosumer has to (co)operate with a grid to transport electricity. It also needs to deal with both purchasing as well as selling with some capabilities of economic optimization. Artificial intelligence enhances the dynamic control of prosumers with learning algorithms that can predict the prosumer?s consumption and generation profiles, ad well as the price of electricity in real- time. Some autonomous trading agents can use such predictions to maximize their profit in the electricity market, and efficient algorithms can manage congestion with market operation in distribution networks while guaranteeing good equilibrium conditions in the system. Human-agents interaction mechanisms allow prosumers to guide their trading decisions that take into account the customers? daily constraints and preferences to consume or produce energy.

The concept of the Smart Power Router (SPR) as an intelligent and flexible interface between local control areas is one of the ways in which the emerging active distribution system might operate [11]. An SPR is a back-to-back converter system (hardware), where a Power Flow Controller (PFC) decides set points based on distributed control     algorithms (software) implemented in a Multi-Agent System (MAS) fashion (middleware).

In order to discuss the advantages of MAS based control versus classical methodologies for applications in power systems, it is important to understand how the power grid evolved in the last decades. Classical control methods implemented via SCADA (supervisory control and data acquisition) are fully functional in today?s grid. But the contemporary developments towards the future smart grid will require integrating millions of devices such as distributed storage, intelligent loads and distributed energy resources.

Control systems will then have to operate efficiently on a large scale, despite very disperse faults that may impact the system. SCADA was and is not designed for that.

MAS are distributed by design with three main attributes: (i) local knowledge, (ii) flexible interactions, and (iii) bottom- up control approach. Local knowledge means that the agents? views of the environment are local, and as a consequence, their knowledge is limited to only what they need to know.

The perception of agents can be limited to their neighbors, enabling to reduce data communications. For example, for a microgrid, an agent for a distributed generator does not need to receive information about a small load, several miles away.

Therefore, a distributed MAS architecture contributes to a scalable distribution grid.

A flexible designed MAS incorporates plug-and-play, robust and fault-tolerant procedures when required by changes in the environment. For example, if a generator or load agent is disconnected, i.e., turned on or off (independently of whether it has been scheduled or not) or loses communication, the MAS will acknowledge this modification and adapt to it. It will take it into account when taking decisions towards reaching its objectives (e.g., restoring system stability) after the event has been detected.

This method is superior, compared to most analytical control methods, where all possible events, changes and faulty conditions have to be predicted/considered when designing the control system in order to determine the most efficient corrective actions. In addition, a flexible MAS can add or remove new functionalities without requiring to completely redesigning the system, which could help lower development and maintenance costs. This characteristic is similar to how computer systems use their plug-and-play internal operations.

Fig. 1 When an agent joins an existing MAS, it announces its name and services to the other agents so that they can interact with him. This figure illustrates an example with an electric vehicle.

The previous two features enable the third one, i.e., a  bottom-up control approach. This feature is well-suited for  complex and distributed problems. Agents can operate autonomously, and cooperate or compete with each other if required. The complexity of the control system can be highly reduced by distributing tasks among communicating agents.

This property could play an important role in a MAS designed for a smart grid with a high penetration rate of distributed energy sources. The grid would be divided into many microgrids containing local generators, loads and storage devices (Fig. 2). Intermediate layers, consisting of groups of microgrids for example, can also be added. When compared to control methodologies applied in current power systems, this would be a bottom-up approach instead, where decisions would be taken locally, in a decentralized or distributed way.

Fig. 2 One of the expected evolutions of future power grids is a change from a centralized and radial architecture (left) to a decentralized network of microgrids (right). Circles represent energy sources and loads, but also the corresponding agents.

Proactive agents have goals which can be local or global. A  single agent usually has local goals while a group of agents may have global goals. For example, maintaining a steady voltage is mainly a local goal for a power source, but maintaining balance between generation and supply is global and cannot be reached by a single agent, requiring cooperation. Such pro-activity might be enabled by autonomous intelligence with information based on knowledge about the environment (e.g., the grid), and when appropriate with further information by asking other agents, and knowledge of required actions requested by other agents through communication that may help achieving global goals.

Agents can then take decisions based on such on-line knowledge and their goals, plan actions to perform, and finally execute them for achieving the required actions.

Agents need to have a social behavior compatible with other fellow agents, expressed under various forms. Their social organization can vary from one system to another and with time, as well as the way they interact with each other and take decisions, i.e., they can coordinate themselves and cooperate for reaching goals that may not be reachable by a single agent. Agents can influence the actions of others or act as interfaces through negotiations, requests and contracts.

In a peak storage decision a MAS may engage in a ?discussion? with other agents (such as power system brokers) about whether the load can be taken by another source and maybe a better solution would arise from economics and technical point-of-views. Another scenario is when a small DC microgrid has a bus voltage maintained by a battery. If such battery tends to run towards a low state-of- charge, the battery agent can ask other agents to replace it in order to control the bus voltage.

MAS also enable to specify communication aspects, that are rarely considered in power systems studies, and are an important feature of smart grids. This property enables MAS- based prototype systems to be closer to implementation, the system is already distributed and is easily deployable.

Defining what each system entity (i.e., agent) does also facilitates specifying the required hardware. Smart-grid control requires flexibility and extensibility, and those are inherent features of MAS. Fig. 3 shows how MAS enable communication and intelligent decision-making for power systems, where agents are associated to sensors, actuators, communication network and the grid. MAS have been showing potential as an efficient control framework for developing the technology of smart-grids, including voltage/VAR control, restoration, energy management, monitoring and fault analysis. Interesting state-of-the-art reviews can be found in [12].

Fig. 3 MAS are well suited for monitoring and controlling power grids, and especially for smart grids where communication and distributed assets are intensively present.



III. "BIG DATA" AND THE SMART GRID  Compared with the traditional power grid, the Smart Grid is characterized by concepts of sustainability, evolvability, interoperability, and improved observability/controllability.

However, what makes Smart Grid truly unique is the abundance of data used for monitoring, control and protection purposes, i.e., big data. Big data is a new term which is being widely used dealing with huge datasets and their analytics [13].  Big data reflects the true nature of the Smart Grid paradigm; however, the concept is by no means recent. With the advent of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) in the  1980s, Customer Relationship Management (CRM) in 1990s, and e-Commerce, and later Mobile Commerce (m- Commerce) in the beginning of the 21st century, major companies and institutions have long been involved in collection, mining and interpretation of large amounts of raw data. What makes the new trend challenging is the fact that the extent of the data to be collected and analyzed is beyond the capacity and capabilities of most traditional data analytics tools [14].

A modern power utility, now an enterprise comprising energy management and market operations, faces this challenge everyday. From the highest level of power generation to the lowest levels of end-use consumption, the measurement, status and control data are being generated on the fly, and in hundreds of thousands, if not millions. Not long ago, utilities were formed in the shape of Vertically Integrated Utilities (VIU), where one entity owned all the generation, transmission and distribution infrastructure, and would dispatch system resources based on a predefined performance metric. In this environment, consumers were reactive, and were modeled as dumb loads with a quasi- steady-state nature. The introduction of competitive wholesale electricity markets, efficient technologies for harvesting renewable resources of energy, and a cost- effective end-to-end data communication has changed this picture. Independent Power Producers (IPPs) are now major players in the modern power grid whose impacts on the energy market can no longer be ignored. Moreover, consumers have evolved from reactive entities into proactive ones, thanks to Demand Response [15]. High fidelity sensors and actuators, now cheaper than ever, are deployed out on the field in order to provide means for monitoring and control. To add to this already complicated picture, the nature of the loads is becoming highly dynamic and largely unpredictable.

At the power distribution level, demand that was once comfortably modeled as a combination of constant- impedance, constant-power or constant-current components now consists of a myriad of dynamic loads often equipped with power electronics converters.

How do utilities adapt to this changing environment? The slow load growth, aging equipment, rate freezes and regulatory uncertainty are forcing power utilities to look for ways to increase earnings [16]. In order to stay competitive, they must use techniques to perform asset management so they can balance asset performance, asset cost and failure risks. At the same time, financial and environmental concerns sometimes prevent utilities from performing adequate capacity expansion projects. In order to avoid damages to their reliability indices, deferral of such projects must be offset by other solutions such as effective utilization of demand responsive loads. At the same time, in order to maintain security constraints of the grid, the utility would have to forecast ?as accurately as possible? the power and energy available from intermittent resources such as wind and solar, as well as the sporadic charging power demanded by electric vehicles (EV). This requires the utilities to measure     and maintain records of equipment status/data, sub-minute market trends, short-term and long-term weather data, meter data, customer behavior patterns, and maybe even EV owner driving patterns, to name a few. A successful approach calls for both breadth (number of points) and depth (resolution) in data collection. This begins to paint the picture of the daunting task modern utilities face; one that in all certainty will continue to get even worse.

In the absence of abundant data, businesses and utilities rely on population sampling and statistical inference techniques in order to extract trends and patterns applicable to the whole population. However, the accuracy of these techniques may be sacrificed when generalizing the extracted patterns to the individual points. Big data, on the other hand, provides accuracy, albeit at the expense of additional technical challenges in data analytics. These challenges are threefold:  (a) Data Volume ? sensors, meters and various monitoring nodes capture measurement and status data from multitude of points from across the grid. For example, instead of measuring the load at the feeder-head or lateral-heads, it is now possible to access thousands of individual smart meters behind service transformers. This level of granularity was technically not possible before.

(b) Data Rate ? although some specific data types, e.g., status data or device health data, may be reported by exception (RBE), majority of measurement data can be collected at very high rates, moving from hourly to every few minutes, and perhaps every few seconds in the near future.

(c) Data Structure ? to make matters worse, much of the available data is likely to be unstructured which requires additional analytics in order to extract meaningful information from it. Efforts are being made by the standardization bodies to create and propose structured data models, but these efforts are in the catching-up mode at best.

In the field of data analytics in Smart Grid, there is much room for innovative solutions. To name a few: ? Storage: Limited capacity may pose technical challenges,  as new data continue to arrive at a conceivably high rate.

This is specifically troublesome for distributed solutions and multi-agent schemes. Things might get worse as the nature and structure of the data changes from raw bit- stream to structured data that aims to contain more information in each data point.

? Processing Speed: With high data rate, there comes the need for fast real-time, or near-real-time, data analytics solutions. This calls for more efficient algorithms for data mining, pattern recognition, data classification and trend extraction. This is an overwhelming task given the fact that data is expected to be a mix of structured and unstructured data. For example, an algorithm designed to extract customer consumption patterns for demand response purposes, may have to simultaneously deal with  structured data, e.g., meter data, and unstructured data, e.g., readings from room occupancy sensors.

? Communication Infrastructure: Theoretically, a two-way communication path must exist between all sensors/actuators in the field and the central processing unit. A limited bandwidth network would fail under the burden, while an overly-designed network would be wasteful of the bandwidth at the times of low data transfer. Usage of data concentrators and data aggregators may offer an interim solution for reducing the data bottleneck, but in the long-run it would be postponing the inevitable.

? Privacy and Security: These are delicate issues with currently no definitive answer on the horizon. The question of ownership and sharing of personal data is always a tricky one. Regulatory efforts are expected to tackle this issue, and once an acceptable solution is devised, mechanisms ought to be put in place to prevent unauthorized access to the data. End-use consumers would definitely demand the final control over their privacy choices.

Big-data technologies are required to be able to  economically and efficiently extract value from very large volumes of a wide variety of data in a timely fashion, through high-velocity capture, discovery, and analysis. Real-time collection, analysis, and solutions are especially essential to handle time-series dynamic big-data. In particular, how to predict future trends through understanding dynamic big-data collected in a large-scale network environment in a timely fashion is very challenging. For instance, in Smart Grid, a key problem is how to understand voltage variation stamps through mining dynamical data from tens of thousands of meters located in a vast distributed power distribution network in order to predict future trends and develop pro- active control strategies [17]. Another key problem is how to introduce dynamic energy pricing to reduce carbon footprints based on the forecast from mining the dynamic metering data [18].

Another aspect that may impact efficiency of data analytics, especially dynamic data analytics encountered in Smart Grid (such as those time-series data from smart meters and measuring equipment such as phase measurement units, PMU), is the network topology. In recent years, the study of complex networks has attracted a lot of attention from many scientific disciplines, such as mathematics, physics, biology, chemistry, and engineering. The studies attempt to address questions associated with large-scale networks with non- trivial topological features beyond the characteristics of simple networks (e.g. random networks), such as social networks, biological networks and computer networks. Smart Grid presents a typical scenario where theories of complex networks can play a role [11]. When networks become too big and sophisticated, traditional power systems approaches may fail due to the explosion of dimensionality (a large number of active participating elements) and complexity (a variety of energy sources such traditional power generation     and renewable sources). Complex networks theory may provide an alternative, effective way to deal with Smart Grid issues. For example, some statistical properties such as path length and degree distribution may be used to characterize power networks for vulnerability analysis [19] or discriminate some sub-networks to vastly improve computation efficiency without significantly scarifying accuracy. Because of the dynamic nature of Smart Grid, modeling of these properties is another way to understand the meanings and dynamic changes of them and predict their future trends.

However, research in this direction is still in infancy and opens up a new frontier for inter-disciplinary research. It is envisaged that by integrating the theories of complex networks, data analytics, and intelligent systems, it is possible to analyse dynamic behaviour, identify patterns, and design intervention and control strategies for Smart Grid in a timely fashion. Taking advantage of characteristics of complex network dynamics, topology, and architecture in data analytics will result in much efficient computational algorithms without compromising accuracy and precision.



IV. DEMAND RESPONSE AND THE SMART GRID  Within the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Smart Grid Conceptual Model [20], the two classes of entities that may interact with the Utility/ISO for the purposes of DR include Customers and Demand Response Providers (DRPs). Customers are those entities that consume energy and their participation to DR programs may be voluntary or mandatory. DRPs are intermediaries between the Utility/ISO and the customers and provide a range of services related to DR.

Most customers necessitate technical and financial support from the utility in order to install automated devices for DR since load management technology or Energy Management Systems (EMSs) are not able to automatically react to signals sent by utilities. Besides, once DR equipment is installed, most customers require additional assistance in order to successfully take advantage of the technology [21].

According to the amount of the consumption within their facilities, customers can be divided into the following classes [22]: ? Large Commercial and Industrial (C&I) ? Small C&I ? Residential ? Individual Plug-in Electric Vehicles (PEVs) ? Fleet of PEVs  Large C&I customers usually have within their facilities the most advanced technologies for controlling the loads (typically related to manufacturing and process control for industrial customers) and may consequently take part in either wholesale or retail electricity markets. Inside commercial facilities, instead, the main loads are normally those used for the management of the facilities, such as Heating, Ventilation, and Air- Conditioning (HVAC) systems and lighting. Most industrial customers and certain large commercial customers may use on-site backup generation for  DR since they have on site generation equipment, either for emergency backup or auxiliary power.

Furthermore, some industrial facilities, such as pulp and paper manufacturing have autonomous, discrete, production processes that, in case of need, may be shifted to other times of the day or to different days.

Residential Customers, characterized by relatively small and somewhat limited types of loads, are not actually inclined to invest much in order to manage their electrical usage in terms of both time and money. They usually only take part in retail electricity markets and mainly participate in direct load control programs.

In the near future this is likely to change thanks to the deployment of new standards and technologies such as AMI that permits lower cost equipment in the marketplace. New standards and technologies for the building automation systems will also allow smart homes providing technical support to the smart grids. Small C&I Customers are diverse and, in some cases, seem more like Residential Customers while in others cases look more like Large C&I Customers.

PEVs represent an important new load on existing distribution systems and load-shifting will become more popular due to their diffusion.

However, if the distribution systems will not be correctly reinforced, their usage in DR programs may determine voltage problems, a degradation of the power quality, and even damage to utility and consumer equipment [23].

A. Load Classification and demand packages (DPs) identification DR requires loads classification in order to assess the  responsive demand potential in end-user facilities and to organize the customer energy consumption [24]. In order to analyze and rank the individual processes that conform the load, some criteria should be adopted. The most important are:   ? Priority: whether the supply can be curtailed or not, ? Storage capability: whether the interruption of the process  implies the suppression of the service provided by the appliance or not,  ? Re-scheduling time: the time in advance that the specific process needs to be changed.

Similar individual processes can be aggregated in order to  quantify the quality and characteristics of the demand packages (DPs), each characterized by the following parameters [24]:   ? Time horizon in which the demand patterns can be  foreseen, that varies from years, for long term load participation, to minutes for short term load participation;  ? Demand and service flexibilities, furnishing the information related to the quantity of predicted demand that can be modified and to the rate by which these changes can be made. Load structure and the availability of communication and control systems determine the     flexibility of demand.

According to these parameters, the following packages can be distinguished for the demand acting in electricity markets [24]:   ? Long-term DPs that can be identified one year ahead.

? Medium-term DPs that can be scheduled with a horizon of  24 hours, these types of DPs may bid in one-day-ahead energy markets as well as in reserve markets [25]. The participation in these markets would require extra communication capabilities to furnish the market operator with the exact amount of the hourly traded energy by the customer.

? Short-term DPs that can be foreseen and controlled in a 1- h span of time, and may require minor changes in the control of flexible specific loads. Loads characterized by storage facilities belong to this group and may participate in balancing markets by offering the load reduction up to 30 min before the dispatch. Extra communication requirements are required for the participation in these markets in order to provide the system operator with the exact amount of energy sub-hourly (such as every 5 min) traded by the customer.

Dispatchable DPs including real-time controlled loads that  may allow taking part in ancillary services markets; for every load set participating in these DPs a two-way communication is required. The customer may offer the previously described DPs to market and system operators either directly or through a retailer, that, in order to offer more significant demand bids can take advantage of the similar DPs offered by homogeneous or heterogeneous customers [26].



V. CONCLUSIONS  This paper has reviewed and discussed advanced trends for design and implementation of contemporary smart grids: (i) distributed IT systems, (ii) big-data management and the requirements of (iii) intelligent demand side. All of such can be enabled via information technology that needs to be harmonized with power engineering.

The authors expect that the members of the IEEE IES Technical Committee on Smart Grids will further contribute for the advance of smart grid based systems, and expand the ideas presented in this paper towards novel contributions for our IEEE Industrial Electronics Society.

