Fluctuations of the Chinese Real Estate Market: Price Stickiness and Non-  equilibrium

Abstract?Price stickiness is a problem faced by macro controlling and policy making, also is the core idea of the neo- Keynesians and emerging neo-classical scholars. The research on the sticky price of Chinese real estate market has positive policy implications. We use 22 big and medium cities monthly housing price data in China from Jan.2006 to Nov.2012. We research from multiple perspectives of price fluctuation frequency, amplitudes, tendencies and pricing pattern. We find that the eastern cities get a lower price adjustment frequency and show strong price rigidity, but at the same time, 1-month and 12-month results show that the amplitudes of eastern cities are lager than that of central and western cities.

We decompose the housing price into state-dependent and time-dependent parts and find a significant non- equilibrium characteristic of price fluctuations. First, when the price goes up, it behaves more like a monopoly seller market and tends to be price-determined pricing pattern, however, It show competitive market pricing pattern when in the contraction market condition; Second, the state-dependent coefficients of eastern cities are larger indicating that the eastern cities get higher market-oriented degree of real estate market, the price fluctuations are determined more by market factors.

Keywords-real estate; price stickness; pricing pattern; asymmetry

I. INTRODUCTION With the development of global urbanization and  financial shocks, real estate market plays an important role in the macro economic society. First, the real estate market stimulate the development of real economy through the huge investment quantities, on the other side, its capital-intensive features will make the supply and demand sides associated with the virtual financial markets in terms of the capital constraints and inter-temporal configuration of issues. The recent three years statistic data of statistical bulletin from the National Bureau showed that, the real estate industry direct investment come up to 5.756, 7.569 and 9.236 trillion Yuan in 2010, 2011 and 2012, respectively, are 14.462%, 16.049% and 17.784% in the percentage of GDP. Consider other indirect factors, it can be said that contemporary Chinese economic growth, employment, financial security, the gap between the rich and the poor, many other social and livelihood issues are closely tied up with the real estate market. The housing price fluctuations are undoubtedly the core issues concerning the overall situation, since the price  fluctuations will not only affect the residents pay ability and investment decisions, but also can transmitted to the general level of consumption and domestic demands through the wealth effect channel. Further, it also can reflect the market bubbles and the derivative financial security, the gap between the rich and the poor as well as other sensitive topics. Therefore, the analysis of the housing price fluctuations can significantly reveal the complexity and nonlinearity for the long-term macroeconomic stability.

. However, a controversial problem is that the political controlling efforts have been enhanced in recent years, weather the monthly rising housing price data of 70 large and medium cities from the Statistical Bulletin 1 , or the market overreaction or even various distortions transaction behavior under the ?Five Rules?, it seems that the frequent regulation do not really catch the real estate market price fluctuations, conversely, but have raised market expectations of confusion and even panic and eventually lead to policy and market dubious. It is worth pondering in the time of rapid economic growth, accelerated urbanization and unprecedented release of the housing needs, what is the micro mechanism of real estate market fluctuations? Do it show the degree of price stickiness or other characteristics?

This is undoubtedly related to the micro-foundation of policy making, also is the fundamental issue that the precision of the regulation and the expected flexibility in managing that need to be clarified.



II. LITERATURE REVIEW The sticky price theory can divide into two major fields,  the first is focused on the maximize profits of manufactures and the games between supply and demand pricing methods, such as menu costs(Hicks, 1935; Barro,1972), fair pricing(Rotemberg,2005) and mantissa pricing(Kashyap, 1995). The second issue research the information stickiness effects on price fluctuations. Stigler(1942,1946) consider   1 Under the background of the ?New Five Rules? in Mar, 2013, the Mar, 2013 70 cities housing price on statistical bulletin of the National Statistic Bureau shows that, the num of the cities that price rise is 68, unchanged is 1, the largest rising amplitude is 3.2%; comparing with the same time last year, the num of the cities that price fall is 67, unchanged is 1, the largest amplitude is 11.2%.

that consumers price searching activity under the incomplete information is constrained by the information cost and ultimately cause the transaction price stickiness.

Taylor(1980) believes that manufactures usually follow a fixed production plan to adjust the price, Calvo(1983) considers that manufactures follows a fixed promotion of each phase to adjust the price randomly. There are also scholars from the perspective of viscosity model(Mankiw and Reis,2002;2006), learning model(Evans and Honkapohja,2001) and the heterogeneity of expectations(Branch and McGough,2004) to explain price stickiness. Kitamura(2008) and Knotek(2010) combines the sticky information theory and menu costs theory and improve the explanatory power of the macro price data.

Dupor(2010) established the Phillip curve model incorporating sticky price and information model thus explained the U.S.A inflation at some extant. Mankiw and Reis(2010) consider that even not considering the cost of information, the individual information processing capacity is limited and uneven, also makes it possible to slow the dissemination of information, and ultimately lead to lags of price changes.

Recently, a new trend is that some scholars use standard statistical methods and price decomposition model to extract the price stickiness information and research the market structure meaning from the perspectives of time-dependent pricing (TDP) and state-dependent pricing (SDP)(Klenow and Kryvtsov,2008; Drainage Shen Ning, 2012) which provides the background for the implementation of political regulations. One of the main conclusions is that if the price decomposition results are primarily related to time, implying a lower market-oriented level and less competition, such as the developing countries in the common law of price fluctuations (Gagnon,2009). Conversely, if the relationship between price adjustment and market conditions is significant., implying a higher market level, the impact of price adjustment strategy is more effective, such as Europe, the United States and other countries(Klenow and Kryvtsov, 2008; Lein, 2010).

The housing price has aroused widespread concerns since it plays an important role in macroeconomic market, the research can be divided into two categories. The first research field mainly focus on a variety of exogenous variables, such as the effects of price fluctuations on policy evaluation. Other researches focus on the relationship between housing characteristics and prices, such as location, floor, orientation, transportation and other neighborhood characteristics impacts on housing prices, for the Hednoic Model, which aims to provide a reference point for housing transactions and taxes. In summary, the existing researches provide a useful reference for people to research house price and its fluctuations, but from a more practical point of view, why the housing price performance under the intensive policy regulations is still uncertain? Do it imply the sticky price effects as well as the role of investment properties of asymmetric adjustment mechanism? In fact, these are the details that we need to aware when considering the regulation timing, regional differences, and effects evaluation of the micro regulation implementation.

Unfortunately, the existing studies seem to be lack of consideration of these issues, also is the focus of market expectations management that need to be clarify. We note that today?s government regulations and policies concern much about price stickiness and its nonlinear characteristics, and try to eliminate price stickiness( Branch et , 2009 ; Reis , 2009 ) and strive to control ?Scientifically? ( Mishkin , 2007 ) through the enhancement of policy transparency, credibility and forward looking capability.

The dual properties of consumption and investment of real estate, as well as the market structure, location, operating status, behavior finance and even financial income and other factors, all these factors can influence the complexity of the price fluctuations. Based on the model of Klenow and Kryvtsov(2008), we decompose the housing price fluctuations into time, space and states conditions, which not only contribute to the observed dynamic changes from short-term to long-term, but also reveals the non- equilibrium characteristic of housing price fluctuations on the dimensions of state and space respectively. In this paper, we use the housing price data of 22 representative cities in China, the monthly data are from Jan 2006 to Nov 2012, and discuss the price stickiness and non-equilibrium from the perspective of frequency, amplitude, orientation, and pricing patterns, also provide a new perspective for the refinement of political regulations and controlling decisions.



III. DATA AND MODEL DEVELOPMENT Considering the long time span of housing price data,  the price stickiness can be derivative through the frequency, amplitude and tendency of the price adjustment, and thus label the ?Taps? of different cities, further, the pricing model and decomposition methods can help us find the inherent laws and implied market structure from its adjustment mechanism.

A. Calculation of Price Stickiness Index 1. Amplitude The amplitude of pricing changes may be spatial  different considering the city location, public infrastructure, economic development and other source endowment conditions, the responses of information shocks for different cities are not synchronized, so we analyze the 1-month amplitude and 10-month amplitude respectively in the model.

, , ,, ( ) / ( ) / ( ) / 1,12  n n  it m it i t m i t mi m t t  R R n p p p n m? ? ? ? ? ?? ? ? ?? ? ? 	?     Where we only consider when ,  i m  R ? to exclude the unchanging data, n is the num of observations in different time scales.

2. Tendency The financial commodity prices rise and fall show  significant asymmetry based on the existing research, such as the ?two eight phenomenon?, which can be further explained by the ?frame effect? of behavior finance theory.

We focus on the differences of house prices fluctuations     under rise and fall two states, which undoubtedly has a strong practical significance, which also compensate for the related research blanks in the related fields.

Define the price rising indicator ,it mI ? and falling  indicator ,it mI ? . When ,it i t mp p ? , , 1it mI  ? ?  , or else  , 0it mI ? ? ; when ,it i t mp p ?? , , 1it mI  ? ? , or else , 0it mI ? ? ,  thus we can obtain the price rising tendency and the corresponding falling tendency is  , , , ,/ ( ) n n  i m it m it m it m t t  g I I I? ? ? ?? ?   - - , , , ,/ ( )  n n  i m it m it m it m t t  g I I I? ?? ?   B. Pricing Pattern and Price Decomposition  In this section, we decompose the housing price fluctuations into time-dependent parts and state-dependent parts to reveal the market structure and the policy orientation through pricing pattern model. We research 1-month and 12- month pricing pattern respectively based on the work of Gargon (2009) and Klenow&Krystov(2008), and divide the price changes periods into up and down two regimes, which can provide a more complete results to reveal its dynamic and asymmetrical features.

First, we assume that the price fluctuations weights of different cities are same, we can divide the price rates into fraction of the cities that the price changes and price change amplitude(Liang shenning, 2012):  , , , ,( / ) [( ) / ]tt m it i t m it i t m i t m i it m  p p p p p p p  ? ? ? ? ?  ? ? ? ? ? ?    Where ,it mI is the price-change indicator, when ,it i t mp p ?? , , 1it mI ? , or else , 0it mI ? , then (6) can be written as:  ,  ,  , ,  , , ,  [( ) / ] ( )  t m  t m  it i t m i t m i  t m it m i it m  ifr dp  p p p I  I ?  ? ?? ?      ?????  ???????????  ,t mfr is the fraction of the cities that the house prices are changed, ,t mdp is the monthly price changing rates. So if  ,t m? is more related to ,t mfr , means when the fraction of the cities that the price change increase, the effects on housing price rates are significant, this is more likely to be state- dependent. Conversely, when ,t m? is related to ,t mdp , which means the relationship between price fluctuation and price change amplitude is more significant, and is not so much related to the market conditions thus tends to be time- dependent.

Further, considering the market conditions, we divide the monthly price rates into the sum of rising and falling two sectors.

, ,  , ,  , , , , , ,  , , , , ,  [( )/ ] [( )/ ] ( )( ) ( )( )  t m t m  t m t m  it m it i t m i t m it m it i t m i t m i i  t m it m it m i iit m it m  i i fr fr  dp dp  I p p p I p p p I I  I I ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ? ? ? ? ?  ? ? ? ?  ? ? ? ?         ????? ?????  ????????????? ?????????????  Where ,t mfr ? is the fraction of the cities that the price goes  up, and ,t mdp ?  is the corresponding housing price  rates; ,t mfr ? and ,t mdp  ?  are the corresponding values when in a contraction market condition.

C. Data Source The house price data in this paper come from SouFang  Web and 365 real estate web, the observation window is from Jan 2006 to Nov 2012, total of 83 monthly data.2 As the start points of different cities housing price are not consistent, we choose 22 cities as our research objectives, Nanjing, Wuhan, Chengdu , Dalian , Xiamen , Xi'an , Changsha , Fuzhou , Shenyang , Zhengzhou , Beijing , Shanghai , Tianjin , Shenzhen , Guangzhou , Hangzhou, Wuxi, Suzhou, Hefei , Haikou , Nanchang and Qingdao. We can see that the chosen 22 cities almost come from the National Bureau of Statistics Data Base and thus be relatively objective and representative.



IV. ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS In this section, we give the empirical results of the  proposed models and algorithm. The frequency, amplitude and tendency of housing price fluctuations are presented in the first part and then the pricing pattern results are given in the second part.

A. Amplitude of Price Fluctuations We measure the magnitude of price changes through the  up and down two conditional states, Fig.1 and Fig.2 show 1- month and 12-month price changes amplitude respectively to observe the dynamic and spatial housing price evolution paths  Fig.1 shows the spatial differences of price change amplitude in short-time scale, roughly, based on the one- month decrease amplitude value 0.06, the entire sample can be divided into high and low two sectors. The price change amplitude of eastern cities are higher than central and western cities. Specifically, Xiamen, Hangzhou, Beijing, Shenzhen, Fuzhou, Qingdao, Nanjing, Dalian, Shanghai and Haikou ten cities are located in the high volatility group with typical eastern coastal feature, but also reflects higher price changes amplitude. I   2 We compare the two sources of data and get a consistent price changing trend. We rebuild the missing data through the spectrum smoothing method, the results are consistent with the relatively smooth market of Chinese real estate market trends before the 2008 financial crisis.

beijing  changsha  chengdu  dalian  fuzhou  guangzhou haikou  hangzhou  hefei  nanchang  nanjing  qingdao shanghai  shanzhen  shanyang  suzhou  tianjing  wuxi  wuhan  xian  xiamen  zhengzhou  .0  .0  .0  .1 1m -r is e  .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 1m-drop  Figure 1. one-month(short-term) price change amplitude(the horizon axis represent 1-month rising amplitude, the vertical axis denote 1-month falling amplitude)  n addition, it is consistent with the results in Table 1 that the high price changes frequency cities Xiamen, Hangzhou and Beijing almost have highest price changes amplitude.

The ?overshoot? signs of price changes may weaken the internal price stability and then mitigate the price stickiness, and the price will changes frequently under the external influence of information shocks. So the research on the relationship between price changes frequency and amplitudes has a positive sense.

Fig.2 shows the 12-month(long-term) hosing price changes amplitude of Chinese 22 cities. Compared with Fig.1, the spatial differences is strengthened and more significant. Although the concentration degree decline, Suzhou, Wuxi and Guangzhou and other cities have joined in the high amplitude group from short-term to long-term price changes in Fig.2. We also find that Beijing, Hangzhou and Xiamen still locate in a special position, the 12-month price changes amplitudes are relatively larger, but the 12- month falling amplitude of Xiamen is also more significant  beijing  changsha  chengdu  dalian  fuzhou  guangzhou  haikou hangzhou  hefei  nanchang  nanjing  qingdao  shanghai  shanzhen  shanyang  suzhou  tianjing  wuxiwuhanxian  xiamen  zhengzhou  .1  .2 .2  .3 .3  m -r is e  0 .05 .1 .15 .2 12m-drop  Figure 2. twelve-month(short-term) price change amplitude(the horizon axis represent 12-month falling amplitude, the vertical axis denote 12- month rising amplitude)  which means the housing price is lack of supports compared with Beijing and Hangzhou.Fig.2 show the asymmetrical features of price changes amplitudes in the long-term time  scale, the 12-month rising amplitudes are larger than falling amplitudes for most of the 22 cities, which is the main difference with short-time price fluctuations, implying Chinese real estate market is in a rising circle, this is determined by the asymmetrical features of housing price fluctuations.

B. Tendency of Price Fluctuations We figure out the price changing tendency through  calculating the increasing and decreasing times of the house price changes within the entire sample window.3 We find asymmetrical characteristics of price change tendency from the total 83 months house price data from Mar 2006 to Dec 2012, the increasing tendency is over 50% and tends to be more significant in the long-term time scale, the value of 12 months rising tendency is larger than decreasing tendency, which also explains Chinese real estate market cycle from the point view of price changing probability. A relatively obvious rule is that most cities in Fig.3 are linear gathered in a strip area with positive slope, especially for the eastern countries. The frequency and amplitude of Changsha, Shenyang and Hefei although show quite difference in Fig.1 and Fig.2, the three cities present a similar spatial distribution features in this section. This is undoubted show that the price stickiness level of eastern cities is more significant in terms of price change tendency.

nanjing  wuhan  chengdu  dalian  xiamen xian  changsha  fuzhou  shenyang  zhengzhou  beijing  shanghai  tianjing  shenzhen  guangzhou  hangzhou  wuxi  suzhou  hefei  haikou  nanchang  qingdao  .5 .6  .7 .8  6m -r is ep ro b  .6 .7 .8 .9 1 12m-riseprob  Figure 3. six month and twelve-month price rising tendency(the horizon axis represent 12-month rising tendency, the vertical axis denote 6-month rising tendency)  C. Non-equilibrium of Price Fluctuations  We observe the housing price stickiness of Chinese real estate market through the previous work and we try to explain the internal logic behind non-equilibrium price   3 Considering the randomness of the price adjustment within the span of one-month time scale, we also report more stable housing price tendency of 6-month and 12-month time scale. Further, since the total probability of rising and falling is 1, so the price rising probability is the reverse value of falling.

fluctuations. In this section, we analyze the internal price adjustment mechanism and the implied market structure.

1. Non-equilibrium of market conditions  TABLE I. HOUSING PRICE DECOMPOSITION UNDER DIFFERENT MARKET CONDITIONS( PRICE  GOES UP)  Up Time Scale  Variable Correlation coefficient  with PI  Coefficient of PI  P- value  1-month EM 0.374 0.023  0.000 IM 0.760 0.384  0.000  3-month EM 0.734  0.045  0.000 IM 0.757 0.362  0.000  6-momth EM 0.816  0.031  0.008 IM 0.932  0.614  0.000  12- momth  EM 0.880 -0.032  0.054 IM 0.981  1.006  0.000  TABLE II. HOUSING PRICE DECOMPOSITION UNDER DIFFERENT MARKET CONDITIONS( PRICE GOES DOWN)  Down Time Scale  Variable Correlation coefficient  with PI  Coefficient of PI  P-value  1-month EM 0.772  0.027  0.000 IM 0.825  0.264  0.000  3-month EM 0.877  0.066  0.000 IM 0.638  0.106  0.000  6-momth EM 0.898  0.092  0.000 IM 0.407  0.050  0.020  12- momth  EM 0.893  0.106  0.000 IM 0.322  0.050  0.002  In Table 2, ? represent the general situation of housing price situations, and we decompose it into EM and IM two sectors, the former is the proportion of the cities that price changes, reflecting the market conditions (state-dependence), IM represent the price changes rates(amplitudes) (time- dependence). We find significant non-equilibrium characteristics of Chinese cities housing price fluctuations.

The correlation coefficient with IM is larger in a rising condition market, but correlation coefficient with EM is larger in a contraction market, the statistical results are significant at 5% level. The correlation coefficients with IM are 0.760, 0.757, 0.932 and 0.981, the correlation coefficients with EM are 0.374, 0.734, 0.816 and 0.880 under the time scale of 1-month, 3-month, 6-month and 12- month when the price goes up. When the housing price falls (contraction), the corresponding value of IM are 0.825, 0.638, 0.407, 0.322, and the correlation coefficients with EM are 0.772, 0,877, 0.898 and 0.893 respectively. The economic implications behind this set of figures is that the non-equilibrium of price fluctuations is determined by the inherent microstructure characteristics of Chinese real estate market, this feature is clearly changed in up and down two market conditions. When? is related to IM which means monopoly power and seller market become the dominant factor of pricing mechanism in the process that price goes high. Conversely, ? is related more to EM, reflecting the  brokenness of the existing market structure balance, the seller dominant force is significantly weakened, the price stickiness level also falls down and the housing price are susceptible to the influence of market atmosphere, the environment and policy shocks. However, for the investment property of Chinese real estate market, it shows great importance that the price stickiness drops and competitive pricing adjusts in a rational span when the housing price falls down, which can increase consumer surplus and promote social welfare; However, if the market environment sticks into irrational conditions, it can easily lead to the expectation panic dominated by the state-dependent feature of Chinese real estate market. In other words, the asset price may easily divorce from the internal balanced criteria and concern more about what is happening around, the Japanese real estate bubble burst in 1991, the Southeast Asian financial crisis in 1997, the 2007 U.S. subprime mortgage crisis, as well as the 1990s Hainan property bubble burst, all reveals the overreaction, irrational selling ?finite rationality? (Shiller, 1989), ?herds effects? (Gao Bo, 2008), thus except the results in Table 2, the further research on non- equilibrium and the implied pricing mechanism characteristics of price fluctuations, which is very important of inhibition the market infection risks.

2. Non-equilibrium of spatial conditions Location is an important factor in the real estate pricing  mechanism, also contribute to the primary non-equilibrium of real estate market and can be reflected by the non- equilibrium characteristics of price fluctuations in the former section of the paper. Follow this logic, we divide the cities sample into eastern and mid-western two sectors to analyze the hosing price decomposition results.

TABLE III. HOUSING PRICE DECOMPOSITIONS UNDER SPATIAL CONDITIONS(EASTERN CITIES)  Eastern cities Time Scale Variable Correlation  coefficient with PI  Coefficient of PI  P-value  1-month EM 0.434  0.149  0.000 IM 0.979  0.953  0.000  3-month EM 0.321  0.153  0.004 IM 0.979  0.967  0.000  6-momth EM 0.356  0.253  0.002 IM 0.984  0.987  0.000  12-momth EM 0.559  0.705  0.000 IM 0.994  1.033  0.000  TABLE IV. HOUSING PRICE DECOMPOSITIONS UNDER SPATIAL CONDITIONS(WESTERN CITIES)  Mid-western cities Time Scale Variable Correlation  coefficient with PI  Coefficient of PI  P-value  1-month EM 0.224  0.054  0.043 IM 0.984  0.947  0.000  3-month EM 0.258  0.065  0.021 IM 0.971  0.954  0.000  6-momth EM 0.237  0.110  0.038 IM 0.979  0.942  0.000     12-momth EM 0.460  0.405  0.000 IM 0.993  1.029  0.000  The results in Table 3 show strong non-equilibrium of price fluctuations under spatial conditions. On one side, the IM coefficients of eastern cities are larger than that of mid and western cities. The IM coefficients of eastern cities are 0.979, 0.979, 0.984 and 0.994 at 1% significant level. The corresponding values of mid and eastern cities are 0.984, 0.971, 0.979 and 0.993, also significant at 5% level, which means the eastern cities get higher price stickiness level since the IM coefficients are larger indicating the lower relationship with the market conditions. On the other side, the EM coefficients of eastern cities are also larger than that of mid and western cities. The EM coefficients of eastern cities are 0.434, 0.321, 0.356 and 0559 at 1% significant level. The corresponding values of mid and eastern cities are 0.224, 0.258, 0.237 and 0.460, also significant at 5% level, reflects higher degree of market factors contributing to the pricing mechanism, therefore, the lower frequency, larger amplitude and higher tendency of the eastern price changes are determined by the internal market structure and pricing mechanism, also is the result of market selections.



V. CONCLUSIONS AND POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS After the text edit has been completed, the paper is ready  for the template. Duplicate the template file by using the Save As command, and use the naming convention prescribed by your conference for the name of your paper. In this newly created file, highlight all of the contents and import your prepared text file. You are now ready to style your paper.

Price is the direct presentation of the economic activity laws, we find the price stickiness and non-equilibrium characteristics of Chinese real estate market through the analysis of monthly housing price of 22 representative large and medium-sized cities in China from Jan 2006 to Nov 2012. The following are the conclusions:  1. Price stickiness of market fluctuations. First, the sticky price performs as larger increasing rates and higher probability of rising tendency, which determines the stickiness of the Chinese real estate market in a relatively stable upward cycle. Second, the decompositions results show more time-dependence, reflecting the existence of non-competitive or seller dominant in Chinese real estate market, and is the micro foundation of price stickiness to generate and sustain. The future political regulations should pay full attention to the price stickiness of Chinese real estate market  2. Non-equilibrium of market fluctuations. The real estate market has strong regional and heterogeneity features.

The results of this paper show the significant non- equilibrium of housing price fluctuations. First is the non- equilibrium of price changes under different market conditions, the larger IM value in the up cycle shows higher  price stickiness level. The EM value is more significant in the down cycle implying the strong effects on the market mechanism and may exist expectation infection in the real estate market. Therefore, the price stickiness is undoubtedly the main reason of the increased difficulty of policy control in the rising cycle, also is the premise of the trading tax passed on to the buy sides, which is more prominent in the eastern cities.

