Oct. 20-23, 2013 in KCC, Gwangju, Korea

Abstract: SAW(Submerged Arc Welding) machines normally consist of two or more torches to increase  productivity. The performance of conventional SAW depends on the experience of the operators. Error between  the measured and the actual values of welding conditions is accumulated as time goes on. Therefore, the weld  quality cannot be guaranteed because of the error. Even if a number of welding defects occur, workers are not  able to find out the cause of defects because the measured signals show a big difference with the actual values.

In this study, a stable measuring system was developed for the welding conditions such as current, voltage,  speed so that workers can easily monitor the actual welding conditions. If the error between monitored and  measured signals occurs, workers are able to easily correct the actual welding conditions through this system. In  this way, it increased the reliability of the welding conditions. This system was applied to an actual welding  system and showed that the weld quality was stabilized and improved.

Keywords: Automatic welding measurement, SA W, wireless communication, data correction  1. INTRODUCTION  In shipbuilding production, SAW technique is prevalently used for the butt welding of large steel plate having thickness of more than 10mm. This welding technique is normally carried out under high current and low voltage conditions. Depending on the thickness of steel plate and joint preparation, the current is changed from SOOA to 14S0A, and the voltage, from 30 to 4SY.

Welding system which is used to weld two steel plates is normally made up of the combination of DC and AC welding machines in order to improve the productivity[I]. Unfortunately, this kind of automatic welding system has sometimes serious problems with errors between the actual and the set welding conditions due to the decrepit of the equipment if reliable measuring system doesn't exist so that the workers can recognize the actual welding conditions. Most of workers rely on their own experiences to estimate the actual welding conditions. Also, they may have trouble adjusting the proper welding conditions in the presence of the severe fluctuation of the current and voltage values. This attribute makes the welding unstable and finally influences the actual weld qualities[2][3].

This paper proposes a reliable measuring and monitoring system in order to solve the aforementioned problems. This system is to measure the actual welding conditions such as welding current, voltage and welding speed in real time. And, the system analyses the measured signals to derive the special characteristics. A band pass filter is also developed to reject the noise for enhancement of signal quality. The proposed system helps the operator to adjust the welding conditions  978-89-93215-05-295560/13/$15 @rCROS 1623  easily and stably by monitoring the real time welding  condition even under the long time operation. The acquired data are saved in a dedicated database, and the cause analysis using the database is available when a poor welding quality is obtained. Fig. 1 shows the developed system which is applied to an automatic welding machine.

Fig. 2 shows the welding head on which the measurement system is equipped. The welding conditions (current, voltage and traveling speed) are directly measured from the torch and the carriage. The    welding current and voltage are measured from the cables connected the torch, and the traveling speed is calculated by using a distance sensor which can measure the relative distance between the sensor and the moving welding head. Using this measurement system, a worker is able to monitor and adjust the welding condition  the can be ?n1n,rmJP'-'  1IIt1?-  Fig. 2 Welding head part of condition measurement  2. WELDING CONDITION MONITOING SYSTEM  2.1 Concept  As mentioned before, the developed system incorporates a measuring and monitoring system for the SAW welding equipment. In order to measure the actual welding current, a hall sensor which can detect both DC and AC current was used. The welding voltage is directly measured from the cable installed between the torch and steel plate. The welding speed is calculated by using a laser displacement sensor. The laser displacement sensor is attached to the moving welding  carriage and a reflector is located at a fixed part of the welding machine, respectively. The distance between the sensor and the reflector is measured continuously.

Then, the welding speed is calculated from this sequence. The welding data are inevitably affected by noise, however, a band pass filter is indispensable for removing the effect of noise in the measured welding conditions[ 4] [5].

The measured data are displayed on a monitoring panel for on-site workers. In addition, these are transmitted through a wireless communication to save them in a remote database. The database is used for the analysis in the management program. If a poor welding quality is acquired, a production manager can find the cause of the poor quality by analysis of the stored data, and adjust the welding conditions to improve welding quality.

Fig. 3 shows the conceptual diagram of the developed system[6].

Analysis team  Database  Sensor Panel butt joi nt Fig. 3 The concept diagram of developed system  2.2 Design of a measuring main controller  The main controller of the developed system measures DC and AC currents, voltage and welding speed on the SAW welding equipment. A heat input is also calculated from the measured data. The current, voltage, speed, and heat input are displayed on a color touch LCD panel and transmitted to the database using the wireless communication. The touch LCD panel provides a calibration function for the welding current and the voltage. An offset and a span values for the measured signals can be adjusted by using the touch  LCD panel of the main controller. The calibration  function is designed to easily correct the errors between the monitored values and the actual welding conditions within a tolerance range.

Fig. 4 PCB of main controller  Fig. 4 shows the main controller PCB of the developed system. The PCB of the main controller is composed of one DC voltage, one DC current, one AC voltage and one AC current channel. Each channel is composed of a separate module, in order that each  module can be replaced easily when a failure occurs.

The communication module and port are placed at the bottom left of the PCB to receive the distance from the laser displacement sensor for calculation of the welding speed[7].

The component of the main controller is shown in Fig.

5. The touch LCD panel is placed on the top of the main controller, and the main PCB is assembled under the touch LCD panel. The main controller is connected to a remote server PC through the wireless communication to transmit the measured welding data.

Main Controller  PCB  Fig. 5 Design of measurement panel  Fig. 6 shows an example of the screen on the touch LCD panel. It shows both the measured welding conditions and the calculated heat input in real time during welding operation.

? , 1 1 _ _  .7  Fig. 6 Monitored data on touch LCD  An integrated block diagram of the main controller is shown in Fig. 7. The current and voltage data measured  from the hall sensor are filtered and amplified. The measured sensor data are inevitably affected by noise data[8].

The noise effect in the raw sensor data is suppressed by using the band pass filter. The filtered and amplified sensor data are converted into the digital data using an AID converter and transmitted to a microprocessor. The laser displacement sensor also provides the digitized sensor data to the microprocessor. In the microprocessor, the sensor data are transmitted to the server PC through the wireless communication to be saved in the database, and also displayed on the touch LCD panel.

Hall Sensor(AC) Ac weldin?  M/C rrgrt'o-  Laser Senso!

o Fig. 7 Integrated block diagram  2.2 Correction of measurement data  A general SAW system uses three-wire cable of <l> 150 to pass high current and to avoid use of a huge hall sensor. The current from 1200A to 1500A flows through these three power cables. In the developed system, we tested that the values of welding current passed through the three cables are almost equal. To measure the welding current accurately, each cable should be equipped with each hall sensor and the three measured current values should be added to calculate the total  welding current. A hall sensor is installed to only one cable and total current is calculated by multiplying three times of the measured current value.

Even though each current flow of three cables should be same in an ideal condition, an actual condition shows  a slight difference. A calibration process is performed to correct the errors. For this purpose, the calculated total current value is compared with the welding current obtained from a clamp meter which can be regarded as an actual value. The entire current range is divided into six sections by minimum, maximum, and 4 intermediate current values. Then, the measured current value is compensated using calibration factors for these 6 points.

Amper 1600 ,------------ Max. value  1400 +------- -?--- ?,= ? } Error       1st setting  / ?? Min. value ___ Sensing value*3  j__ ...... Actual value  Number  Fig. 8 Error between actual and monitored value    SETUP MENU", Settmg of DC Current Compensation  Number 0 C(JI1lUl)II?<ltif)1I "'<thIP   2 00000  3 00000  4 00000  5 00000  C()01pl'lI?all'(t ValliI'       AID: 00000 Actual? 00000  7 8 4 5 1 2  +- + SAVE/RUN   EXIT Fig. 9 Input screen for the current compensation  Fig. 8 shows an example of the current value calibration. [n this example, the calculated total current is larger than the actual current for every six sections.

These errors are corrected by the calibration function shown in Fig. 9. The calibration model provides a linearized error correction if the number of calibration points, the calculated (measured) current, and the actual current values are given. The error correction model can be derived using a scaling factor and an offset factor.

Because a linearized error model is used, more intermediate calibration points would be needed for highly nonlinear errors.

2.3 Monitoring stabilization  The measured welding condition data should be shown reliably for the on-site workers. The workers can adjust the welding conditions to acquire successful quality by monitoring the conditions. For this purpose, the developed system provides a monitoring panel for the on-site workers.

Fig.l0 shows that the deviation of the measured voltage for a mean value is within a reliable range from -O.6V to +O.6V It means that the developed measuring system is sufficiently stable to monitor the current state.

Unfortunately, the welding current is dramatically changed as shown in Fig. 11. The welding current is affected by base metal, flow of shielding gas, spatters, swaying of the torch and characteristic of welding machine. Due to these effects, the measured current values showed the big deviation ranging from -60A to +60A. [t is so enormous that the operator cannot recognize or follow the instantaneous value in this situation.

Voltage  43 ,-----------------------------------  42.5 ?------..... --?----?+_=_--_+?_+--l_:  4L5 +---??----''--------------.....:..------''----?----  41 +-----------------------------------  Fig. 10 Voltage fluctuation   Ampere  1100 t-.....;---------;---------------------------   960 +--------------------------------------  Fig. 11 Current Fluctuation  For the stable monitoring, moving average algorithm was adopted to smooth the fluctuated welding current.

The processed current value is displayed on the monitoring panel shown in Fig. 12. By monitoring the welding condition, any worker can adjust the welding conditions adequately to achieve the predefined welding conditions [9] .

Fig. 12 Monitoring panel  3. CONCLUSION  This paper proposed a novel welding condition monitoring system for a SAW system and analyzed the characteristics of the welding conditions such as welding current, voltage, and traveling speed. To acquire these welding conditions accurately, the errors between the measured and actual value were corrected by performing the error compensation process. The reliable and stable condition monitoring system was able to be achieved by the proposed method. Also, it could be used to adjust the welding conditions easily for the reliable welding quality.

The measured data is transmitted to the server through the wireless communication so that the accumulated data can be used for data management in the future. If a defect occurs in the welding quality, any quality managers are able to analyze the causes of the poor quality through the developed system. This system was applied to the HH[ shipyard, and even inexperienced workers were able to carry out weld using the optimum welding conditions.

