Grigore T. Papa University of Medicine and Pharmacy, ia:ji, Romania, November 21-23,2013

Abstract- With the advent of technology the healthcare solutions can be delivered to the intended user by enabling technology solution. The traditional healthcare methodology is being replaced by smarter health care clouds. The research highlights on potential and challenges of integrating cloud enabled health care systems. The Software as a Service (SaaS) for healthcare is developed to handle readily changing doctor and patient needs across the globe. The paper highlights benefits and challenges of using cloud based healthcare systems. Further the discussions are applied on the different health care clouds and models that can be implemented by the healthcare industry. It further illustrates architecture and leading providers of SaaS based solutions to the healthcare practitioners. How the companies have applied SaaS for viable business healthcare model. Discussions are also applied on how data mmmg techniques for cloud based healthcare big data can help in extracting valuable information.

Keywords: cloud computing; Software as a Service (SaaS); health cloud; big data; data mining.



I. INTRODUCTION  The cloud is a large group of interconnected computers extending beyond the enterprise. It is a paradigm shift from traditional desktop computing model that enables running of software programs from each computer. With the emergence of cloud computing platform the PC centric environment is transformed into document centric culture. The software's are not run from a personal computer rather stored on the server and is accessed through internet. The health care industry undergoes tremendous pressure to deliver quality service to patients and doctors across the globe. IT comes as rescue to the dynamic heavily loaded healthcare demands. A health cloud is designed as an interconnection of extensive number of computers and servers specifically dedicated to meet the needs of the healthcare industry. The healthcare service is delivered to the user who can be a doctor or a patient via internet connection. The cloud service enable registered users to access the hardware and software managed by the third parties at remote locations. It has brought substantial transformation in the way information is stored and accessed. Refer Table I for computing model comparison. The cloud computing framework for health care can encourages re-use of IT capabilities. The primary value proposition of cloud computing is to pay only for the services a user consumes as required and pay for them accordingly. As an example, organizations can run multiple applications in the cloud and pay for only what they use based on the number of virtual CPU's, storage and network utilization. The cloud model can be useful to run  AmitKumar IILM Graduate School of Management, India  amit.kumar@iilmgsm.ac.in  software, handle testing, expand storage and simplify collaboration. The cloud enables computing infrastructure to be considered as a service. These services lead to enhanced agility and scalability.

TABLE T COMPUTING MODEL COMPARISION Parameter Cloud Computing Tradition al Computing  Storage Internet Computer or server  Access Anytime via Internet Any computer on network  Collaboration Real Time Not Real Time  Model Document centric PC Centric  Cost Pay per use Expenditure to build &  maintain IT infrastructure  Scalability Unlimited Limited  Service On-demand Cannot be available  Availability anytime anywhere everywhere anytime

II. RELA TED WORK  Cloud Computing is an interesting methodology enabled by delivering software, infrastructure and the entire computation platform as a service. Contrary to traditional web hosting providers, cloud computing delivers pay-per-click services. It means users only have to pay for the resources they use over time [6]. These services are offered over the Internet by large data and computing centers [10]. The cloud computing is service oriented and not application oriented. It offers on? demand virtualized resources as assessable and chargeable service [5]. Cloud computing can make convenient for the patients to find and keep track of their own health records [7].

The healthcare applications for cellular network had gradually gained momentum over the last few years [4]. The escalation in the invasion of mobile networks in remote rural villages in India the mobile phones has become an important device for enhancing doctor-patient communication [3]. The mobile technology is increasingly augmenting functions of handheld devices, smart phones and PDAs that are potentially replacing the use of computer based substitutes while supporting mobility needs of patients and medical practitioners [9]. With these benefits it is increasingly becoming possible to create innovative applications for developing countries that can shift the paradigm of delivering services and resolve problems nurtured by the healthcare systems [14]. Recent trends aspire towards accessing information anytime across the globe which can be achieved by shifting towards healthcare cloud. This current delivery model can make healthcare more efficient and     effective and at a comparatively less cost towards technology budgets [8]. In spite of rising security and privacy risks, the health care organizations can certainly take benefits of cloud computing solutions and bring immense benefits to improve quality of service to the patients and reduce overall healthcare costs [13]

III. CLOUD TYPES  The cloud is available and can be adapted for different needs. The cloud can be classified as:  1) Public Cloud: The public cloud hosting is owned by third parties and is not targeted towards the organizations in particular. The large cluster of servers enables opportunity of superior scalability whenever required. It provides large virtual space for the web applications and making users to pay only for service they use.

2) Private Cloud: The private cloud is owned by the enterprise and is operated within the enterprise firewall under the monitoring of the IT department. It offers similar benefits as of public cloud but provides improved security in comparison to the public hosting. The private cloud can be available on premise or externally hosted beyond the boundary of the organization. The computing resources are shared across applications and business units of the same organization.

Healthcare providers contemplate private clouds for enterprise resource planning systems.

3) Hybrid Cloud: The hybrid cloud model is that uses combination of public and the private cloud to deliver required services. It is implemented by large organizations that use cloud computing for multiple initiatives.

4) Community Cloud: Community Clouds are built for specific market segments such like healthcare that needs specific set of features of compliance and security measures.

This cloud infrastructure is shared by different organizations with familiar interest of business, security requirements and policy.



IV. CLOUD COMPUTING MODELS  Cloud services include Infrastructure as a Service (laaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS) [17]. The cloud service delivery models can be described as:  1) Software as a Service (SaaS): The software delivery method that allows software to be accessed as a web based service through the use of cloud computing infrastructure. The web based application is delivered to multiple users irrespective of location.

2) Platform as a Service (PaaS): The platform service is hosted over the cloud and accessed through a browser. The service allows developers to build Web applications without installing any tools on their computer and then deploy those applications without any specialized administrative skills.

3) Infrastructure as a Service (JaaS): The service delivery model provides users with the benefit to rent hardware, operating system, storage and network capacity over the internet. The provider owns the infrastructure and is responsible for application hosting, running, and maintaining.

The customer need not get engaged to manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure but has control over operating systems, storage, and deployed applications; and possibly limited control of select networking components [12].

v. CLOUD ARCHITECTURE The medical data is saved on the internet cloud. The  internet cloud is built of software applications and patient's database. Refer Fig 1. for Healthcare cloud infrastructure.

Patients  Mobile Phone  PDA  Computer  Hospital  Fig. I. The cloud infrastructure explains how cloud services works for doctors and patients.

The cloud based infrastructure enables improved management of healthcare records. The e-health system can be accessed by patients and doctors through different portable devises.



VI. CLOUD BASED HEAL THCARE PROVIDERS  There are multiple companies offering cloud based healthcare service; a few to name are: Practo Technologies, Healcon Labs, Helping Doc, DocSuggest, MocDoc and Insta Health. With the rising demand of digitization the healthcare digitization is at peak with the leading competitors such like: Practo (allow doctor patient connectivity, digitized records, billing and reminders), DocSuggest (Helps fmd suitable doctors, schedule appointments via website or call), Mocdoc (Books appointment, offers SMS reminders, follow-up calls and digitized records), SmartRx (Book appointment, offer access to patient records, alert on diagnostics and e? consultation) [2]. Refer Table II for detailed website ranking profile. An example of moving towards the cloud is the company: Practo Technologies, India was the first SaaS based start up in the healthcare sector. The start-up came into existence when the owner of the company a college going student had to send across medical reports of his father to doctors in US for second opinion. With no efficient data management the healthcare data remained stacked in files. The e-health management appeared to be an interesting option for the business. Although there were multiple challenges faced by Practo team to make their place in the healthcare sector but they were able to establish themselves. The challenges were: non-acceptance of technology by doctors, un-awareness among healthcare fraternity and lack of IT infrastructure. The team used benefits of SaaS based model for selling the software to their clients. The user can pay for the service they use and for the duration they use. Selling of software SaaS was cost effective for users to buy. Marketing Strategy followed by Practo:  ? Initially focused on designing and coding the software ? Focus on sales after product development ? Short duration (15 day) sales cycle to monitor the  results.

? Sales team was geographically segregated to keep  account region wise.

? Organizing awareness sessions for the software users.

?  ?  Trial version for a month time was given for free.

Continuous product development.

? SaaS benefits were emphasized during sales.

Table II. WEBSITE RANKING  Company Website URL Global Indian Daily Name Rank Rank Time on  Site (min) Practo practo.com 46, 757 4,334 16:51 Technologies HelpingDoc helpingdoc.com 76,275 8,181 15:36  Saral Software saralsoftware.com 8,249,232 No data 1:00  DocSuggest docsuggest.com 93,954 13,975 3:13  NamasteDoc namastedoc.com 483,630 65,187 2:47  [nsta Health instahealthsolution 1,493,957 No Data 3:22 Solution s.com Healcon Labs healcon.com 27,853 5,306 2:37  MocDoc mocdoc.in 498,082 68,739 4:20  SmartRx Smartrx.in 547,574 54,003 21:45

VII. THE CLOUD SERVICE  The cloud services offered by organization have benefits dis advantages and challenges mentioned below:  '  A. Benefits Bringing cloud into use in businesses, it will not just save  the cost of staff required to manage servers, but will also require lesser servers and with that less power consumption (Padhy, Patra & Satapathy, 2012). E-health cloud data may be used by decision makers for planning and budgeting for health care services [1]. Cloud computing has potential to significantly reduce IT costs and complexities. It improves resources utilization and service delivery [11]. The organizations offering cloud service can depend on rapid and elastic provisioning with minimal service provider interaction.

Here are listed advantages of having SaaS base cloud system:  ? Low cost computing service: It is not required to have a high computing power system to run cloud based web application. The client computer can be low priced with small hard disk and memory.

? Improved Performance: The health cloud provides the opportunity of improved handle patient care. The unified patient records can be shared effectively with other medical specialist if required. The digital records are available anytime anywhere to view the patient's medical history comprehensively.

? Low cost of IT infrastructure: The health cloud solves the issue of scarce IT infrastructure and healthcare professionals. The cloud service enables rural and remote communities to use the healthcare service.

? Less Maintenance Issues: The cloud service reduces the hassle of hardware and software maintenance for enterprises. The software is not handled or managed by the organization.

? Instant software update: The software does not get obsolete with the requirement of high up-gradation cost.

The web based application gets automatically updated when a user logs in.

? Lower software cost: The internet based health cloud offers the service opportunity at a reduced price. The  collaborative environment brings shared cost among participants with the flexibility to pay for actual resource utilization.

? Universal access: The data saved through cloud can be accessed from anywhere anytime around the clock and across the globe via internet connection.

? Effective collaboration: The cloud based health service strengthens the ability to monitor spread out of diseases.

It can be used as alert system for diseases outbreak. It can be used to identify the infectious regions, the disease spreading patterns and the probable reasons of the outbreaks.

? Improved compatibility: The cloud based software application is compatible with different operating system like Windows, Apple Mac OS and Linux.

? Forecasting: The strategic decision makers can use health loud for planning and budgeting health services.

The integrated approach can help in predicting future healthcare needs.

B. Challenges for Integrating cloud in healthcare It is convenient for healthcare providers and patients to  have electronic health record applications and services over the cloud. This adoption may lead to enormous security challenges related with user authentication, access control, policy integration and trust management [15]. The challenges leaded to lot of difficulty in the idea being accepted. Doctors were very apprehensive about buying the software online. The challenge of SaaS based system can be classified as:  ? Proper bandwidth: The adequate bandwidth is required to upload and download data from the cloud. The medical data being large in size needs proper bandwidth for data access.

? User Acceptance: The user acceptance to cloud emerged as a vital issue. The doctors were not very open to the idea of technology to manage their operations and other healthcare practices.

? Infrastructure: The cloud based healthcare service should be available on-demand continuously with no interruptions. The cloud based service should not be compromised due to hardware, software or network breakdown.

? Security: The cloud services do offer security measures but there is challenge about data security. Data security and privacy are primary concerns for the healthcare industry. As the service becomes distributed in nature the chances of erroneous data increases.

? Maintenance: With the rise in the numbers of users and the complexity of the cloud based healthcare network, the cloud based resources should be maintained in a reliable manner to avoid any future disruption of the service.

? Big Data Mining: The cloud databases uses relational database and are structured in nature. With rise of unstructured data analysis of data has become difficult.



VIII. DATA MINING  The research question is how to manage and draw information from data in the cloud? The solution is data mining, a technique to transform this data into relevant    information. Data mining also known as knowledge discovery in data base, is the process to extract the relevant info from the database. The massive data have is overloaded with hidden information which can be strategically used. The data mining in Cloud Computing enable organizations to centralize the management of software and data storage leading to adequate, improved, reliable and secure services for the users. Refer Fig.

2 for Health data mining.

Fig. 2. Data mining process to extract valuable information from healthcare data saved on the cloud.

Cloud service providers apply data mining to provide clients an improved service [16]. The data mining techniques can be applied to healthcare dataset for effective decision making. The methodology is to start with the problem definition, data collection and finally data mining. The major mining techniques of clustering, classification and association rules can be applied. k-means clustering is used to explore breast cancer classification using genomic data [20]. With the exponential increase of health care data, data mining techniques cannot provide holistic approach to healthcare data analysis because of voluminous data. The huge data from heterogeneous sources is called 'Big Data'.



IX. FUTURE TREND: BIG DATA MINING  Big data is massive volume of data in structure and un? structured format. The huge data is created from multiple sources: Web, social media, mobile etc. The potential data healthcare remains untapped for analysis. Big data is difficult to be used with relational database and with the current infrastructure analysis of big data is a challenge. It is essential to mine big data for improved health care and decision making.

Big Data is used to improve life in developing countries [18].

Big data includes: Google + 1 billion queries per day, Twitter 250+ million tweets per day, Facebook's more than 800 million updates per day, and YouTube more than 4 billion views per day [19]. Big data mining of each person DNA, to discover, monitor and improve health aspects [21]. Big datasets are so large in size that typical database systems are not able to store and analyze the datasets [22].



X. CONCLUSION  The e-Health Cloud represents an efficient technology solution for several healthcare providers experiencing various concerns of increasing healthcare delivery costs, information sharing, and scarcity of healthcare professionals. The benefits gained cannot be suppressed by issues of trust, privacy, and security. The technical issues that must be addressed before health care providers can fully adopt and trust the e-Health Cloud. Challenges of security and interoperability will rise with the cloud computing model leading to the adoption of the cloud remarkably slowly. With the implementation of best practices in the design, deployment and use of it will hopefully generate a future growth of the cloud based systems  embracement despite all of the obstacles. This paper provides an overview of the necessity and utility of big data mining in cloud computing. Not much research has been done in the area of big health care data mining. The future perspective of research explores management and application of healthcare big data mining for improved decision making in healthcare.

