

Abstract?In recent years, virtualization technologies were  settled faster than anyone imagined and got placed big areas in our lives. Virtualization is a technology that eliminates the "uniqueness" dependency by creating an abstraction layer between the hardware and the software that runs on it. The aim of virtualization is to centralize the information system for facilitating administrative task while improving scalability.

Virtualization technology which allows more efficient use of existing physical hardware, as well as some advantages including cost reduction, labor loss and performance improvement, contains several innovations in security, especially in system security. Software applications such as antivirus, firewall, end point security installed on the servers to ensure system security causes performance loss on the network and servers. Hence, security applications must be implemented on virtualization layer (hypervisor, Virtual Machine Monitor) to cover all the virtual system. In this paper, we aim to explain usage of Intrusion Detection Systems and Intrusion Prevention Systems in virtualization technologies and prologue possible security threats in virtual area.

Keywords?Virtualization, Virtual Machine, Intrusion Detection Systems, Intrusion Prevention Systems, System Security, Cyber Security.



I. INTRODUCTION irtualization technology is discovered in the 1970s.  It fell out of favor, because computer equipment was very  expensive and the "framework" machines were not suitable for virtualization. Researches and the use of virtualization technologies began to spread quickly in the early 2000s, along with hardware becomes much cheaper and being very easy access to all areas. Now, virtualization is in every area of information technologies.

There are many important benefits of the virtualization.

Applications can be transferred transparently, servers can be consolidated and overall system maintenance can be made while the system is running. General security level can be upgraded and the hardware costs can be reduced.

In this paper, besides innovations brought about by virtualization, virtualization techniques, security and virtualization security issues will be informed. Furthermore, virtualization technologies? effect on Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS) will be focused on.

Section II and III focus on the concept of security and the basic techniques used to ensure the security, intrusion detection and prevention systems, section IV presents the virtualization and usage areas of the virtualization, section V summarizes the virtualization security and the concept of virtual machine monitor (VMM) and finally the conclusion is presented in section VI.



II. SECURITY OVERVIEW Security in information technologies can be defined as  taking the precautions to save data, provide the continuity of information system, provide privacy and protect the system from inside?outside active and passive threats. Security requirements;  ? Confidentiality, ?  Reliability, ?  Authentication, ?  Integrity, ?  Availability,  Many organizations establish the information technologies infrastructure as three tries which are network security, system security data and security:  Network security means that all activities in a network infrastructure from up to down undertake to protect the data stream and the current usage of the network assets (network equipment, configuration and network policy) and to ensure the integrity of all ongoing operations.

A system security involves the access and control of computer system's resources which includes hardware, software applications, and operating system files. Data security means to protect data and information from to be processed by unauthorized access, misuse, modification and damages.

A. Ensuring Network security techniques: Firewall: A firewall is a software application system for  personal usage or hardware-based special network security equipment for multiuser big organizations that detects the inbound and outbound network activity like a router by resolving the data headers and determining whether it should be allowed through or not over the network by predefined rule-based policy.

Virtual Private Network (VPN): A Virtual Private Network is a kind of network technology that provides private  Benefits of the Virtualization Technologies with Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems  Murat ?al kan              Mustafa ?zsiginan                  Emin Kugu Aeronautics and Space Technologies Institute    Aeronautics and Space Technologies Institute     Aeronautics and Space Technologies Institute  Turkish Air Force Academy         Turkish Air Force Academy         Turkish Air Force Academy Istanbul/Turkey              Istanbul/Turkey              Istanbul/Turkey  muratcaliskan2004@gmail.com         mustafaozsiginan@gmail.com          e.kugu@hho.edu.tr   V        and secure network connection for communication over a public network or Internet Clouds. VPN can connect multiple sites over local area and wide area for multipurpose communications such as Voice Over IP (VOIP), web services.

Intrusion Detection System (IDS):An intrusion detection system (IDS) is a software application or hardware-based network security system that monitors and analyzes all inbound and outbound network activities like TCP connection analysis, address matching, HTTP string and substring matching, packet anomaly detection, traffic anomaly detection and identifies suspicious traffic pattern that may describe malicious attack from anyone attempting to disturb the system.

Intrusion Prevention System (IPS): Intrusion Prevention System is also known as Intrusion Detection and Prevention System that included in all activities of intrusion detection system and also have the ability to take immediate action as to prevent/block intrusions that are detected based on a set of rules.

Web Filter: A Web filter is a program that is monitoring an incoming web page to check the origin or content of it based on the set of rules determining whether some or all of it should be screen or not.

Unified Threat Management (UTM): Unified Threat Management System is an all in one security platform solution that provides the ability to protect network. Unified threat management is the evaluation of the traditional firewall and typically includes firewall, intrusion detection system, web filtering, antivirus application and so on in a single integrated security appliance product. Its advantages are low-price, easy management, singe product, all in one central security appliance for small organization.

Network Access Control (NAC): Network access control is an approach information security area that user based access control the all parts of a network by checking user identity, user system security healthy and other end point security factors. It provides an effective system and network management ability against the unauthorized network access.

B. Ensuring System Security techniques: To ensure the system security, updated anti spam,  antivirus, data lost prevention software solution against virus, unauthorized access, spam, spyware and malware software must be in use.

C. Ensuring Data security techniques: To secure data, some encryption techniques must be used.

Not only stored data but also transferred data from side to side should be encrypted either symmetrically or asymmetrically and should be signed using digital signature.

With the evaluation of the information technology, there is a need to have comprehensive security strategies and integrated precaution systems.

Organizations primarily determine security needs and risks. They should generate their security policy and apply them to whole organizational units. In order to achieve the durability of the applied security policy, they should raise information security awareness of their users by having them attended to information security training activities.

After making these activities, organizations should apply their security policy over the information technology  infrastructure consistently, monitor all network activities, produce report about the major network and system events and update or upgrade the generated security policy if it is necessary.



III. INTRUSION DETECTION AND PREVENTION SYSTEMS Intrusion Detection is the procedure to monitor every kind  of instances and processes, analyze and decide them if they are violent or threat for the system [5]. IDS/IPS system monitors and detects all kind of actions, incoming and outgoing traffic over the network, determine types of network traffic then block/drop and allow the TCP package from inside to outside and vice versa based on the generated policy rule. Making these operations, it collects the events and processes as a knowledge base to improve the policy against the any kinds of inside and outside attacks.

Intrusion detection and prevention systems perform the following functions to ensure the security:  ? They find security violations that cannot be identified and prevented system by the other security components,  ? They determine beginning of the intrusions and attacks then immediately protect the system,  ? They report the threat and unwanted traffic over the network.

They generate the alarm for the unauthorized access and report the weakness of the system. Another goal of IDS/IPS is to detect inside attacks or account theft very easily. If someone uses stolen account and acts in the system, IDS/IPS system generates an alarm for the misuse profile. Then, the system recognizes the injection attacker. This kind of feature is serving deter from system.

Intrusion detection systems operate as misuse detection and anomaly detection by comparing familiar and unfamiliar network attack pattern. A misuse refers known attack. For example, the intrusion detection system immediately detects those attackers attempting to overstep the web server in a way that means it is already trained. A misuse detection system can be identified normal and abnormal traffic from known attacks.

It compares network traffic snapshot pattern using sequences of the system call or other features of known attack. An anomaly is something out of the ordinary, e.g., abnormal network traffic which is actually caused by unknown attacks.

An anomaly detection system models normal behavior and identifies a behavior as abnormal (or anomalous) if it is sufficiently different from known normal behaviors. [6]  In this type of detection, there is a need to log event data for identifying the normal operation over network traffic.

If there is a well-defined policy installed on the IDS/IPS in the system, they protect the unwanted attacks, unauthorized access and malicious software attacks. But if they are configured unsuitable, they cause false positive alarms and degrade network performance.



IV. VIRTUALIZATION Virtualization is a method that increase the hardware  utilization rate by dividing the hardware into multiple logical pieces. It minimizes hardware dependence of the software,        thereby reduce the costs of information systems. In addition, virtualization improves the scalability of the system. General virtualization architecture is shown in Fig. 1.

Besides the significant cost savings, another important benefit is dynamic load balancing capacity through the multiple file systems. Applications decelerate or even come to a halt when processing bottlenecks occurred on conventional machines. Dynamic load balancing helps to ensure that such bottlenecks do not occur, thereby enables applications to run continuously without any disruption [1].

Virtualization; physical resources designed to serve multiple virtual machines or multiple virtual machines may be installed on a single set of hardware, and adds to system idle hardware capacity, removes hardware dependency for software, thus a software solution that greatly reduces the cost of software and hardware.

Virtualization has serious acquisitions in information security area besides efficiency, functionality and permanence.

These benefits include server consolidation support by isolating applications from one another while sharing the same machine, improved system security by isolating vulnerable applications from other mission critical applications running on the same machine, fault resilience by migrating applications off of faulty hosts, dynamic load balancing by migrating applications to less loaded hosts, and improved service availability and administration by migrating applications before host maintenance so that they can continue to run with minimal downtime [2].

A. Virtualization Areas: There are three areas of information technology where  virtualization is used commonly: network virtualization, storage virtualization and server virtualization.

Network virtualization; allows a real isolation of virtual networks by dividing and using the same infrastructure [3].

Link virtualization and node virtualization are two main components of network virtualization. Network virtualization plays a key role for the next generation internet [3].

Storage virtualization; virtualizes physical storage in an enterprise storage area network (SAN). These virtual containers which are decoupled from infrastructure can be used by applications in systems. Online migration and load balancing are also supported in storage virtualization [4].

Server virtualization; simplifies the application computation by being wrapped inside virtual machines (VMs).

Virtual machines can be run along with each other on a single hardware [4]. Service-oriented architectures and isolated systems can be enabled thanks to virtual servers [11].

B. Benefits of Virtualization: Network virtualization; splits network traffic into layers,  provides easy management and improves the quality of service. Deployment of network virtualization forces new necessities and increases networks monitoring and managing performance [3].

Storage virtualization; increases available storage space and does not allow idle storage. Also, storage virtualization uncoupled the rigidity of classical systems. Today?s data centers are more agile by dint of virtualized the storages [4].

Fig. 1.General virtualization architecture and Virtual Machine  Monitor (VMM) Server virtualization; provides software and hardware  independent of system and allows the use of hardware resources through virtualization layer. More than one hardware work as if a single part like distributed systems.

Thus provides applications deployed transparently. New servers can be created from an existing template in a short time. The management of all servers in a center provides the elimination of some administrative difficulties. The cost of hardware and software reduces 40%. It provides the highest levels of scalability by reducing administrative and operational challenges [1].



V. VIRTUALIZATION SECURITY Virtualization can help you in many ways to solve the  security problems. However, in some ways virtualization can create more unsafe environments than physical systems in order to use many separate system components like virtual hardware, virtual machine monitor and physical resources by virtual system.

Virtualization technologies use abstract computing resources such as CPU and memory. These resources are used by IDSs while investigating intrusions [7].

Server virtualization can increase the reliability of the whole system, by providing a variety of software to keep their virtual environment. A virtual system error does not affect other virtual systems and attacks are confined inside the virtual environment, thus security is improved.

As an example, Java applets running on the Java VM "sandbox" environment can be given as a benefit of virtualization security in information. The sandbox restricts capabilities such as reading or writing to files on each local computer, starting or calling programs on each local computer, and obtaining network connectivity to the same computer from which applets have been loaded [1]. An application running on a virtual environment is restricted and the virtual machine system cannot interfere the own system.

Software installed on the server computers to ensure system security (antivirus, I/O control, firewall) causes        performance decrease on server computers as well as on the network. Thus, security applications must apply on Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM) layer by covering all virtual frameworks. VMM, by fulfilling the security requirements of all the virtual machines centrally, improve the virtual machines performance and consume less resource with same security level.

VMM, also called as hypervisor, is a software layer responsible for multiplexing a single physical machine to run several virtual machines on it [8]. A Virtual Machine Monitor is a highly privileged piece of software that runs either alongside or under an operating system. It is designed to be ?an efficient, isolated duplicate of the real physical machine? [9]. A hypervisor on virtualization layer with hardware and software architecture is also shown in Fig. 1 [9].

In principle, virtualization involves the use of an encapsulating software layer (Hypervisor or Virtual Machine Monitor) which surrounds or underlies an operating system and provides the same inputs, outputs, and behavior that would be expected from an actual physical device [9].

Current virtualization researches assume that the virtualization environment, such as the VMM, has knowledge of the software being virtualized, such as the guest OS. This knowledge can then be used to monitor the operation of the guest VM to determine its integrity and to correct any observed anomalies [10].

Although VMM needs the control of all the resources, it uses a very small part of system resources for its own management, virtual machine management, control, monitoring, and other operations.

One of the important features of VMM is the ability of capturing the system state and restore. Each virtual machine image can be captured very quickly and whole virtual machine can be restored very quickly (named as ?snapshot?). All of these mean that only copying the files for a VMM and it is as easy as a file transfer.

The snapshot feature provides the advantages of the ability of restoring many previous system states, malware analysis, honey pot and intrusion detection system usage.

While physical systems require additional hardware and reinstall a software system when copying a machine, this operation is not different from copying a file for a VMM.

It is impossible to differentiate the copied machine from the real one. However, unauthorized and unwanted copies cause name and address confusion on the network. That unwanted copies own the same rights to the actual machine and carry risks for the system. This problem jeopardizes the data and system confidentiality, integrity and availability and causes load balancing problems. In addition, these unauthorized copies complicate the measurements of intrusion detection systems that monitor known and valid virtual machines.

Due to being hardware-independent, multiple virtual machines can be installed on a single hardware kit. Separation of hardware and software adds inherent safety advantages to the virtualization.

There are two operation modes for VMM-based intrusion detection systems: Calibration and test. In calibration phase, abnormal activities are recorded using machine learning  techniques. In the testing phase, matching of the normal model operations and the model produced in the calibration phase is tested [8].

Since VMM covers all virtual machines system, possible threat on VMM will put at risk the whole system and everything running on it. Some features that VMM falls under the danger are confidentiality, integrity and availability.

Not only virtual machines but also VMM is at risk for privacy aspect. The operating systems on the same level or above the VMM can observe the VMM operations and intervene. In this case, the system hardware may also be at risk.

If VMM is at risk about integrity, all virtual machines and hardware are also at risk again. A system is only as strong as the weakest link power, if this weakest link is top link, it can be say easily ?system is weak?.

System can serve as long as the VMM be able to survive against Denial of Service attacks. When VMM is interrupted, all the machines running on the system will be affected. In this case, some of the system data loss and data corruption can occur. Software errors and bugs in VMM and scarcity of resources (RAM, CPU, bandwidth etc.) will have suffered the effect of DoS attacks and will stop the service.

To ensure the security of the virtualized systems and eliminate some of the disadvantages which derive inherently, some methods must be used. For secure hardware of system, attestation must be used for verification where supported, all physical accesses must be controlled, unnecessary hardware must be removed. For operating system security, all patches must be applied, disks must be full encrypted if possible, unnecessary services and software must be removed and disabled. For hypervisor security, attestation and integrity checks must be used, hypervisor must be monitored for signs of compromise. For virtual machine security, virtual machines must be prevented from utilizing physical resources, allocation of physical resources must be allocated.



VI. CONCLUSION From a security perspective, virtualization is a double-  edged sword. While some of the virtualization features occur security problems, much vulnerability are no longer a problem owing to virtualization applications. Virtualization security should be handled carefully. Systems isolation from each other brings simplicity on manageability issues, but if this operation is not handled with careful planning and practice, many dangerous situations can occur. While carefully planned, well- considered, consistently observed and well-managed virtual system?s security level is high, in the opposite case system might be completely at risk.

Against the possibility of making some security remissness, some precautions should be taken to eliminate these risks.

Virtualization technologies offer many advantages to intrusion detection and prevention systems due to ability of monitoring, snapshot, inspection of records and restore. By using these features, intrusion detection systems and intrusion prevention systems monitor the traffic in the network, learn the normal behavior patterns, detect and prevent abnormalities more successfully.

In general, Host Intrusion Detection System (HIDS) and Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) are widely used in computer security for different purpose that defending whole system which is included network and hosts and only host base systems. Likely for defending virtual hosts and virtual machine monitor can be used HIDS and NIDS at the same time. If HISD is wanted to use for defending hosts, HIDS should be install both VMs and VMM for ensuring full protected system. In this technique, there could be lost a bit of system performance. In contrast, If only NIDS is desired to use for defending virtual system, it could be required to make provision for VM.

For ensuring full protected system, it could be best way to use NIDS in front of the Virtual system and install HIDS into VMM with the using Virtualization technologies advantages.

