Keynotes & Tutorial

Abstract The Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant accident dispersed a large amount of radioactive materials, which poses risks of internal and external exposure to the residents. Because the accident broke out in the internet era, a large amount of data were digitally collected. These include radiation-monitor data, tweets, GPS-enabled mobile-phone position data, car navigation data, and so on. Analyses of such ?big data? are important to assess the risks of residents and to make plans for countermeasures. On the other hand, there have been many problems regarding the data publication method, and how to archive the collected data. Particular difficulties exist in the handling of personal radiation exposure data, due to the lack of common infrastructure, and more importantly, due to the difficulty in reconciling the data handling with the personal data protection act. I will show several examples of collected and published data, and discuss what we have learned from such data; in particular, it has become clear that the internal exposure level of Fukushima residents is much lower than was initially estimated from the soil contamination level and from the knowledge gained from the Chernobyl accident.

Biography: Dr. Ryugo Hayano is professor of experimental nuclear physics at the University of Tokyo. His research concerns fundamental symmetries and interactions of nature using the spectroscopy of exotic atoms. He earned his Ph.D from the University of Tokyo in 1979, and he held professorship at the National Laboratory for High Energy Physics (KEK) before returning to Tokyo in 1986. In 2008 he received the Nishina Memorial  Prize, the most prestigious physics prize in Japan, for the study of anti protonic helium atoms. He is the spokesperson of ASACUSA collaboration at CERN?s antiproton decelerator facility.

Since March 2011, his tweets related to the Fukushima Dai-ichi accident attracted some 150,000 followers; his activities in Fukushima include systematic measurement of school lunch for radio cesium, study of internal exposures using whole body counters, and analyses of GPS-enabled mobile phone data to visualize the flow of people around Fukushima Dai-ichi.

xlii     Keynote:   Sensing the World: Knowing Events and People?s Opinions Using Social Media Analysis   Akiko Murakami  Knowledge and Infrastructure group at IBM Research-Tokyo  Japan  Abstract: On 11th March 2011, a 9.0-magnitude mega thrust earthquake occurred in the ocean near Japan. This was the first large scale natural disaster in Japan since the broad adoption of social media tools (such as Facebook and Twitter). Since many people posted their own information to their followers in Twitter at that time, we could know what were happening in various areas from the tweets. Some people also posted tweets with their thought. In general, messages posted in Social Media scan be considered as a "sensor" of the world, not only sensing events but also sensing peoples? opinions. Using Natural Language Processing, Network Analysis and/or other technologies, we can identify events and peoples? thoughts in the world. In this talk I will show key technologies for social analytics and show some analysis results using these technologies for disaster managements, marketing, etc. I will also show the results of social analytics of candidates?/voters? activities in the Net for the Japan House of Councilors election in July 2013.

