Establishing Private Social Media Networking Platform for Socio-political  Organizations

Abstract  A Private Social Media Networking can be the foundation for a Social Media campaign that also includes Facebook?s posts, Twitter?s posts and e-mail messages.  This branded website provides the members states or social political organizations with the ability to engage their, members or citizens and neighboring countries in a deeper, more meaningful conversation that will fully develop its public level relationship with other peer country ? turning them from an ordinary relationship to closer friends (fans) and their advocates.  The suggested private social media platform will have all of the functionality of facebook with the ability to create groups, chat rooms, conversation sub- sites for member countries and anything else they need.

The private Social Media Networking platform for member states of Community will create a new type of social corridor. It has been widely realized that people seeks new and more meaningful ways to connect and engage with each other. Private Social Media Platform fills a gap in the current social spectrum by empowering and sharing conversations that is effortless but not automatic.

In our initial research work, we shall present the best-of- class designers, developers and visionaries who will work together to help define the next generation needs by provisioning this platform.

Keywords: Private Social Media, Big Data, Portal for Community Services, Role of Social media in today life, Internet II, ,Facebook , Twitter, Google

I. Introduction  Private Social Media platforms as Internet II applications can play a vital role in Social interactions, education and in research communities to create their own peers groups beyond their present borders and would like to have a ubiquitous presence at a global level. It will be based upon but not limited to the following key milestones.

The proposed Model will be based at ' Private Social Media Systems' similar in functionalities such as facebook (But Private ) Will be fully protected and resilient against any hacking, defacing threats Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability shall be high and guaranteed Member states  universities, institutions and special interest group will own their data of entire user base or fans Hosting portal for member universities should be the part of our research The portal development and hosting infrastructure should support up to millions members or fans at stage one The membership models shall be presented for approval The provisioning models about the creation of home page and groups will be presented The portal shall be made friendly and customize- able for each member state  In fact, in next two to three year Internet II will dictate the social needs to its users; it is a philosophy & strategy, supported by a technology.

Figure -1 Advent of Social Media and its timeline     We aim to develop a framework for digital portal?s business rules, workflow, processes & social characteristics, designed to engage the people. Common Interest Groups in a collaborative conversation in order to provide mutually beneficial values in a trusted & transparent environment.

Figure -2.Common Goals of Socio Political organizations e.g.  NAM, ECO, SAARC

II. Theme of private Social Media Portal  The Theme for establishing a Community Private Social Media Portal could be social connectivity  at the Citizen level and to know each other in neighborhood , exchanging private social viewpoints, making friendships and there could be an exhaustive list of activities and communications in real-time as they are active in Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.

However community member countries can equally use this portal for improving the lifestyle of entire communities, by sharing information, sharing resources, knowledge and their markets. Figure ? 2 above pragmatically identifies some challenges and suggests solutions for global communities. It is noticed that most of the communities are from under developed countries that are facing similar challenges and issues for a huge percentage of population who live below the poverty lines.



III. Private Social Networking evolution  At present generation, we are fortunate or rather privileged to have number of options to shape our lifestyles, cultural and social needs. Celebrate and perform religious rituals, comment on global and local issues, tweeting in real-time, uploading trip photos, profiling and  productizing our skills and products. But when it comes to country level we need more private, secure and vigorous platform to communicate in our country fellow citizen, furthermore if we bound to a larger scale as consortium and group of communities in likeminded countries, we further need to exhibit and expend our horizon to communicate and exchange our experiences at a bigger platform such as Community Countries platform, Non- aligned Movement (NAM) platform, The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and The Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO). For such a wider platform, we need to plan and develop the following:

IV. Social Media Plans  For materializing such a social media platform the following consideration will take place.

Lay out a plan where will the information originate?

Who will write the content?

What will be the flow of information?

Which applications will we use?

Who will be responsible for them?

How should they inter-connect?

How will private social media be marketed?

How will you keep citizens of member states engaged?

You can?t sell it just because it?s ?the thing to do? Social Media Plans The following Figures shows the workflow of proposed high level information Flow:  Figure 3. Workflow of Private Social Media platform     While Facebook, YouTube, and other social media sites are expected to play a large part in the Social Interactions as well as geo-political setup, Twitter is proposed to have a huge role in the election process. By using Twitter as a campaign tool, there is a shorter gap between the politician and the people.

For example, If anyone subscribes to lady Gaga?s private social media website known as Backplane (www.littlemonsters.com), their private feeds will update its fans regularly on how the entertainment world is experiencing new releases of songs and videos. They will then place the online order for the movies and songs and as well as they can sell and upload their own songs, videos, entertainment products to Lady Gaga?s community.

Backplane?s CEO Mathew Michelson has given a press statement that ?the future economy of Hollywood?s entertainment world will be set by Backplane? .  In other words Twitter is a great tool for getting a campaign message out to the public, it has also recently started selling political advertisements. Politicians are able to pay for ?Promoted Advertising,? which will publish posts ?in the timelines of people who follow campaigns.

The Figure -4 explains that User (objects), which can be profiled as a Social Objects of each individual or group.

This can import and export his/her connections, Activities, and updates. The data can then be filtered out for various dimensions to make it qualitative data, and further to narratives as Knowledge and wisdom.

Figure 4. Social Objects of Individual or Group  Forming Special Interest Groups & Chat Room When the portal data is fully populated and converted into knowledge or wisdom, the system will start sending POKES (one sided willing invitations) to other similar interested fans/people in the member list to form a ring of virtual Interest groups (VIG), this will form a true mesh so that they can widely get connected and started exchanging their views and experiences.

Once the Group is formed , then the Global data of the members at Facebook, Twitter, You Tube and other public  social media will be linked and started harvesting importing and exporting non-confidential and public domain data of the members or fans to our platform.

However the security and privacy will be built upon a resilient protocol to keep the media platform PRIVATE and SECURE.

(a) Security of the Portal and fan?s Data  The Security of the portal itself should be designed as high as public social media platform such as Facebook, Google and Twitter, ensuring that hacking, defacing and other incidents should be mitigated to near zero risk.  The data of the country specific, groups and individual will be fully protected.

The privacy of the fans of this platform will also be developed along the same benchmarks making sure that the portal is trustworthy and successful. Complete Security model, Hosting model, Secure DNS Provisioning and its multiple hosting, multiple instances model of the portal will be submitted.

(b) Portal Execution steps  Upon the complete evaluation of our research postulate, the implementation committee will invite consultants to work on the following feasibility studies and investigate the key milestones for supporting millions fans or members at portal with optimized resources.

It will be agile enough to fit future needs and changes Research Report on currently running Private Social Media platforms and their fans lists (in Millions) such Lady Gaga?s Entertainment platform ?Backplane? The first world Private Social Networking platform launched recently.

Research Report on Community Social Media Platform and their success storey such as www.dudu.com (For Multilingual Community social Media setup in Dubai) A Design of Community social Media Architecture supporting for Millions fans concurrently connecting Development life cycle Implementation Strategy Complete BOQ of Software, Hardware and tools Hosting recommendation and optimization Timelines and milestones Commissioning of the Portal for Member States Operating the Platform for one year Annual Maintenance and up gradation  Data Mining and analytics of the Platform (Raw Data to quality data to Knowledge Data)

V. Supporting Case Study (Social Media usage in US Elections - 2012 )  Over the past two years, we were narrowly monitoring the use of social media Campaigns in the US Elections -2012 by both presidential candidates. As an evidence we are sharing the case study in brief to support our research work for future use of social media and private social media role in community and social and political processes globally.

A complete report and comparative research work during the US Election ? 2012 can be shared if requested.

(a) EMINENCE FACTS  President Obama was using a social media platform since 2007 and established his profile and fan numbers list well in advance than the Mitt Romney. President Obama also used Social Media early in the 2008 Elections and repeatedly used in the 2012 election and reaped the benefits of social media connecting to his fans that turned out as advocates of his election campaign. First lady Michelle Obama helped him a lot to gain more fans and advocates to re-elect him for another 4 years term.

President Obama was listed at 9 social media sites whereas Mr. Mitt Romaney was listed on 7 sites. In next page one can see the fans list and social media positioning of presidential candidates in election 2012.

(b) Statistical Comparison of their Social Media usage.

(c) Digital Divide of Presidential Candidates

VI. Conclusion  The proposed Private Social media portal for establishing private social media networking platform for the member countries or members of socio Political communities, offering them private social media networking. The objectives are to focus on citizens of those countries, their cultural and special interest groups to have more interactive cradle for collaboration and networking.

The main objective is easy connectivity with any device, anywhere at any time and goal is to establish private social media cutting edge platform based on robust technology, similar to Facebook and twitter. The data privacy and control will remain with portal owners such as NAM, ECO and SAARC organizations.



VII. References  1. Anderson, Nate; Technical, Ars (14 January 2011). "Tweeting Tyrants Out of Tunisia: Global Internet at Its Best". Wired..

2. Kaplan Andreas M., Haenlein Michael (2010).

"Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of social media [ Page 52 to 61]  3. "Social Media Stats in Australia Facebook Blogger Myspace". Socialmedianews.com.

Retrieved 2012-10-22  4. Powell, Guy R.; Groves, Steven W.; Dimos, Jerry (2011). ROI of Social Media: How to improve the return on your social marketing investment.

5. Lardi, Kamales; Fuchs, Rainer (2013). Social Media Strategy - A step-by-step guide to building your social business (1st ed.).

