Communication Technology and Electric-Vehicle Technology (rICT & ICeV-T)

Abstract? The ability to generate a meaningful big-data through social media opens many possibilities that never existed before.

In traffic management system, there are systems that use user generated contents to brings information about real-time traffic condition, such as waze (www.waze.com). However, those applications do not utilize the available traffic camera network.

Second, they do not also utilize all that information to predict the future traffic condition through simulation and use it to gives user traffic suggestions that potentially balances the traffic load.

The paper describes the project to develop the integration of traffic camera network & user proximity device?s generated content to bring more robust traffic information. Furthermore, by using those information to calibrate traffic microsimulation in real-time, the system has prediction capability to generate better sugestion for the user and even optimally balance the traffic load.

Keywords? microsimulation, big-data, user generated content, traffic management system, model calibration

I. INTRODUCTION Simulation is become more and more important concept in  many applications. The ability to model complex phenomena and gives predictions are become the important and necessary foundation of more advanced features especially in transportation system.

However, there are gap between the application of macro- simulation model that usually is used on planning and demand forecasting on one hand and the need of operational model on the other.

Planning or demand forecasting model that are used in predicting future traffic volumes are based on land use patterns and socio-economic factors such as income levels, vehicle ownership and other household information. It is suitable for a view at large, big picture, but unable to provide operational information that  is often required in smaller scale such as daily traffic management, or traffic sugestion to individual users.

On the other hand, the operational models that  are more concerned on the smaller scale issues such as arterial analysis and capacity analysis at intersections at a specific time, are usually deficient in capturing wide effects of a localized improvement because of their simulation scope.

The widely available GPS-based on-board navigation computer is one of the example of the available operational model that suffers such problem. It has the capability to gives route suggestion to the user without concerning to any actual traffic condition.

A better solution is to augment the navigation computer with real traffic condition so that the user can make a traffic related decision using the information of the actual traffic condition. Waze (www.waze.com) has done exactly that by utilizing the actual traffic information from the user, user generated traffic data.

The application on user proximity devices, smartphone or car unit, interprete user?s movement data from GPS-equiped smartphone into traffic information, and send the information to central data server. All user of Waze now can see the interpretation of data for the whole traffic network and act accordingly.

Despite the success drawing many users, the above approach still faces many issues i.e. (1) since user only know the actual traffic information, the user decision can lead to suboptimal trafic since the one user decision is mutually exclusive to the other; (2)  there are no prediction available on the future traffic condition which also leads to suboptimal decission making by the user.

This paper describes the Bandung Smart Transportation System Project (BSTS) at the School of Electrical Engineering & Informatics, Institut Teknologi Bandung. It is the next enhancement to the above system by making the simulation of the traffic as the back-bone of the system.

Similar to Waze system, there are information from the user proximity devices  sent to the central server. The information is used for simulation calibration. However, since not all traffic actors are the collaborative member of the BSTS service, then additional information is needed to refine the realism of the simulation further. The BSTS used the available traffic camera network for additional calibration information.

The next section describes the traffic microsimulation model. BSTS is design to be a service for Bandung City area, hence the Bandung map & Bandung street map is used. Next, the section will illustrate on how the information from the user and camera is used for callibration of the simulation.

Several open problems for the future works are presented on the last section of the paper.



II. TRAFFIC MICROSIMULATION There are two different strategies to simulate traffic  systems:  1)  Macroscopic simulation: the approach includes simulation with dispersion model [4], freeway traffic model [5], etc.

2)  Microscopic simulation: the approach includes cellular automata model [6], multi-agent simulation[7][8][9][10], particle system simulation [11]etc.

There are also strategies that combine those two approaches, mesoscopic simulation,  such as the ones discussed in [12][13][14].

Microscopic modeling allows for tracing the individual vehicles right  from the entry into the network until the departure. It also allows for assigning to each vehicle type a specific performance capabilities such as maximum speeds, acceleration and decelerations, and/or some other unique characteristics such as handling limitation etc. Since one of the key features of BSTS is the ability to give users a unique suggestions then the microsimulation model is picked as the direction.

There are many microsimulation framework that is available. We have reviewed and compare various traffic simulator software packages which employ micro-simulation approaches. The effort is similar to [3]  and we choose SUMO software package [2]  as the framework for BSTS back-bone.

According to [2], there are four steps that should be performed to rum simulation in SUMO, i.e.:  ? Step 1 - To build the network: this step is to enter road network information(spatial information about road, capacity, condition et.).

? Step 2 - To build demand information: this step is  to enter  traffic that is estimated from existing  O-D (origin ? destination) matrices. It reflects the traffic condition that is uncontrollable but known information.

? Step 3 - To compute the dynamic user assignment: this step is to enter the dynamic of the vehicles that is time dependent.

? Step 4 - To run the simulation for certain period of time that is considered valid.



III. BSTS AND SIMULATION CALIBRATION   Fig. 1  BSTS Project Main Website  Main site of BSTS Project is http://bsts.lskk.ee.itb.ac.id (Fig. 1). In that site, the user can register and download smartphone applications for various platform.

A. BSTS System The architecture of BSTS Server Architecture is given  below:   SUMO Simulation Framework  Traffic Camera Server  User Data Server  User Suggestion Generator   Fig. 2  BSTS Server Architecture   BSTS Server System consists of: (1)  Traffic Camera  Server, (2) User Data Server; (3) SUMO Simulation Framework; (4) User Suggestion Generator.

The BSTS Server?s working period is 2 minutes. Fig 4 illustrate the tasks on BTS Server?s working period.The working period consists of the time for:  - Traffic Camera Server to collect camera data and intepret the traffic statuson particular traffic node based on the camera  data.

- User Data Server to collect all BSTS member data.

- Callibrate the model into - Running the Simulation  for 10 minutes simulated time.

- Inteprete the simulation data and generatesuggestion  for the user.

B. Traffic Camera Information BSTS Project collaborates with www.bandung247.com to  gain access to 100s of their cameras around Bandung.

Fig. 3  Traffic camera image sa  The Traffic Camera Server handle reque  camera server of www.bandung247.com, extract the number of vehicles in every fram  Based on those information, it esti condition at certain road network  node an O-D matrices that is needed by SUMO Sim     ample  est of images to the and process it to  me of the images.

imates the traffic nd can generate the  mulation Framework.

START  Road Network Initialization  Acquire Traffic Camera Data  Modify the Demand File According to  Traffic Camera Data  Acquire User Traffic Data  Modify the Dynamic User  Assignment According to User Traffic  Data  Run Simulation for 1 minutes  real-time  Generate Custom  Suggestion for User  Finish?

Yes  STOP  Fig. 4  BSTS Serve    C. User Generated Information   er Working Period  n       Each user of BSTS will periodically gives to the BSTS User Generated Data information concerning:  - Position & Direction - Speed - Origin (automatically) - Destination  Those informations is sufficient to generate a corresponding O-D matrices of SUMO Simulation Framework. Fig. 5 illustrate the Client User Interface with the map of Bandung Metropolitan Area.

Fig. 5  Client User Interface    D. Model Callibration There are numerouscalibration procedures, however the  following have nbeen used most frequently: (a) manual search; (b) gradient approach; (c) simplex-based approach; and (d) artificial intelligence technique[1]. At this stage, simplex- based approach is choosen for its simplicity.

The measure of similarity between empirical observation and simulated result is a common measure of the mean absolute error (MAER):  ? where  - Si  = metric from simulation model - Oi  = obeserved metric - n  = number of observation   Since O-D matrices from User Generated Information is assumed to be really what the user means, the optimization for calibration is only be done for the selection of O-D matrices from Traffic Camera Image Data.



IV. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE REMARKS This paper has described the BSTS Project that employs  traffic simulation system. The simulation system uses user generated data and traffic camera data to calibrate the microsimulation model such that it reflects the reality.

However, issues on capacity & performance becomes the problem that need to be aware of since for BSTS to be  realistically operational, it need to have the capacity to simulate hundreds of thousand to millions vehicle.

Furthermore, there are several issues that need to be resolved for the future works i.e: (1) the calibration is based on the above calibration measure, however there are uncertainty regarding how good the calibration from the point of view of the user; (2) the prediction and the suggestion for the user is based on the assumed valid simulation horizon (1 minutes simulation periods), it is still uncertain un how to measure the validity time horion of simulation and the factors that affect it.

.

