Utilizing interactive simulation-based modules for  enhancing learning outcomes in Basic Computing

Abstract?The utilization of interactive simulation-based  instructional materials for teaching an introductory computer course plays a big contribution in leveraging student learning outcomes. Simulation can provide learners a guided environment wherein they learn the content by doing it. This paper focuses on the discussion of the positive outcomes and benefits gained by students in Sultan Qaboos University from the IT Foundation Program while utilizing an online course that is fully equipped with simulation-based training modules. It includes presentation of findings from an experiment to measure the impact of simulation in improving students learning engagement and performance. Whilst students responded favorably on the use of simulation tools and perceived that their comprehension and retention of the learning material were satisfied, the implication of this study is for educators to consider the incorporation of simulation-based modules in teaching. This paper also tackles some of the challenges affecting the implementation of simulation tools in teaching an online introductory computer course in the university. Discussions of results contained in this paper are supported with quantitative and qualitative data describing students perceptions on the employment of simulation-based modules. Furthermore, discussions about future directions of integrating ICT tools such as simulation-based instructional tools in Sultan Qaboos University context will also be presented for consideration.

Keywords? simulation; simulation-based training; technology; interactivity; learning outcome

I.  INTRODUCTION The innovative utilization of educational technologies such  as simulation tools provides higher educational institutions relevant opportunities for the design and implementation of media enhanced, interactive, and engaging learning environments (Sankey, Birch and Gardiner, 2010). They also claim that it is not questionable that the intention to improve the  engagement and learning of students serves as the key motivation for integrating these educational technologies into most of the curricula. Furthermore, the way how teachers select the way of delivering the content to their students serves also as focal point when designing effective learning environments (Bell and Kozlowski, 2007). Hence, the presentation format of content must have an impact on whether the student can be  motivated internally to learn further. Instructional designers together with the subject matter experts must carefully consider the design and development of content delivery which can be assist students for better comprehension of the content and for them to be able to apply the content when given real world problems.

It has been noted that simulation has been successfully used for decades in tactical training environments that requires performance (Radcliff, 2005). Also in the same year 2005, Radcliff emphasized that simulation offers an attractive alternative for soft-skills training and becomes a just-in-time testing ground for students. He also added that high-quality, realistic simulation can offer the benefits of engaging scenarios, highly interactive content, and relevance of the subject content as applied to real-world scenarios.

Considering the rapid and continuous advancement of educational technologies, the way in which we train and educate people are becoming more and more advanced as well (Sankey, Birch and Gardiner, 2010). Students usually face difficulties in learning especially if the content is semantically complex to assimilate. Whilst having this phenomenon observed, there is a growing need for more powerful tools such as simulations and modeling tools to assist students achieve a successful learning path (Bell, Kanar and Kozlowski 2008).

In the Sultanate of Oman, its Ministry of Education has undertaken a comprehensive reform of its education system in an effort to improve the quality of education for all students in Oman. It believes that information and communications technology can act as an important change agent to facilitate educational reforms [32]. As a leading university in Oman, the Sultan Qaboos University has taken initiatives in employing innovative educational technology. It aims to enhance teaching and learning at SQU through supporting faculty members and departments with the latest technologies in teaching and encourage the adoption of best instructional practices.

This paper presents the findings from an experiment that shows the impact of using simulation-based modules for increasing learners outcomes in Basic Computing Skills course in Sultan Qaboos University. An enumeration of the benefits  e-Courses: Standards of Excellence and Creativity  DOI 10.1109/ECONF.2013.60   e-Courses: Standards of Excellence and Creativity"  DOI 10.1109/ECONF.2013.69     that simulation tools contributed to these students from the IT Foundation Program will also be presented.

The structure of this paper is preceded  with defining simulation-based training and relevant related literatures, such as effective content presentation and multimedia in teaching.

Various research papers focusing on simulation modeling, best practices and guidelines for effective development were taken into consideration for review. The methodology used in the research will also be discussed. Afterwards, the examination of the benefits and challenges associated with simulation-based training in Sultan Qaboos University follows, specifically in the context of students from the IT Foundation Program who were enrolled in the Basic Computing Skills course. The author also aims to justify the promise of simulation-based training as applicable for SQU students as well as the barriers that can affect simulation-based teaching in SQU context. Finally, the author concludes by discussing the future directions of integrating simulation-based instructional tools in Sultan Qaboos University as an innovative educational strategy to assist students achieve better learning outcomes.



II. LITERATURE REVIEW  A. Overview In general point of view, simulations refer to artificial  environments that are carefully created to manage individuals? experiences of reality (Bell, Kanar and Kozlowski, 2008). It serves as an exercise involving reality of function but in a simulated environment (Jones 1998, p. 329). Simulations should possess an essential feature of having the ability to augment, replace, create, and/or manage a learner?s actual experience with the world by providing realistic content and embedded instructional features (Cannon-Bowers and Bowers, ?in press?). Specific type of simulation tools such as computer- based simulations has its growing use and has become  a research venue for conducting other related studies that seek to prove its effectiveness. According to Bell, Kanar and Kozlowski (2008), various studies were able to show that simulation-based training specifically computer-based simulations are capable of providing synthetic learning environments for learners.

B. Benefits of simulation-based training Considering today's emerging challenges such as  globalization, economic pressures, changing nature of work, and work-life issues, these all contribute for a creation of a business environment that demands innovative, flexible training solutions (Bell and Kozlowski, 2007). Additionally, technological advancements have opened a room for development of technology-based training applications as practical tools for addressing these emerging challenges (Summers, 2004). Salas, Kosarzycki, Burke, Fiore, and Stone (2002) claims that technological advancements have expanded both the breadth and depth of training technologies which results into today?s high-end technologies and thus offering the capability to provide information-rich content and immerse trainees in high fidelity dynamic simulations. This focus on technology is evident in the simulation-based training literature as many studies have focused on either describing the  technological features of simulations (Summers, 2004) or on describing specific training systems and applications (Draijer and Schenk, 2004).

Bell, Kanar and Kozlowski (2008) summarized the instructional features and the associated potential benefits of simulation-based training which is described in Table 1. They justified this summary by providing a detailed discussion of each of the features which is given in the following section.

TABLE I.  INSTRUCTIONAL FEATURES AND POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF SIMULATION-BASED TRAINING                            The first instructional feature discussed by Kozlowski and Bell (2007) has to do with the content, which concerns on the richness with which basic declarative information is delivered through the system to trainees. As Schreiber (1998) notes, the presentation of information represents one of the key features of an instructional event.

The second category raised by Kozlowski and Bell (2007) focuses on features that influence immersion or sense of realism. The goal is not to replicate the actual performance environment, but rather to prompt the essential underlying psychological processes relevant to key performance characteristics in the real-world setting (Kozlowski and DeShon, 2004).

The third category which relates to interactivity or collaboration potential is a feature of simulation that captures characteristics that can influence the potential degree and type of interaction between users of the system, between trainers and trainees, and potentially between teams or collaborative learning groups (Kozlowski and Bell, 2007).

Finally, it is important to consider  the features that influence communication richness or bandwidth, which tells up to which the extent users can communicate via verbal and non- verbal means (Kozlowski and Bell, 2007).

C. Simulation as a training tool In the training world, simulation or experiential learning  has a long and productive history (Radcliff, 2005). Radcliff in the same year, noted that the trainers from various fields such as medical, aeronautical, and military have successfully used simulation to train individuals responsible for preserving lives, training in life-threatening environments, and protecting expensive or irreplaceable property. He also reported that for decades, airline pilots have practiced scores of landings on a simulator before ever setting foot in an actual airplane cockpit.

Simulation has been a preferred training method in many commercial areas, including manufacturing, engineering, call centers, healthcare, supply chain automation, animation, process engineering and education (Radcliff, 2005).

D. Best Practices for Simulation Modeling and Program Flow The aviation industry and military have spent years  developing best practices for simulation models that have been tested and proven effective. The content flow that has been determined to be most effective follows a model that was originally developed for the Navy and other military divisions.

(Radcliff, 2005). Radcliff also analyzed the content flow of effective soft-skills simulators, hence he came up with summarizing this flow as shown below in Figure 1. He explained that content flow for effective simulators typically includes five components: briefing which sets the stage for the training and provides the knowledge transfer component; best practices model comes next  where participants are given an opportunity to see an example of a successful client interaction. Afterwards, participants go through the simulation, applying the knowledge they gained in the earlier sections. The next section is the debriefing, where participants receive feedback and coaching on their behavior in the simulation. If they don?t take the best possible course of action through the simulation, they are given an opportunity to repeat it. The fifth component although not shown in the figure involves follow up. This process provides the critical continuous learning portion of the program. It enables participants to revisit the simulation as needed and can also include new modules that carry on where the original simulation left off and introduce new challenges to the participants.

Fig. 1. An Effective Program Flow for Soft-skills Simulations  E. Multimodal Learning The use of multimedia in conjunction with hypermedia has  been successfully applied to many e-learning environments for enhancement and also to cater a variety of student learning styles (Birch and Gardiner, 2005; Sankey and St Hill, 2009; Sprague and Dahl 2010). Neuroscience research has also revealed that significant increases in learning can be accomplished through the informed use of visual and verbal multimodal learning (Fadel, 2008, p. 12).

This means that students may feel more comfortable and perform better when learning in environments that cater for their predominant learning style (Cronin, 2009; Omrod, 2008).

This is also referred to as the  ?meshing hypothesis? (Pashler et al. 2008, p. 109). Further, Shah and Freedman (2003) discuss a number of benefits of using visualizations in learning environments, including: (1) promoting learning by providing an external representation of the information; (2) deeper processing of information; and (3) maintaining learner attention by making the information more attractive and motivating, hence making complex information easier to comprehend.

Fadel (2008) found that students engaged in learning that incorporates multimodal designs, on average, outperform students who learn using traditional approaches with single modes.

The use of multiple representations, particularly in computer-based learning environments has now long been recognized as a very powerful way to facilitate understanding (Moreno, 2002). For instance, when the written word fails to fully communicate a concept, a visual representation can often remedy the communication problem (Ainsworth and Van Labeke, 2002). Some simple examples of multiple representations include, using audio enhanced PowerPoint slides as mini lectures, usually using point-form text or images as shown in Figure 2;  interactive diagrams with accompanying transcripts and voiceovers as described in Figure 3 which may contain video presentations, interactive graphs and forms, audio explanations of concepts and still images. In these examples, the multimedia elements (visual, aural, and interactive elements) present additional representations of the information also opposed to text-based explanations alone.

Fig. 2. Example of an Audio-enhanced PowerPoint presentation                         Fig. 3. Interactive narrated learning objects with a text-based transcript  F. Advantages and Benefits of Simulation Learning Radcliff (2005) noted that simulated soft-skills scenarios  can be designed to meet almost any training objective and can be deployed with many levels of complexity. Participant interaction and retention are usually quite high in simulation training, as it engages the participant in a competitive gaming environment. The author also enumerated the advantages and benefits of using simulation-based learning which includes its being safe, effective, proven training methodology that is capable of handling complex, changing scenarios; it provides realistic, motivating training experiences for soft-skills training needs; it is entertaining and engaging, as compared to traditional e-learning; it enables learning to occur in a low-risk situation that is effective for large, dispersed sales forces, as well as for training inexperienced sales personnel on complex products or within a complex sales cycle; return of investment may be higher than traditional training methodologies because of the ability to develop realistic scenarios and enable participants to actually practice with them repeatedly; by providing an almost exact replication of a work environment, employees are better prepared for actual job tasks [30]; it provides opportunity for ongoing continuous learning and reinforcement and can be used to supplement other training tools and methodologies.



III. METHODOLOGY The main objective of this study was to establish a cause-  and-effect relationship between the way how the concepts are being taught to students, that is through the use of simulation- based modules and their learning outcomes. An experimental research design was conducted to allow for the implementation of simulation-based modules and the measurement of students learning performance. The researcher used the ADDIE instructional design model for developing a fully online course that contains most of the simulation-based modules for all the chapters included in the Basic Computing Skills course. In line with this methodology, a post experiment survey was also conducted to investigate whether students benefit from simulation tools and to determine as well which learning elements were considered to be most helpful in assisting their learning.

With the relevant approval and acceptance of the study by the Sultan Qaboos University, the researcher held a preliminary meeting with 15 lecturers of the IT Foundation Program who are assigned to teach Basic Computing Skills course. The purpose of such meeting was to explain to the lecturers the research rationale and its objectives. In that meeting, an agreement between the researcher and the lecturers was established which was to provide the researcher two sections of students to participate in the experiment and for them to be automatically enrolled to Online Basic Computing Skills course developed by the researcher.

Specifically, the processes involved in the experiment are enumerated in Figure 4 as given below:                                Fig. 4. Processes involved in the experiment  Participants accessed the Online Basic Computing Skills course in an open flexible set up, which means that they log on to the course before, during or after the class. It has been found however, that out of 60 students enrolled in the online course, 83% of them log on to the course after their class, while 13% use the online course during class hours and the remaining 4% prior to going to class.

Demographic data was also collected through an online pre- experiment survey including their gender, age, and program.

Furthermore, students were also asked if they have existing knowledge of the course and how they consider their level of familiarity with the course. They were also asked if they had previous experience of using simulation learning. Participants were also asked of their learning style preferences or their desired mode of learning (aural, textual, visual or multimodal).

These questions were all important to the research to determine how students were ready enough to try using the experimental course that has all the simulation-based modules.

Most importantly, an online post-experimental survey was provided by the researcher to gather students? perceptions of the benefits they gained from using the simulation tools.

As this study seeks to address the impact of simulation- based modules for an enhanced student learning, the researcher came up with research questions in order to prove the research hypothesis. These questions were divided according into two major themes:  A. Effectiveness of the Simulation Learning  Participants were asked if the simulation tools were effective enough to make their learning better. Questions under this category were based on the literature gathered about the best practices used in developing effective simulation models as described by Radcliff (2005). These questions were then verified from the participants.

B. Benefits from utilizing the simulation tools  Using a checklist of the promising benefits and advantages that a user of simulation tool should get, this checklist was then verified to the students if they were also able to obtain them. Questions under this category were based on the literature gathered about the ideal benefits of utilizing simulation tools  as enumerated by Radcliff (2005).

Additionally, six open-ended questions were provided in the online post-experiment survey to enable participants express what they felt had been the most helpful contribution of simulation tools in their learning. These qualitative measures were included to provide students with the opportunity to give a more in-depth account of their encounters with the simulation environments.



IV. FINDINGS AND  DISCUSSIONS From the participants population of 60, 61% were females  and the rest of the 39% were males. A varying age was noted, with the youngest participant being 16 years and the eldest being  years. Most of the participants were between 17 to 18 years. There is also a variation with regards to participants mode of learning styles which is given in Table 2.

TABLE II.  STUDENTS LEARNING STYLES PREFERENCES   Learning Style   Female   Male   Total  Visual  10 (27.7%) 8 (33.33%) 18 (30%) Aural  2 (5.55%) 3 (12.5%) 5 (8.33%)  Read/write  2 (5.55%) 2 (8.33%) 4 (6.66%) Kinaesthetic 10 (27.77%) 9 (37.5) 19 (31.66%) Multimodal  12 (33.33%) 2 (8.33%) 14 (23.33%)  TOTAL  36 (60%) 24 (40%) 60 (100.0%)   The majority of participants prefer a kinaesthetic learning style (31.66%) while there was 30% for visual learners.

Read/write (6.66%) and aural (8.33%) learners were under represented in the sample. There were also differences across gender. It was found out that the females in the sample  predominantly had a multimodal (33.33%) learning preference.

Females were more evenly distributed across multimodal (33.33%), visual (27.7%) and kinaestheric (27.7%) learning styles. There were very few aural learners in the sample with only 5.55% of females and only 12.5% of males.

A. Examining the results for Research Theme 1 The first research question is concerned whether simulation  tools were effective enough to contribute in improving participants learning outcomes. Majority of participants (92%) strongly agree that the simulation tools provided in the online course were able to provide them an effective briefing mechanism to orient them within the simulation activity including the target mission. While the 8% perceives that the simulations briefing capability was quite good. None of the respondents objected on the briefing feature of the simulation tools which implies that they were able to comfortably work within simulation environment.

Relatively, it was an overwhelming result that indicates 99% of the students perceive that the simulation tools provided in the course had modeling capabilities through a demonstration that  shows them how to perform the required tasks in a right way. Additionally, they perceive that with the simulation tools? accessible FAQ section, the difficulties they faced were fairly addressed in a real-time. Only 1% of the participants shown a fair response on this feature.

When it comes to simulation experience, 95% of the participants perceive that they were challenged, engaged and became interactive while doing the simulation activity. They believe that the coaching feature of the simulation tools motivate them to progress throughout the activity. However, the remaining 5% shown a fair response regarding the simulation experience they had with the simulation tools. With these results, none perceive negatively about the simulation experience while using the said modules.

Furthermore, the debriefing capabilities of the simulation tools were also justified as effective by the participants. 84% of them perceive that they were able to review their performance through a completion report given by the simulation tool. The 12% of them however expressed a positive feedback on the feature of the tool that suggests  the next activities that can be done by the student when a high score is obtained, otherwise it will suggest for the repetition of the simulation activity.

B. Examining the results for Research Theme 2 The second research question addresses the issue on  whether the students were able to benefit from utilizing the simulation tools. The experimental data revealed a slight difference across the benefits of simulation tools with respect to their learning performance. However the qualitative data obtained from the open-ended questions, indicated that there learners expressed different levels of satisfaction with respect to the contributions of simulation tools in their learning.

Out of 60 students, 51 (85%) claimed that simulation tools are beneficial to increase their learning outcomes. They like the situation that while they are doing a simulation activity, their anxiety of possibly damaging any element involved in the     activity is omitted. They perceive that simulation activities provided them realistic, motivating training experiences and that their problem solving skills are challenged and improved.

Qualitative questions through open-ended questions gave the opportunity for students to give a more in-depth comment of their experience with the simulation environments. Some of the exemplary comments that describe this experience are being expressed in the following statements:  1. It motivates me a lot because the system has like a guiding teacher but virtual type.

2. Where can I download all your simulations? It helped me a lot like a tutorial resource.

3. How I wish all my courses in SQU have this kind of resources. Very helpful!!!



V. CONCLUSIONS Referring to the quantitative data obtained for this study, it  indicated that students from the IT Foundation Program in Sultan Qaboos University possess a high optimism in utilizing simulation tools. They perceive that simulation learning can assist their comprehension, understanding and retention of content and thus make their learning  a more interesting and enjoyable experience. Given these findings, the importance of providing enjoying learning environment for students is also dependent on educators.  Educators should then be encouraged to explore the use of educational technology and multimedia such as simulation tools for enhancing their students learning experience. However in this relation, it is also important for Sultan Qaboos University stakeholders to consider the necessary technological resources that will enable instructional designers and subject matter experts select and develop effective tools to meet specific training objectives.

Relative to the development and production of simulation tools in the university, instructional designers and subject matter experts should be continuously encouraged to become abreast with the latest and best practices for simulation modeling. This is to enable them develop highly reliable simulation tools that can be relevant for the students. The author strongly suggests for the university to invest on this project and support the stakeholders for its successful development and implementation.

Furthermore, as it has been indicated that the use of multimedia in teaching has been very essential as students feel more comfortable and able perform better when learning in environments that address their  learning style. Teachers in the university must be aware of their students preferred mode of learning and should be willing enough to provide a mechanism that will address those preferences. Currently, a limitation known to be affecting this issue is that teachers might know their students needs, but the technological resources are quite limited for them to address those needs. To reiterate, the university should consider the technological needs of the academic departments to be able to design and deliver effective teaching.

Through this study, the teachers and students of the IT Foundation Program in Sultan Qaboos University perceive that  simulation tools are relevant towards enhancing learning outcomes. However, there are certain challenges and issues that must be addressed which include technical factors such as reliability of internet connection, bandwidth issues and availability of software applications for the developing simulation tools. However despite of these technical dilemmas, the university continuously implements appropriate solutions to improve the situation. It is then also recommendable for the university to invest on advance technological resources that can enable educators design effective learning environments such as complex simulation tools.

Finally, as simulations have been proven by many studies to be effective in enhancing learning outcomes, the university should devise a strategy on how to integrate this methodology in other curricula. Further experimentations for instance can be done in other areas of specializations to determine the applicability of simulation tools as a supplementary aid in assisting the students achieve better learning outcomes. The author recommends for a follow up experimentation about the use of simulation tools in other areas of study such as Engineering, Medical or Nursing courses for instance, where simulation can be fully utilized. These future researches should involve a larger sample of students with the provision of more complex and highly-interactive simulation-based modules.

