Data Marketplace for Efficient Data Placement

Abstract?Data values are uneven. Some data have higher (financial) values than others. Data with low value-density should be reduced in size or removed in order to make room for new data with higher values. Okanohara et al.[9] argued that the data values will determine the placement of data in the network so as to maximize the utilization of the storage capacity (and the processing power) of the entire network, and proposed an architecture called Krill. Determining data values, however, is not an easy task because the data values are speculative, meaning that the future values are usually unknown. This paper discusses an attempt to adopt the marketplace concept for determining the data values. It is expected the market efficiency guarantees the best possible value is assigned to each data item. We consider two models with different complexity and show that the overall utilization of the network is maximized.



I. INTRODUCTION  Okanohara et al.[9] argued that most of data will be stored and processed at the edge of the network in the next ?BigData? era. They call this phenomenon ?Edge-Heavy Data?, and proposed an architecture called Krill. The main idea behind the Krill architecture is that the networked agents (called krill nodes) dynamically determine the value of data, and the data will be optimally allocated over the network based on the value density. The way to represent the value of data becomes the key question. The value of data may consist of its present value as well as its future (speculative) values. For example, the data from a surveillance camera may not be interesting at present, but if later a suspect is found to be in its vicinity, the data value suddenly increases.

In [9] they defined Data Value Field (DVF) as a tuple < A, V > where A = {a1, a2, . . . , aN} are N krill nodes and V is its predictive value model. Each krill ai has a time series data collected from its locally attached sensors. The predictive value model vt0(i, j) represents the value of data ai looked at by the krill aj at time t0. In general, the data values are asymmetric, that is, vt0(i, j) ?= vt0(j, i). Figure 1 shows a DVF consisting of two krills a1 and a2.

This is a simple model but they did not give the details how these values are determined. In this paper, we try to adopt the idea of marketplace as a concrete example of giving these values. Marketplaces are known to maximize the overall utilization of the market (a property called market efficiency) if the participants of the marketplace behave rationally. In particular, market mechanisms are known to be very powerful in predicting the future in very complex problems such as the completion date of a large integration project [10].

On the other hand, market mechanisms on the Internet have different characteristics, due to complex relationships between digital contents, copyrights, and their values. Since  ?????? ??  ??????? ?  ?????	?? ???  ??  Fig. 1. Data Value Field  digital contents can be duplicated without cost, the correlation between their rarity (or demand) and value (or price) does not hold. We also have to rethink about digital copyrights, since free-shared contents or knowledge can generate different assets or future values in the eco-system, as known in Creative Commons [6]. Freemium [1] is also known as a successful business model in many industries, in which customers can use initial services for free, and if they like it, they pay for optional premium services. Market mechanism on each eco- system depends on the nature of the economic assets and environment. In this paper, we would like to predict how the market mechanisms for ?Edge-Heavy Data? looks like in the future data-centric society.

Next section shows a motivating scenario of the data marketplace in the setting of surveillance cameras in a fictitious shopping mall. Then in Section 3 we discuss the most basic model of data marketplace and show the market efficiency in fact holds. Section 4 extends the model for more realistic cases, followed by the remarks of the future works.



II. SHOPPING MALL SCENARIO  As a motivating example, we use a shopping mall scenario (Figure 2). Suppose that a shopping mall has surveillance cam- eras installed in strategic locations such as the mall entrance, the backyards, and each tenant. These cameras as well as the data analytic node are implemented as krill nodes and they are sharing the data. Each krill node has its local storage. For example, each camera has 100GB of local storage to store the recorded images.

Note that 100GB is barely enough to store images for just one day provided that images are taken every second and each image is 1MB. Old images must be discarded so that the more recent images can be kept for later analysis. In the figure, The sequence of small boxes represents the time series of recorded   DOI 10.1109/ICDMW.2013.146    DOI 10.1109/ICDMW.2013.146     Krill1: Frontgate Camera Krill2: Backyard Cameras  Krill3: Analytics Engine Krill4: Tenant Camera 3: Ana e Krill4: T  <? > 1 day  <? >  suspicious Reduced in size but later marked as important  <? >  Shoppers? realtime demographic info  100GB 100GB  100GB  100GB <? >  suspicious  Analytics on: ? Shopper demographic ? Suspicious activities activi  ? Sales prediction ? Shrink management  Fig. 2. Shopping Mall Scenario  images. The rightmost ones are the most recent, and the old items are on the left. The size of the box represents the size of the image (e.g., in bytes). For example, in the krill node for the mall entrance (Krill 1) maintains up to one day of full size images but reduces the size of the older images.

The analytic node (Krill node 3) accesses these images.

For example, Krill 3 may want to analyze the number of male shoppers in their 50?s currently in the mall. To do this analysis, the analytic node needs to access the images taken by the entrance camera. To keep track of the shoppers in the mall, the analytic algorithm may need to look back images in the early morning of the same day, but it seldom needs to access the images older than one day. Thus, the analytic node (Krill node 3) makes a ?bid? to Krill node 1 saying that ?I am interested in full size images of the same day, but less interested in the older images.?  The analytic node also keeps track of any suspicious activities in the shopping mall. To do this, it needs to correlate activities in various parts of the shopping mall. For example, if a person that closely matches the description of a potential terrorist is identified in one of the backyard cameras, the analytic node may want to distribute the information to other krill nodes so that they can report when this particular person appears in their cameras. Thus, the analytic node also makes a ?bid? to the other Krill nodes saying that ?I am interested in any suspicious persons or activities found in your node.?  Based on this ?bidding? information each node can re- prioritize the local storage usage. For example, Krill Node 1 usually keeps track of the one day worth of the full-size images in the local storage because that is the information needed by its client, Krill Node 3. Older images are less important so they are kept in a format with reduced size. The size reduction could be in the image resolution, or only the features extracted  from the images are kept. If Krill node 1 is informed about a suspicious person and finds that this person is captured in one of the older images, these images are flagged as important and protected from further reduction in size of removal.



III. BASIC DATA MARKETPLACE MODEL  We first build a very basic model for data marketplace. In this model, we consider one seller and m buyers as in Figure 3.

The seller has n data items A = {a1, a2, ..., an} each of which occupies one unit of the storage space. The seller has the total R units of storage space. We assume that R < n, meaning that the seller cannot keep all the data items in the storage. It needs to select a subset A? (A? ? A and |A?| = R) at time t0 when the buyers make their bids.

Seller: a1, a2, ?, ai, ?, an  Buyers: b1, b2, ?, bj, ?, bm  , ?  bid / use  1, a2, , ?, ai,  Fig. 3. Seller and Buyers  There are m buyers b1, b2, ..., bm. At time t0, a buyer bj makes a bid Bj (Bj ? A) by selecting data items that bj believes that it will need to access at a future time t1 (see Figure 4).

t0 t1  bid use  Fig. 4. Bidding and Using  At time t1, each buyer bj tries to access the data items in B?j . Note that the actual access request B  ? j may be different  from its original bid Bj because the prediction may have been inaccurate. Also not all the items may be available because the seller has already removed data items (it may be B?j ?? A?).

For each data item successfully accessed (i.e., a ? B?j ? A?), bj pays a constant access fee c to the seller. We assume that the utility that bj receives from the access to the data item a is greater than c.

With this setting the seller tries to maximize the total payment from the buyers. Each buyer bj pays the amount c ? |B?j ? A?| to the seller so the seller?s total revenue will be c? ?mj=1|B?j ? A?|. The seller maximize this by carefully choosing A?. If the bids B1, B2, ..., Bm at time t0 are good indicator of the access pattern B?1 , B  ? 2 , ..., B  ? m at time t1, the  best strategy for the seller is to select R data items that have the largest number of bids. The other data items are discarded.

A buyer wants to maximize the utility of the data access at time t1. In other words, a buyer bj chooses its bid Bj so as to maximize the number of data items that are available when accessed, that is, |B?j ? A?|. It is easily seen that the best strategy for bj is to make the bid Bj the best possible prediction of B?J , because (1) if a ? B?j and a ?? Bj (i.e., the buyer fails to bid a necessary data item), this information is not communicated to the seller and the probability of having a in the available data set A? gets smaller, and (2) if a ?? B?j and a ? Bj (i.e., the buyer bidder an unnecessary data item), the probability of this unnecessary item in A? gets larger that would decrease the survivability of the other necessary data items in A?. Thus, a buyer has an incentive to make the bid as accurate as possible.

The above analysis leads to a conclusion that in this data marketplace model, a rational seller and rational buyers will act so that the total utility of the data will be maximized subject to the constraint of the storage capacity. We call this property efficiency of the marketplace.



IV. EXTENSION TO MORE GENERAL MODEL  In general, we would like to deal with a marketplace with multiple agents who can play both roles of seller and buyer.

Also in a real world sensor data are dynamically generated, processed, and discarded.

Figure 5 depicts this generalized model. In this model, a seller holds a time series of data in a finite storage of size R.

At time t0, this series can be represented as < ..., at0?1, at0 >.

A buyer bj makes a bid to the latest data item at0 by declaring its predictive value Bj =< vj , ?j(t) > where vj is the base value and ?j(t) is the time discount function.

The time discount function ?j(t) will modify the value for the future time t. It is usually a decreasing function because the importance of data diminishes as time goes by. However, the actual value of a data item could suddenly increase if, for example, a suspicious activity is detected in some other camera and the same person appears on this image. In our model, it is the buyer?s responsibility of taking these future events into account in their bids and specify ?j(t) accordingly.

If the buyer thinks there will be no event that will make the data more valuable, the buyer should specify a large discount rate (i.e., the data item loses its value quickly). If the buyer believes that there is a good chance that the data item will be valuable in the future, the buyer should set a smaller discount rate.

At each of the succeeding time points, the seller determines the availability of all the data items stored in its storage of size R. For example, the importance of data item at0 is determined based on the bids on this data item from all the buyers and its availability is determined by its relative importance to the other data items of the seller.

At time t1, the valuation of the data item at0 by the buyer bj is represented as  ? inf t=t1  vj?j(t)dt. This formula takes all the future values into account, that is, this represents the data item?s predictive value.

The total value of the data item at0 is the sum of the predictive values for all the buyers. If this value is small relative to the other data items in the time series, the seller may determine to reduce the size of the data item. This reduction ratio is represented as u(at0 , t) (0 ? u(at0 , t) ? 1). Note that is a decreasing function, that is, u(at0 , t1) ? u(at0 , t2) always holds where t1 ? t2 because once the size of the data item is reduced, there is no way to restore it to the original size.

In particular, if (at0 , t1) = 0, that data item will no longer available for time t > t1.

When a buyer wants to access the past data item at0 at time t, it may find that the data item has been reduced in size (and in value), so it pays for the discounted value u(at0 , t)? vj?j(t).

A rational seller tries to maximize the average income subject to the storage limitation. Because the seller knows all the bids from the potential buyers for all the past data items, the seller can make best informed judgement on the storage space allocation for the data items. In normal cases where the time reduction functions ?(t) are decreasing functions, it assigns less storage spaces to older data items. If a data item is not popular to any of the buyers, the seller can remove it entirely from the storage (i.e., u(at0 , t) = 0).

A rational buyer tries its bids Bj as accurate as possible, because (1) if the bid is an underestimate of the actual value, there is a danger that the seller may reduce the size and value of the data item prematurely, and (2) if the bid is an overestimate, the buyer must pay larger amount than necessary.

Seller  Buyer  Seller  Buyer  time t0 time t1  < ?, at0-1, at0> < ?, at0-1, at0, ?, at1 >  , at0  Bid B=<v,?(t)> a?t0   a?  Reduction u(at0, t1)  Use/pay u(at0, t1) * v*?(t)   a t0  Fig. 5. Bidding, Reduction, and Using  Based on the above analysis, it is fair to say that there is a good chance that this generalized model has the efficiency property, although we should have either a mathematical proof or experimental results to prove the claim.



V. FUTURE DIRECTIONS  In this paper we discussed that defining data values plays a key role in efficiently utilizing the finite data storage in a networked computing environment and proposed to use the idea of marketplace by showing two models of such data marketplace.

Data marketplace has gaining attention recently and there are multiple commercial data marketplace services such as Windows Azure Marketplace1 and iTunes2. These services are either subscription based or based on the fixed price determined by the sellers. They do not automatically reflect the dynamically changing nature of the demand of the buyers.

There are research efforts to enable more fine-grained pricing based on individual queries, such as [2] and [7]. None of them, however, tries to optimize the resource utilization for a network by taking advantage of the predictive power of the marketplace.

The proposed models need further elaboration both on the theoretical aspects and the practical aspects. On the theory side, we need to further investigate the mathematical properties of the models. On the practical side, we plan to do some experimental implementations so that we can understand how to represent and exchange data values among the nodes, how to optimize the data placement by taking the network parameters (topology, bandwidth, latency etc.) into account, and what kind of tools and APIs are best suited for such applications.

Another important aspect of the concept of data market- place is its policy. Especially the concept of the data ownership and how the rights and responsibilities of using the data owned by somebody else are represented, communicated, and enforced are big questions.

