

A Distributed GIS Model Based On Hadoop Yu Weng,Huiting Liu  School of Information Engineering Minzu University of China Beijing  Beijing, China 100086  mr.wengyu@gmail.com  ABSTRACT Along with the rapid development of the information superhighway big data has been mentioned more and more frequently. Cloud computing turn all IT resources into a service, users can use these services through the network, in order to reach the goal of demand computing and cooperative multiplayer. The application of GIS technology in the industry, information sharing will provide users with a more effective and unified means to display data. Among the big data time, the main feature of GIS is sharing the storage of related spatial information. Use the idea that cloud computing turn all IT resources into a service, combine the model of HADOOP, GIS technology will be as popular as water and electricity, from the perspective of information technology, every industry, businesses and even individuals will interconnected with GIS applications. GIS system will demonstrate its more powerful side with a new look.

Keywords: Big Data; Cloud Computing; HADOOP; 1. INTRODUCTION  Data, have penetrated into every field of industry and business functions today, it have become the important factors of production. The excavation and utilization people for massive data, heralding a new wave of productivity growth and consumer surplus .Mentioned about big data analytics, we often connected to cloud computing, because real-time analysis of big data sets need a frame like Map-Reduce to allocate work to tens, hundreds or thousands computers. Big data is considered as another hot spot after cloud computing.

Compare with us, GIS study Abroad is earlier than domestic. With the help of Esri, Qinghai-Tibet Railway take the system based on real-time monitoring ArcGIS at it?s first build time for protection of the operator. 2008 Sichuan earthquake relief and Olympic security we all can see ArcGIS. 2009 60th anniversary parade of meteorological support services also play an important role in ArcGIS. 2010 Yushu earthquake relief, ArcGIS provide the technical support for fast response. 2010 Shanghai World Expo in information security, ArcGIS is also active in every corner.

The products of ArcGIS provide users with a scalable,comprehensive GIS platform. In 2010, Esri Releases ArcGIS 10, it become the world's first GIS platform who support cloud-based. In WEB2.0 times achieved by the sharing of GIS leap to the collaborative; at the same time ArcGIS 10 have a true 3D modeling, editing, and analysis capabilities, and achieve the leap from three-dimensional space to  four- dimensional space; the real integration of remote sensing and GIS.

MapGIS is developed by WuHan independently, it have intellectual property rights of Geographic Information system  completely in China. In July 2011 they released the version of MapGIS K9 SP3 take the suspension architecture, scalable and highly adaptive, it achieve functional and data separation, loose coupling between functions and data.The solutions MapGIS made for rural land contract management rights registration and management in 2011 based on geographic information platform, its construction of the core functions of the warehouse for multi- source data collection, processing, display, manage, analyze and maintain, it build a development platform through plug-in, use the freedom of customization features of workflow editor, form editor, business functions warehouse to achieve definable data organization, view loaded, interface design and menu portfolio.

At the application layer, though MapGIS registration of rural land contract management system interface, it offers B/S, C/S and other related management and building database application services to users. At the service layer, use the advanced MapGIS IGSS platform architecture and alliable capable service system to offer the powerful support technique for public services.

Above all, no matter domestic or foreign, these applications provide a good case for distributed GIS, and also provide a possibility for comparison, improvement, optimization of GIS.

But when GIS system does not care about the transmission of real geographic data, like google map, baidu map, they focus on real-time location map applications, but attribute data become the emphasis, for example the distribute of our nationalities, this kind of GIS is not very strict to the geographical distribution of the nation, so there is no need to to update the spatial database frequently, but the attribute database changed constantly. Users may propose constant needs, they ask to display different attribute data in different fields, and different nation, but the origin of data is irregular, sometimes users may provide their own database, this bring a lot of trouble to researchers for the dynamic extraction of data. This kind of GIS no longer bind to just one database, but more. It is a good method to store GIS data use the idea of distribution, but how to solve the problem of dynamic extraction and show data on GIS, those applications we talking about above did not involve or provide a solution of that problem, our system use the open source framework of Hadoop, and calculation model of Map-Reduce, can solve this kind of problem appropriately.

In this paper, our system use the free framework of HADOOP to achieve GIS data distributed storage, use the Map-Reduce calculate model, those provided technical support for the analysis of big data. We add a middle data layer, it provide convenience for users to siphon GIS data dynamically then form the corresponding services to publish, by layering Package, we separated application layer and data layer completely to become easy to carry and extend. The system use middle layer to map and interact with application layer then form application service, this can ensure maximum accuracy of the underlying data, and avoid misuse and other errors caused by system.

DOI 10.1109/ICINIS.2013.76    DOI 10.1109/ICINIS.2013.76     This paper start with the hot spot of this current affairs--big data, make the application of GIS as the main service targets,use the HADOOP free framework and Map-Reduce calculate model to describe the advantages of GIS data distributed storage, user dynamic extraction, demand publishing GIS services and fast processing of big data models and other aspects of the system.

Then we proposed a solution under the user varied application requirements, and provide more possibility of optimizing of distribute GIS system.

2. Overall system model of distributed GIS 2.1 Distribute GIS model base-on HADOOP  The system used as a distribute model base-on Hadoop mainly divided into four parts: physical layer, data storage layer, middle layer, and application layer. The physical layer use VMware vSphere to achieve physical hardware virtualization, and thousands of virtual machines? collaboration in parallel to increase the efficiency of the system. Using the open source framework of Hadoop and HDFS system, these virtual machines can store all data GIS needed, this is called physical layer.

Because of the massive of data, users may not use all the data we stored, so we can see every visit as one need, our system do dynamic extraction to the underlying data, including spatial data, attribute data and other data, and these data become the origin data for users, response by the GIS Server installed, every GIS service will be transform into application, all applications are Web-Service, achieve a distributed environment for massively distributed dynamic analysis of spatial data and Integrate with other applications, it can operate in different system and data, it has the capability of cross-platform applications and heterogeneous network interconnection, it also with good human-computer interaction and data collection and Interoperability In order to achieve maximum sharing of geographic information.

Figure1  Distribute GIS model Base on Hadoop   Hadoop consists of many elements, HDFS stores all the  Hadoop cluster files on the storage nodes. In distribute GIS framework, it stores attribute data. HDFS has a structure of  master slave, based on TCP / IP,  Namenode, Datanode and Client can communicate with each other, based on this kind of model, the program which scheduled GIS attribute data can run at the Namenode on master, and GIS attribute data stored at Datanode on slave, and more slave achieve parallel computing.

As long as the required GIS attribute data divided into classification standards, appropriate and equivalent size of the data blocks, the time required for the entire GIS  system will be improve. The equivalent data block effectively avoid the processing time of each slave node mutual wait, improve the data processing efficiency. Secondly, HDFS use multicopy strategy, data can store in many machines, or the different position of local machine. So when slave need to call first copy of data but failed, mater can call second copy of local machine, if failed again, master can call other copies on other machines, obviously, this multi-copy data storage strategy can effectively improve the reliability and availability of data storage.

2.2 Big Data Calculation Model Base-on Map-Reduce Map-Reduce calculation model because of its open source  nature allows developers to write free use of the framework and programs for application development. In this system, the big data calculation model, Map can divide massive task into small pieces, Reduce can group together a complete result among the divided blocks of the results. The core idea is parallel computation , which can exponentially faster data processing speed then shorten data processing time.

Original computing data  Map1  Virtual Machine  Virtual Machine  Virtual Machine  Map2  Virtual Machine  Virtual Machine  Virtual Machine  Map3  Virtual Machine  Virtual Machine  Virtual Machine  Reduce  Reduce  Reduce  Map  Separate the data into substantially equal data block to execute Map function  The previous calculation result of Reduce become the next calculation of the Map  function input  Reduce the final result  User through the browser view statistics  Reduce   Figure 2 Map-Reduce Big data model   As the need of GIS applications for users become increasingly  sophisticate and complex, the data GIS needed become more and more big. In particular, when the user needs to span GIS applications in many fields, the data needed will be a Cartesian product, more fields needed, the amount of data will be superimposed on the rapid expansion just like a snowballed, such a large data processing for conventional calculation model will clearly be a challenge. But Map-Reduce calculation model can be a good remedy for the traditional calculation model, using the cheap machines or virtual technology, we build lots of virtual machines to provide physical basic support for Map- Reduce. Map function derived by map interface, Reduce     function derived by reduce interface. Map function output is a series of Key / Value pairs, those are for Reduce function. And according to the demand Map or Reduce function can be repeated several times. The results can be Map-Reduce again.We made a experiment, a 2.6G file processing in Map- Reduce model only have ten slave nodes, only need less than ten minutes. The idea of multiple parallel processing of data is appropriate in big data time, and even if several slave nodes hooked or terminated in the processing, it will not make much impact for the whole result, but only the amount of data is large and hang up rate within the range we can tolerated.

3 Conclusions and future work In this paper, we proposed a distribute GIS model based on  Hadoop for big data, use HADOOP and Map-Reduce these two hot technology to solve the irregular data source of single field or many field and user needs changeable, this model has certain advantages to solve those problems. This article describes the advantages and application prospects from the GIS data distributed storage, user dynamic extraction, demand publishing GIS services and fast processing of big data models and other aspects of the system.

As cloud computing is the result of the evolution of a variety of technologies, and is still in the development stage, with the development of cloud computing technology, distributed GIS architecture design requires constantly improvement to make it more optimized, then satisfied the user?s demand of GIS application in many fields in big data time, GIS will show its new face and powerful side to the world.

References [1] Jianfeng Wu,Yunpu Zeng.Analysis of key technologies of  distributed GIS[J].Surveying and Mapping,2011,09:70-73.

[2] Yu Liu,Dugang Xi.Several implementations of distributed GIS platform comparison [J]. Surveying & Spatial Information, 2012,05:10-13.

[3] Wei Zhang.Mobile GIS-based distributed storage technologies and applied research [D]. PLA Information Engineering University, 2010.

[4] Tonfkui Liao,Cheng Peng.Construction of Distributed GIS- based Web Services technology research [J].Remote sensing information,2006,01:56-59.

[5] Dan Jin.Distributed GIS architecture [J]. Today Keyuan,2007,16:115.

[6] Xiujuan Guo,Xiaoou Fan.Based on Web Services Architecture of Distributed GIS[J].Jilin Geology,2008,01:90-92+100.

[7] Wenjue Jia.Distributed GIS service chain key technology integration[D].Wuhan University,2005.

