Measuring Surveillance In Online Advertising: A Big Data  Approach

ABSTRACT There is an increasing public and policy awareness that tracking cookies are being used to support behavioral advertising, but the extent to which tracking is occurring is not clear. The extent of tracking could have implications for the enforceability of legislative responses to the sharing of personal data, including the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth). In this paper, we develop a methodology for determining the prevalence of tracking cookies, and report the results for a sample of the 501 most visited sites by Australians.

We find that the use of tracking cookies is endemic, but that distinct clusters of tracking can be identified across categories including search, pornography and social networking. The implications of the work in relation to privacy are discussed.

Categories and Subject Descriptors K.4.4 [Electronic Commerce]: Security.

General Terms Security, Human Factors.

Keywords Privacy, Cookies, Social Media, Tracking, Behavioral Advertising.

1. INTRODUCTION Web-based marketing is increasing its share of marketing budgets, as the rise of smartphones and digital connectivity presents a ripe and increasingly more connected audience. While traditional radio and television advertising is based on broadcasting to a very broad range of interests ? which might only be marginally interested in the product or service being promoted ? web-based techniques rely on behavioral advertising to ensure that only the most relevant ads are shown to each user [1].

Providing relevant advertising relies on the construction of a profile of a user?s interests based on their prior browsing activity.

For example, if a user primarily makes use of Search Engine A, then all prior searches made by that user can be stored, and can be  1 Google.com.au and google.com both appear in the Top 50,  however, you are automatically redirected to google.com.au regardless of which address you visit. The same occurs with eBay, so they are treated as single entries on the table.

Separately, googleusercontent.com is not a functional website without having relevant content in the GET request to view mail attachments and ?Google Docs? data.  Consequently, it is also not included in this table despite being a Top 50 site.

used to predict a user?s future interests, or to weight search  results. Furthermore, if Search Engine A also operates an advertising network ? which provides advertising across a wide range of sites ? then the advertising engine can serve up advertising related to that user?s interests based on their stored  profile. Profiling of user behavior on the internet has been widely used to track legitimate and illegitimate activity [2].

Providing personalized advertising relies on the use of cookies, which are small files that are written to a client browser?s local  store. Cookies were used historically to manage session state, for example, in web applications. Yet, more recently, persistent cookies have been used to enable tracking by storing long-dated, unique identifiers for users.

A recent review of the use of persistent cookies in Australia made the following key observations [3]:  ? Cookies have a legitimate role to play on the web in allowing sites and applications to uniquely identify users. Without such controls (whether implemented using session cookies or URL rewriting), privacy could be easily compromised if applications were unable to serve up confidential data to the intended user [4].

? Persistent cookies are somewhat transparently stored on a user?s system, and users can view and delete cookies  that they don?t wish to have stored; however, the  introduction of more sophisticated client-side storage in HTML5 and custom cookies supported by some rich media environments (such as Flash) makes tracking less visible than in the past [5].

? Persistent cookies can be used for tracking users on third-party websites, to support behavioral advertising.

In social media, the concept has been extended to support ?social plugins?, allowing users to ?Like? other  users, pages and companies on third-party sites [6].

? While session cookies are short-dated, tracking cookies often appear to be long-dated, allowing for profiles to be developed about individuals over very long time periods.

? The European Union?s e-Privacy Directive [7] and the US Federal Trade Commission have enforced policies in relation to the disclosure of private information in relation to cookies, especially those which are deemed to be ?non-essential?. Under Principle 2 of Australia?s National Privacy Principles (Privacy Act 1988 (Cth)), most organizations must make users aware about data that is collected about them, and the purposes that the data will be used for. In many cases, there does not  2013 Fourth Cybercrime and Trustworthy Computing Workshop  DOI 10.1109/CTC.2013.12     seem to be general awareness (beyond the security and privacy community) of the extent to which persistent cookies are being utilized.

Although there has been significant media commentary around the implications for privacy arising from the use of persistent cookies for tracking, there has been little systematic study of the prevalence of the phenomenon. Determining prevalence and likelihood is the first step in assessing risk [8].

In the context of increasing enforcement powers being given to the Privacy Commissioner in Australia, this study proposes a new technique for determining the prevalence of tracking cookies for the sites that Australians visit most frequently, and seeks to answer the following questions:  1. How prevalent is the use of the persistent cookies in Australia?

2. What are the characteristics of the persistent cookies being stored? For instance, how long until they expire, on average?

3. What are the natural groupings (or clusters) of persistent cookies which emerge from their links across sites and advertising networks?

4. Are these clusters tied closely to specific sites or functions, such as search engines or social media sites?

2. METHODS The Top 50 sites most frequently accessed by Australians were identified from Alexa2. A script was written to simulate a visit to each website by a web client, and the cookies that would be downloaded to such a client were then stored [9]. In addition, for two sites which deliver advertising based on any click within the site, a click was simulated, and a further sample of cookies was obtained (xhmaster.com and thepiratebay.se). These sites included Web 1.0 search engines (such as Google) as well as Web 2.0 social media sites (such as Facebook).

3. RESULTS 3.1 Frequency Analysis  Table 1 shows the frequency distribution of cookies across all sites. Cookies were counted in three ways:  ? Frequency of all cookies for each site ? The number of distinct sites which stored cookies,  including cookies from within the site?s domain ? The number of distinct external sites storing cookies  The average number of total cookies was 26, and the standard deviation was 18.53. The site with the least number of cookies was wikipedia.org (0 cookies), while gumtree.com.au had the   2 Alexa: The web information company, www.alexa.com,  accessed on 17 Feb 2013  most cookies (90). The distribution is shown in Figure 1. The average number of distinct hosts storing cookies was 8.59, meaning that ? on average ? each site was storing 3.026 cookies.

The standard deviation was 6.50. The average number of distinct external cookies was 5.61, meaning that ? on average ? 65.32% of hosts storing cookies were external to the domain.

Table 1. Table captions should be placed above the table  Site Cookies Distinct Hosts  Distinct External Hosts  abc.net.au 5 4 2  about.com 19 8 3  amazon.com 5 2 1  anz.com.au 16 5 2  apple.com.au 13 1 1  auspost.com.au 16 4 2  avg.com 35 10 5  aweber.com 20 13 6  bbc.co.uk 26 8 6  bing.com 61 21 14  blogger.com 32 5 2  bom.gov.au 4 1 0  commbank.com.au 18 3 2  conduit.com 18 5 1  domain.com.au 31 21 16  ebay.com.au 40 17 16  facebook.com 10 1 0  flickr.com 29 11 5  google.com.au 14 2 1  gumtree.com.au 90 23 21  imdb.com 47 11 10  imgur.com 61 17 10  linked.com 23 12 12  live.com 46 16 6  microsoft.com 28 11 4  national.com.au 20 3 3  news.com.au 42 13 10  ninemsn.com.au 52 19 16  nsw.gov.au 7 2 1  paypal.com 18 6 1  pinterest.com 24 6 1  realestate.com.au 42 22 17  seek.com.au 19 5 3  smh.com.au 22 12 7         theage.com.au 35 14 10  thepiratebay.se.popu p  15 15  thepiratebay.se 13 5 2  tumblr.com 17 6 3  twitter.com 15 5 0  vic.gov.au 8 2 1  warriorforum.com 16 5 3  westpac.com.au 19 9 8  whirlpool.net.au 7 1 0  wikipedia.org 0 0 0  wordpress.com 10 2 1  xhamster.com.popup 7 2 2  xhamster.com 52 16 13  yahoo.com 33 14 6  youtube.com 26 5 4         Figure 1.  Frequency distribution of all cookies for the Top 50 sites visited by Australians.

3.2 Tracking Cookies What constitutes a tracking cookie can sometimes be a contentious argument.  Therefore, we treat all third party cookies that is cookies which are created by advertisers, analytics or social networks which have the potential to track the activity of a user across multiple websites as a tracking cookie.

Table 2 shows the presence of known tracking cookies across all 50 sites. The presence of a tracking cookie was confirmed. The results show that 4 out of 5 of the sites sampled contained Google tracking cookies, either Analytics, Apps, or double click, while almost 1 in 5 contained Facebook tracking. Other social media sites, such as Twitter and Linkedin, were far less well-represented (3 and 1 out of 50 respectively).

Table 2. Tracking cookie frequency for Top 50 Australian sites  System Frequency %  Webtrends 2 4%  Google Analytics 27 54%  Google Applications 11 22%  Effective Measure 1 2%  Linkedin 1 2%  Twitter 3 6%  Doubleclick 12 24%  Facebook 9 18%    3.3 Cookie Expiry The expiry dates of all cookies were analyzed. The minimum expiry was sent to the date of collection, while the maximum was set to 2038 (i.e., the maximum date in UNIX time). The average date was 12/10/2015, being 2.875 years from the date of collection. Thus, the cookies within the sample are relatively long-lasting, generally much longer than the length of an individual session.

3.4 Cluster Analysis The densest cluster by site type was identified by visual inspection. Figure 2 shows the cluster for the ?adult? website  xhamster.com. This cluster was completely separated from all other sites, sharing no common links or cookies.

Figure 2.  Adult website cookie cluster..

For most other sites, there was overlap between cookies and relationships. Starting with Web 1.0, Figure 3 shows how Google cookies are linked to YouTube, Blogger, Commonwealth Bank, Tumblr, Pirate Bay and Gumtree. This does not include the 54% of sites that use Google Analytics. Gumtree and Advertising popups delivered by The Pirate Bay also link into Google+.

Figure 3.  Google website cookie cluster.

Figure 4 shows the results for Netratings Site Census (IMRworldwide). A whole range of media organizations, real- estate sites and search engines are hooked into this system.

Figure 4.  Imrworldwide website cookie cluster.

Browsing The Pirate Bay sees cookies from Twitter, Google, Pinterest, YouTube and Facebook stored on the client, as shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5.  Pirate Bay website cookie cluster.

On the social networking front, visiting any of the following sites: AVG, Gumtree, IMDB, imgur image sharing, News Ltd sites, Pinterest and the Pirate Bay resulted in cookies being set and data from user?s page views being sent to Facebook, as shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6.  Facebook website cookie cluster    The results for the site with the largest number of cookies are shown in Figure 7 (Gumtree). The site stores cookies on behalf of a very large number of advertising engines (like Doubleclick), as well as Google, MSN, Facebook etc Being a Gumtree user, in a sense, places you at the center of a very large tracking network.

Figure 7.  Gumtree website cookie cluster  Finally, an inversion of the analysis is shown in Figure 8 placing the endpoint of data collection.  It represents all the sites where user data is tracked by Google and its wholly owned advertising network, DoubleClick.  40 of the 50 sites, or 80% in the Alexa top 50 were found to be providing data back to Google.  Of note is the fact Google sets its analytics cookie as a website cookie, rather than a third party cookie on the hosted site.  This circumvents a user?s ability to block tracking activity from third party  companies, as can be set in most web browsers.

One a technical note, although we have focused on descriptive statistics to establish prevalence, more sophisticated techniques could be employed to analyze the linkages and clusters formed across all 50 websites, or indeed, internationally. The insights gained from such an analysis could be better informed by developing a large graph model [11] that can be fitted by using empirical data measured from different countries and different user profiles. The impact of changes in the network (such as the growth in social media) could then be modeled and used to inform privacy risk assessment.

A directed graph model could be created as follows: Each site under consideration will constitute a vertex, and there will be an  arc from node X to node Y if accessing X provides a cookie for Y.

Two sites are adjacent if they share an arc. In this way, by walking on this graph we could ask many well-known topological questions such as:  a) smallest number of sites I needed to visit to have installed in my computer a cookie from every site of the graph. Minimum Vertex Cover Problem  b) largest number of sites, no two of which are adjacent: The Maximum Independent Set Problem.

It is well-known that these two problems, as decision problems, are NP-hard. In fact, the minimum vertex cover is part of  Karp's 21 NP-complete problems    [12].

Thus, for general graphs no polynomial-time  algorithm is known for any of these problems, but polynomial-time heuristic algorithms could produce satisfactory results in our domain.

Furthermore, to find a vertex cover of given size k in a graph of order n is fixed-parameter tractable, there exists a O(n2^k) algorithm; see, for instance [13].

Figure 8.  Sites where Google cookies were present as third party cookies     4. DISCUSSION The key finding for this study is that, if an Australian user visited the Top 50 websites in Australia, they would have stored on their computer a very large number of persistent cookies which are being used to support behavioral advertising. In the overwhelming majority of cases, the number of cookies being stored by third parties is many times in excess of the cookies which might be stored by the host to uniquely identify user sessions. The market penetration of one tracking scheme ? Google Analytics ? was 54% of the sample. In this sense, Google Analytics is acting as a ?hub?, extracting information from usage on 27 out of the Top 50 sites, across all sectors of the economy, from banking, news, real estate, etc By amassing this information about an individual?s usage, Google and others are able to build up a clear profile of user activity as if they had been Google customers (rather than being related by proxy through a third-party). The inescapable conclusion is that it virtually impossible to avoid the reach of behavioral advertising in Australia.

The results for Google (initially as a Web 1.0 search engine) are closely followed by the rise of social media sites, especially Facebook, which was storing third-party cookies on 18% of the sites. While not as highly penetrated into the marketplace as Google, the risk of inappropriate or unintended disclosures in relation to privacy is higher, since users of social media make private disclosures about their private lives, which is then being used to direct advertising. Since social media sites and other websites are collaborating, there is the potential for personal data to be exchanged between the two, in essence, setting up a ?privacy feedback loop?, where information gained from one site  is used to inform advertising on the other, and clicks on that site can then be fed back to the social media to further personalize advertising.

In some cases, the extent of third-party tracking cookie storage was astonishing: up to 90 tracking cookies, with durations lasting up to 2038. The potential for profiles to be constructed from such data is enormous. Notwithstanding potential consumer demand for more enhanced and appropriate advertising, broader questions emerge from this analysis: could the data be misused or on-sold by the companies collecting it? Do the companies involved set sufficiently high security standards to ensure that data cannot be exfiltrated by an attacker [10]? Further studies are required to benchmark the Australian experience internationally, and to see whether the risk of privacy of breaches in Australia is higher or lower, based on prevalence [14].

Currently, there is an expectation by website operators that their users have provided implied consent to set tracking cookies on their machine with users left to navigate sites looking for specific privacy policies to determine how the site is using personal data collected via tracking cookies.  Given the level of tracking done by individual companies, as well as the number of sites setting, in some cases up to 90 cookies, it may be time Australia considered adopting legislation such as the European Union cookie laws under the e-Privacy directive, to give users a greater understanding and control over what and how sites and third party organizations are tracking and how they are using their data.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Paul A. Watters receives funding from the Australian Federal Police and Westpac.

6. REFERENCES [1] McDonald, A., and Cranor, L. F. 2010. Americans? attitudes  about internet behavioral advertising practices. Proceedings of the 9th annual ACM workshop on Privacy in the electronic society, 63-72.

[2] Layton, R., Watters, P.A., and Dazeley, R. 2010. Authorship attribution for twitter in 140 characters or less. Proceedings of the 2nd Cybercrime and Trustworthy Computing Workshop, 1-8.

[3] Watters, P.A. 2012. Taming the Cookie Monster: How Companies Track Us Online. Technical Report. University of Canberra. ISBN 978-1-922017-04-8 http://www.canberra.edu.au/cis/storage/Taming%20the%20c ookie%20monster-%20FINAL.pdf  [4] Kristol, D. 2001. HTTP cookies: Standards, privacy and politics. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, 1(2), 151-198.

[5] Ayenson, M., Wambach, D., Soltani, A., Good, N. and Hoofnagle, C. 2011. Flash Cookies and Privacy II: Now with HTML5 and ETag Respawning. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1898390 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1898390.

[6] Gerlitz, C, and Helmond, A. 2013. The Like economy: Social buttons and the data-intensive web. New Media & Society, 14(8), doi: 10.1177/1461444812472322  [7] Debussere, F. 2005. The EU E-Privacy Directive: A monstrous attempt to starve the cookie monster. 13 Int'l J.L.

& Info. Tech. 70.

[8] Watters, P.A. 2012. Cyber Security: Concepts and Cases.

London: British Scientific. ISBN-13: 978-1469900933  [9] Watters, P.A., Watters, M.F., and Carr, S. C. 1998.

Evaluating internet information services in the Asia-Pacific region. Internet Research, 8(3), 266-271.

[10] Schwartzenberg, S. 2008. Hacking the Fourth: The gaps in the law and Fourth Amendment jurisprudence leave the right to privacy at risk. 30 U. La Verne L. Rev. 467  [11] Dekker, A., Perez-Roses, H., Pineda-Villavicencio, G., and Watters, P.A. 2012. The Maximum Degree & Diameter- Bounded Subgraph and its Applications. J. Math. Model.

Algorithms, 11(3), 249-26  [12] Karp, R. 1972. Reducibility among combinatorial problems.

In R. E. Miller and J. W. Thatcher (editors). Complexity of Computer Computations. New York: Plenum. pp. 85?103.

[13] Chen, J., Kanj, I., and Xia, G. 2006. Improved parameterized upper bounds for vertex cover.  Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 4162, 238?249.

[14] Watters, P.A. 2014. A Systematic Approach to Measuring Advertising Transparency Online: An Australian Case Study.

