Discovery and Analysis of Usage Data Based on Hadoop for Personalized Information Access

Abstract?The discovery and analysis of valuable infor- mation hidden in the usage data become more and more important with the exponential growth of Web users, for offering personalized information access. Since the traditional methods are unable to effectively solve the tasks of mining semi- structured and/or unstructured data in the single platform, in this paper, we propose three methods for respectively mining user browsing preference, visiting frequency and participating characteristics, based on the Hadoop cluster by MapReduce.

Moreover, we apply our methods to the Web server logs and Developer mailing lists, and analyze the visualization of mining results in order to gain a deeper understanding of user access patterns and interactive behaviors. The experimental results show that our methods can provide further insights into some useful information from usage data for decision making with a good speedup and scalability.

Keywords-big data analytics; data visualization; web usage mining; hadoop mapreduce

I. INTRODUCTION  With the rapid development of Internet, Sensor Networks, Internet of Things, and Could Computing, the explosive growth of data scale and the extreme complication of data schema indicate the arrival of the Big Data age [1]. Big Data attracts great attentions from industries (e.g., Google [2]), academia (e.g., Nature [3] and Science [4]), governments (e.g., Obama Administration [5], [6], [7]) and other orga- nizations (e.g., McKinsey Global Institute [8] and Gartner [9]), with 5Vs (i.e., Volume, Velocity, Variety, Value, and Veracity).

Recently, Big Data has been mostly produced by human in daily life, besides the generated data from the researches of Genomics, Astrophysics, Meteorology, Biology, and Brain Science, etc. According to the statistics of the premier Inter- national Data Corporation (IDC), the amount of information created and replicated has surpassed 1.8zettabytes in 2011, while individuals contributed 75% of the information in the digital universe [10]. Especially, Web data are exponentially  growing with the rapid increase of Web sites and users, whereas more than 85% of the data collected are semi- structured data (e.g., HTML documents) and unstructured data (e.g., free texts). For instance, Google processes over 400petabytes data monthly by using MapReduce in the large-scale cluster, and Facebook has over 1 billion users generating 300terabytes log data per day.

Due to the exponential growth of Web data, the ways of user obtaining information are changing gradually. It is a new challenge for us to discover and analyze the essential and valuable information (e.g., user access pat- terns, browsing interests, and interactive behaviors) from huge amounts of usage data of Web users, for offering personalized information access. The World Wide Web, as a huge, widely distributed, global information service center for various applications, contains a rich and dynamic collection of hyperlink information, and the access and usage information of Web pages, which provides users with convenient service while causes the problem that ?Data are Rich but the Information is Poor?. In particular, the Developer mailing lists provide effective discussion with a wide range of topics, including the information about the Open Source Software (OSS) development process, design decisions, and developer characteristics [11], while the flexi- bility of development makes useful information mining more complicated from mailing lists for the analysts. However, the Web site and Developer community, as the major carriers of Web information only providing personalized methods of information access, can meet the different needs of various users, while capturing user browsing preference, visiting frequency and participating characteristics would be some effective approaches for solving the aforementioned problems.

Web usage mining [12], [13], [14], [15] techniques can discover the interested patterns from Web server logs [16] that explicitly record the browsing behavior of site visitors   DOI 10.1109/CSE.2013.137    DOI 10.1109/CSE.2013.137     [17], and the research of that becomes a hotspot of Web mining [18]. In recent years, the study of Web usage mining mainly focused on the aspects of user access patterns [17], [19], [20], [21], user profiles [22], [23], Web personalization [24], [25], [26], and personalized recommender systems [27], [28], etc. Meanwhile, in order to better predict and understand various aspects of OOS development processes, some researchers have proposed text analysis tools and machine learning techniques to extract useful information from mailing lists [29], [30]. Undoubtedly, all the previous methods have many desirable properties but have some limitations. Most of them have considered the efficiency of methodology by improving original algorithms, designing new algorithms, etc., but the processing capacity of data has not been improved substantially. Especially, in the context of the Big Data era, the traditional single platform and methods cannot solve the tasks of mining large-scale semi- structured and/or unstructured data effectively. Moreover, to gain a deeper understanding of extracting value from data, several researchers begin addressing the corresponding solutions such as visual analytics [31], [32], [33], so we also utilize visual analytics to present mining results and gain insights from usage data in our work.

In this paper, based on the distributed mining platform of Hadoop framework, we propose three methods to mine browsing preference, visiting frequency and participating characteristics of users, respectively, using MapReduce in the cluster, for decision making of personalized information access. In particular, we apply the proposed methods to mine NASA Web server logs and Apache Tomcat developer mailing lists, and implement the visualization of mining results using Gnuplot. The visual results provide further insights into some significant and useful information hidden in the real-world usage data. Furthermore, we analyze the visual results in order to gain a deeper understanding of user access patters and interactive behaviors. Finally, we experimentally evaluate our methods on the speedup and scalability.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.

Section II describes the preliminaries and data sources.

Section III depicts the implementation of three mining meth- ods. Section IV presents the applications of the proposed methods, and discusses the analysis of visual results. Section V examines our methods, and Section VI concludes the paper.



II. PRELIMINARIES AND DATA SOURCES  In this section, we briefly describe the Hadoop, Web server logs, and Developer mailing lists, respectively, used in our study.

In this work, we construct the distributed mining platform based on the Hadoop cluster (depicted in Section V) to implement and verify the proposed methods through MapRe- duce. At the same time, we apply and evaluate our methods  by using the following two types of real data sets. (1) NASA Web server logs1 (NASA access log Jul95.gz, and NASA access log Aug95.gz), are collected by the NASA server with CLF format. (2) Apache Tomcat-users mailing list archives2 (Jan to Dec 2012, and Jan to Mar 2013), are in the complex MBOX format, each email of which consists of multiple lines stored in the log files.

A. Hadoop  Apache Software Foundation has launched Hadoop frame- work based on the open-source implementation of GFS [34] and MapReduce [35] in 2006, including Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) [36] and Hadoop MapReduce [37], etc.

Hadoop is an open-source distributed framework developed from the subproject of Lucene (i.e., Nutch), and provides a reliable interface for various applications in the cluster composed of a large amount of inexpensive hardware [37].

By making full use of the computational and stored capacity of clusters of computers, it builds an efficient platform for Big Data processing. More importantly, Hadoop offers a new idea and powerful technology for effectively improving the processing performance of large-scale semi-structured and/or unstructured data. For more details, please refer to the Apache Hadoop website3.

B. Web Server Logs  The Web logs record the information of user access and interaction with Web sites, which mainly include server logs, client logs and proxy logs [38]. The server logs can accurately capture browsing behavior of users, and reflect the one-to-many relationships between a Web site and multiple visitors. The server logs usually include access logs, agent logs, referrer logs and error logs [39], which are stored in different formats, such as Common Log Format (CLF) and Extended Common Log Format (ECLF) [40], with ASCII text. The common log file format is the most widely used to capture the activities of site visitors.

The fields in the common log file format4 are as follows: Remotehost rfc931 authuser [date] ?request? status bytes The following example shows these fields populated with  values in a common log file record: 127.0.0.1 - gzmdxdw [20/May/2013:20:08:08 +0500]  ?GET /index.html HTTP/1.0? 200 2088 172.18.16.138 - - [22/Apr/2013:22:19:12 -0500] ?GET  /cnet.gif HTTP/1.0? 200 8316  C. Developer Mailing Lists  The Developer mailing lists are a rich data source with large amounts of information about OSS development [11],  1http://ita.ee.lbl.gov/html/contrib/NASA-HTTP.html 2http://mail-archives.apache.org/mod mbox/tomcat-users/ 3http://hadoop.apache.org/ 4http://www.w3.org/Daemon/User/Config/Logging.html#common-  logfile-format     which has attracted great attentions and achieved major commercial success in the last several years. Obviously, the Apache is a typical example, so anyone can subscribe to the mailing lists, and a developer usually forwards the alternatives to the mailing lists for getting feedback from the rest of the group before developing a solution. The Apache Developer mailing lists are archived monthly, and contain many different kinds of messages [41]. Since each email archive of Developer mailing lists is composed of multiple lines with complex formats, it is difficult to discover valuable information from those unstructured data.



III. PROPOSED METHODS  In this section, we propose three methods for mining browsing preference, visiting frequency, and participating characteristics of users, respectively, by using MapReduce based on the Hadoop cluster, in order to offer personalized information access.

A. Mining User Browsing Preference  In order to mine the browsing preference of users, and analyze the preferred access path of users and the popularity of pages, we extract the attribute, ?request (URL)?, from Web server logs, to calculate the number of hits for each URL and compute its frequency distribution by using the Map function and Reduce function based on Hadoop.

It is composed of the following four steps. First, we upload the Web server log data sets to HDFS. Then, we count the number of occurrences of each URL, and use the regular expressions to parse each line of the uploaded log files. Next, we compute the frequency distribution of each URL through sorting the outputs of the previous step.

Finally, we will get the number of hits received by each URL sorted in an ascending order.

B. Mining User Visiting Frequency  To mine the visiting frequency of users, and analyze the browsing habits of users and the access trends of sites, we extract the attribute, ?data (hour)?, from Web server logs to calculate the sum of page accesses in each hour of the day by using the Map function and Reduce function based on Hadoop.

It mainly includes the following three steps. First, we upload the Web server log data sets to HDFS. Then, we calculate the sum of page accesses in each hour of the day, and parse each line by regular expressions. Finally, we will get the sum of page accesses in each hour of the day.

C. Mining User Participating Characteristics  We count the number of replies received and replies sent by each email thread from the complex Developer mailing lists, by using the Map function and Reduce function based on Hadoop, for mining the participating characteristics of users and analyzing the interactive behaviors of users.

It consists of the following five steps. First, we utilize a custom input formatter to process the Developer mailing list data sets which have data items spanning multiple lines, and the new formatter will create a RecordReader. Meanwhile, we upload the Developer mailing list data sets to HDFS.

Then, we calculate the number of replies received from each email address. Next, we compute the number of replies sent by each email address. After that, we merge the outputs of the previous two steps, which have the same key. Finally, we will get the number of replies received and replies sent.



IV. APPLICATIONS AND VISUAL ANALYSIS  In this section, we apply the proposed methods to mine NASA Web server logs and Apache Tomcat developer mailing list archives, and visualize the mining results and present its analysis, for decision making of personalized information access.

A. Applications  Based on the aforementioned methods, we apply the first and second methods to mine NASA Web server logs col- lected from Jul. 1995 (NASA access log Jul95.gz) through Aug. 1995 (NASA access log Aug95.gz), for analyzing user access patters by discovering user browsing interests and habits. In addition, we apply the third method to analyze user interactive behaviors from Apache Tomcat developer mailing list archives retrieved in Jan to Dec. 2012 and Jan to Mar. 2013, by quantifying user participating characteristics in the two aspects of email archives replies sent and received.

In order to gain a deeper understanding of user access patters and interactive behaviors, we use Gnuplot5, which is a free, powerful, and portable command-line driven graph- ing utility for Linux, OSX, VMS, and other platforms, to visualize the mining results. The results of the visualization are shown in Fig. 1, and 2, respectively.

B. Visual Analysis  The analysis of visual results offers several practical insights that can benefit organizations which apply the Web server logs to gain a deeper understanding of user access patters for improving the design of Web sites, with the better organized structure, and the richer personalized information, etc., and then for enhancing the management level and service capabilities to offer personalized information access.

Furthermore, the visual analysis can benefit organizations that apply the Developer mailing lists to gain a better understanding of user participating characteristics in order to realize knowledge sharing and participation equality in the open source community, and take some mutual incen- tive mechanisms to promote user interaction for eventually improving the quality of personalized information service.

To sum up, the findings of our study can provide some  5http://www.gnuplot.info/     ??  ???  ????  ?????  ??????  ???????  ??????  ?? ??? ???? ?????  ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?? ? ??  ?? ?  ?????????????	????  (a)  ??????  ???????  ???????  ???????  ???????  ???????  ???????  ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ? ?! ??? ??? ??? ??? ??? ??? ??? ??? ?? ??! ??? ??? ??? ???  ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?? ? ?? " # $ ? ?# % % ? ? ? ? ?  &??????#%	?	???????#??#??  (b)  Figure 1. The visual results of mining NASA Web server logs.

??  ???  ????  ?????  ?? ??? ???? ?????  ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?? ? ?? ?? " '?? ? ?? ? % ? ?( ? ?  ?	?? ??????????"'?????? ?  (a)  ??  ???  ????  ?????  ?? ??? ???? ?????  ?  ? ?  ? ?  ? ?? ? ?? ?? " '?? ? ?? ? % ? ?( ? ?  ?	?? ??????????"'?????? ?  (b)  Figure 2. The visual results of mining Apache Tomcat developer mailing list archives retrieved in Jan to Dec. 2012 (a) and Jan to Mar. 2013 (b).

decision making for building the personalized intelligent site and community.

Fig. 1 (a) shows the user browsing preference by the distribution of URLs on the NASA site. The figure is plotted on a log-log scale, and reveals the user access interests and the popular pages. We can easily observe that the distribution of user visiting NASA site obeys the Zipf (power law) distribution [42] in the first part of the figure, while the last few most popular URLs have much higher rates than the first. However, according to the analytical results above, the site designers should take the popular links into account, and then increase more content associated with popular links in more Web pages, to meet the actual needs of user access information. On the other hand, the site managers should pay full attention to the undesirable links, and then improve the organized structure of Web sites and update the content of those pages, in order to attract more visitors.

More importantly, we can find out the potential users and  reduce the loss of loyal users by the further analysis, and utilize the analysis of user browsing preference to provide personalized methods of information access, for meeting the different requirements of various users.

Fig. 1 (b) shows the user visiting frequency by the number of page accesses in each hour of the day among the NASA site, and reveals the browsing habits of users and the access trends of sites. As we can see from the figure, most of the visiting time is in the daytime. The number of page accesses is an upward tendency from early morning to noon, and then the first peak is at 12:00. Subsequently, it is a downward tendency until 20:00, and the next peak is at 21:00. Thus, we should strengthen the management and monitoring of sites to provide efficiently personalized information services at high access frequency, whereas we should deeply analyze the causes of low access frequency and take some effective measures for enhancing the number of page accesses. Especially, in accordance with the different     visiting frequencies, we can reasonably arrange and schedule the site managers in order to minimize administrative costs.

Additionally, we can also take some marketing strategies to obtain higher profits for the enterprises at access peaks, such as publishing important business information, advertising, and so on.

Fig. 2 shows the user participating characteristics by the number of replies received and replies sent by each email thread in the Apache Tomcat developer mailing list archives, and reveals user interactive behaviors, which follows a power law distribution as well. The figure demonstrates that the more replies sent, the more replies received. It is easy to draw the conclusion that the more frequently a developer is involved in the community, the more quickly he will receive a response to his queries. Accordingly, we should positively reply threads and help others in the open source community, which will expand knowledge sharing and avoid participation inequality. Otherwise, participation inequality would eventually result in the demise of the com- munity. Most importantly, the OSS development community should consider establishing multiplex channels to provide personalized information service for the developers, who will greatly benefit from the convenient interaction with others and learn a great deal more about the implications of their design choices. Specially, we should take some mutual incentive mechanisms to facilitate interactions among clusters of key contributors.



V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATIONS  In this section, we evaluate the speedup and scalability of the proposed methods by several experiments.

The experimental platform is composed of one Master machine and six Slave machines with Intel Pentium (R) Core (TM) i5-3330 3.00GHz CPU and 4.00GB RAM. All the experiments are performed on Ubuntu 12.04 OS with Hadoop 1.0.4 and JDK 1.6.0. We use the data sources and their formats, respectively, as described in Section II in detail, and process the NASA Web server logs into four groups of data sets, which are N datasets1 (1.5G- bytes), N datasets2 (3Gbytes), N datasets3 (6Gbytes) and N datasets4 (12Gbytes), respectively. At the same time, we divide the Apache Tomcat developer mailing list archives into four groups of data sets as well, which are T datasets1 with 236 files (1Gbytes), T datasets2 with 465 files (2G- bytes), T datasets3 with 922 files (4Gbytes) and T datasets4 with 1836 files (8Gbytes), respectively. Next, we use the speedup and scalability respectively to evaluate the overall performance of three mining methods proposed in Section III and applied in Section IV.

A. Speedup Evaluation  We evaluate the speedup of the proposed methods for real data sets of different sizes, respectively, with DataNodes  increasing in the cluster. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3 shows that the execution time of three mining meth- ods is decreasing proportionally while the overall perfor- mance is improving multiply, with the number of DataNodes increasing. The results indicate that our methods have a good speedup based on the Hadoop cluster with MapReduce.

B. Scalability Evaluation  We evaluate the scalability of the proposed methods for real data sets of different sizes, with one DataNode, three DataNodes, and six DataNodes in the cluster, respectively.

The experimental results are shown in Fig. 4.

Fig. 4 shows that the computing performance of three mining methods is enhancing continuously, and the exe- cution time varies slightly with the gradually increasing number of DataNodes. The results indicate that our methods have a good scalability based on the Hadoop cluster with MapReduce.



VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  In this paper, we propose three methods for mining user browsing patters and interactive behaviors based on Hadoop by using MapReduce in the cluster, and then apply the proposed methods to mine NASA Web server logs and Apache Tomcat developer mailing lists, respectively. Finally, we analyze the visualization of mining results and evaluate the performance of our methods.

On the one hand, our methods can find out the potential users and reduce the loss of loyal users, and the results of this study can provide some valuable references for decision making of personalized information access. First, the findings of mining user browsing preference can help designers to improve the organized structure of Web sites and enrich the personalized information of Web pages, for offering personalized information service and enhancing the core competitiveness of Web sites. Second, the findings of mining user visiting frequency are beneficial to developing the business strategies to obtain more profits for the enter- prises, and strengthening the supervision of Web sites for the managers. Third, the findings of mining user participating characteristics can help the developers to acquire more implications in the OSS development, and can also promote the users to participate in the community positively by taking some effective motivate mechanisms, in order to expand knowledge sharing and avoid participation inequality. On the other hand, our methods can provide a reference for the same type of knowledge discovery, and we can implement their applications in the analysis of Web sites, open source communities and other domains.

More specifically, the experimental results demonstrate that our methods have the capability to effectively handle large-scale semi-structured and/or unstructured data, and have a good speedup and scalability with more efficient than     ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ???  ????  ????  ????  ????  ????  ????  ????  ????  ????  ???? ) * ? % ? ?? ?   ?? ?? ? ?? ? ? % ?   ? ?  ?	?? ????????+#?#,????  ?,-?#?#?????  ?,-?#?#?????  ?,-?#?#?????  ?,-?#?#?????  (a)  ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ???  ????  ????  ????  ????  ????  ????  ????  ) * ? % ? ?? ?   ?? ?? ? ?? ? ? % ?   ? ?  ?	?? ????????+#?#,????  ?,-?#?#?????  ?,-?#?#?????  ?,-?#?#?????  ?,-?#?#?????  (b)  ? ? ? ? ? ?  ????  ????  ????  ???  ?????  ?????  ?????  ) * ? % ? ?? ?   ?? ?? ? ?? ? ? % ?   ? ?  ?	?? ????????+#?#,????  ??-?#?#?????  ??-?#?#?????  ??-?#?#?????  ??-?#?#?????  (c)  Figure 3. The execution time of three methods for mining user browsing preference (a), visiting frequency (b) and participating characteristics (c).

? ? ? ? ? ?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.

?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.

?.?  ?,-?#?#??????/?/??  ?,-?#?#??????/?/??  % # '#  ?'? ??  ?	?? ????????+#?#,????  (a)  ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.

?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.

?.?  ?	?? ????????+#?#,????  % # '#  ?'? ??  ?,-?#?#??????/?/??  ?,-?#?#??????/?/??  (b)  ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.

?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.?  ?.

?.?  ?	?? ????????+#?#,????  % # '#  ?'? ??  ??-?#?#??????/?/??  ??-?#?#??????/?/??  (c)  Figure 4. The scalability of three methods for mining user browsing preference (a), visiting frequency (b) and participating characteristics (c).

the traditional methods. In the future, we will further analyze the other factors of user loyalty, such as the last access time, the average residence time, and the average number of page views, to address the effective solutions for better serving the needs of personalized information access for various users.

