

Abstract?A-03 Flip-Chip in Chip card is a kind of new technology applied widely in the semiconductor field. It is becoming a big challenge for the stud bump on the wafer due to smaller and smaller bond pad, consequently smaller bump size with more stable process control becomes very critical due to UPH (Units Per Hour) dropped greatly.

In this paper, the process of stud bump is briefly introduced and key requirements are defined. The common mechanism of different stud bump modes is clarified with process procedure.  By comparison of different stud bump modes, these main issues in manufacturing line can be addressed by 6 sigma methodology.  Then the key factors are filtered by DoE experiments.  After that, data validation is performed based on the results of Box plot of CEAD software. The optimized process parameters are drilled for mass production to achieve higher and stable UPH. The whole evaluation can be finalized by data analysis.

Keywords?Flip-Chip; Stud Bump;Chip Card; 6 Sigma

I.  INTRODUCTION In flip-chip process, Au bumps must be addressed on the  bond pad of wafer, and then each chip is flip-bonded on substrate in the end. During the bumping process, bumps are made of a certain size of gold wire. Taken the wire broken issue into consideration, usually the bigger bump size is the first option for production. The advantage of it is easy setup and process control, of course, the UPH is also higher. Bigger bump size process (such as 90um stud bump) has been the standard stud bump process in flip chip of chip-card process for many years. However, with the wafer technology developing, chip inside is diminishing and the bond pad of chip is also shrinking accordingly which smaller bump size is a must to fit. It is a trend for small bump size to replace the big bump size. The process control is more difficult for the small bump size process and the production efficiency also meets serious challenge during the replacement. Figure 1 below shows the decrease from 90um bump size to 45um bump size in same scale. The process complexity lead to the efficiency decreasing greatly, seriously affect the production capacity.

How to improve the UPH by process optimization is a real problem for the Flip-chip of chip card field.



II. THINKING 6 SIGMA METHOD INTRODUCTION IN BRIEF Thinking 6 Sigma is a set of methods and tools which is  used to solve the engineering problem in Infineon. This method is based on probability statistics and data analysis by CEDA software tools.

It is divided into five steps as Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve and Control. The steps are in Table I:  Table I  DMAIC  Flow Activity Tool Output  Define  Define Process Requirements Business  Value Project target  SIPOC(Supplier, Input, Process, Output, Customer) Voice of Customer CtQ Data analysis CEAD: Boxplot,  Normal distribution, Histogram  Problem defined Quantified  Requirements Business evaluated Project Plan  Measure  Search process steps Actual process  performance  Process mapping Matrix analysis Data analysis Mintab: Pareto  Potential process parameter identified Definition which  data/how to measure  Analyze  Test hypotheses Verification of potential cause  Statistic tool, CEAD: DoE, Boxplot, Control Chart Mintab: Pareto  Statistical hypotheses formulated H0,Ha Verified true cause  Improve Select best  balanced choice Verify solution  Trial Run CEAD: Normal  distribution, Boxplot, Control Chart Mintab: Pareto  Most effective and efficient solution selected Solution verified to  meet target  Figure 1 Stud Bump Shape and Diameter Trend         Control  Verify long term performance Maximize  Benefit  Process confirm CEAD: Normal  distribution, Boxplot, Control Chart  Improvement confirmed Project successful  and close Document and  result confirmed   The whole roadmap of process flow can be followed in the  principle shown by the table above. In this paper, we will show how to apply this methodology to solve problems.



III. THE DEFINITION OF THE PROBLEM , THE DATA ANALYSIS AND TARGET SETTING  A  Problem Description and Scope Confirming UPH of making 45um stud bump is reduced about 33.8%  compared with 60um stud bump in mass production.

Scope confirming: In order to define scope, SIPOC of secondary level mode is  used for confirmation. The first level can be seen in Table II.The scope is concentrated in the whole stud bump process.

And the secondary level mode can be seen in Table III. Stud bump process is divided into more details.

Table IIII  PROCESS   Table IVI  STUD BUMP PROCESS    In the above SIPOC mode, details in secondary level are more focused in parameters setting, stud bump mode setting and material selecting. In order to clarify the target further, customer?s issues must be screened. Table IV of VoC (Voice of Customer) is introduced.

Table IV   VoC    UPH values are showed in Figure 2. Control chart shows the process is in normal control and process control is stable.

Figure 3 shows that these data are not presented in normal distribution. It is necessary to transformed them to normal distribution for data analysis. After these data are averaged by use of 4 adjacent numbers and are transformed to normal distribution, Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the judgment result.

B. Preliminary Target Setting: According to the data above, UPH mean value will increase  from 9163 to 12000 if the problem is solved completely. Now the preliminary target is set and the UPH mean value will be increased by 8%, from 9163 to 10000. Figure 6 shows the target setting in Box Plot graph.

Figure 2 Control Chart for Original Data   Figure 3 Normal Distribution Judgment: No!

Figure 4 Normal Distribution Judgment: Yes!

Figure 5 Histogram from Treatment Data   Figure 6 BoxpLot ---Target Define

IV. PRELIMINARY CAUSE ANALYSIS FOR THE PROBLEM In order to find the root cause of problem, Process Mapping  is set at first. Detailed internal process procedure is fully displayed. And then Cause & Effect Matrix of each part is shown. Pareto graph is made according to the score. More probable impact factors are found out. Data collection plan is established according to impact factors and previous data.

Process Mapping table V is as below, according to steps above.

Process evaluation is performed according to the detailed Process Mapping table  below. A Cause & Effect Matrix is produced as shown in Table VI.

Relevant Pareto in Figure 7 is made according to the Table

VI. Four main factors of the problem causes are filtered as stud bump mode, C/V, capillary and gold wire. Root cause hypothesis are presented according to 4 main factors as table VII.

Table V  PROCESS MAPPING     Table VI  CAUSE & EFFECT MATRIX      Figure 7 Cause Matrix Pareto   Table VII  HYPOTHESIS OF CAUSE  Potential Root Cause Hypothesis  Of Cause  Stud bump mode not optimized  Current stud bump mode will prolong capillary travelling route that increase process cycle time  and resulting of low UPH  Unfit capillary type used  Capillary type will influence the tail cut stability.

Instability of tail cut will cause high machine  stoppage frequency C/V parameter  setting not optimized  Low C/V value will decrease capillary motion speed resulting of low UPH  Unfit gold wire type was selected  Unfit gold wire type will have more outspread value. So it will not be easy to be cut. Tail cutting  is not stable, resulting of high machine outage factor.



V. ROOT CAUSE OF THE PROBLEM DETERMINATION DoE methods are used with similar different tape dummy  wafers according to the hypothesis above. Root causes are confirmed. Corrected capillary and gold wire are determined for setup. After these factors are fixed, DoE of process parameters are executed. Different bump mode and different C/V (capillary bond down speed) are combined in final root causes search.

A. Capillaries and Gold Wires Experiment Select 2 groups gold wire and 2 groups capillary to do  experiment. The purpose is to find which type of gold wire and         capillary group is most appropriate and can cause the least amount of downtime. The categories of selecting are shown in Table VIII.

Table VIII DoE MATRIX    Figure 8 Remain Wire The results are as follows:  Combination 2, 3 and 4 lead to ?flying wire?, in which the Au wire cannot cut off and leave a tail in the bump shown in Figure 8. The probability of the issue is greater than 50% in mass production. The stud bump is not stable. However, Combination 1 does not have this ?flying wire? issue, so the combination of W1 & C1 group is defined as best  B. Bump Mode & C/V Experiment: The combination of W1 & C1 is chosen for the evaluation  of correlation among different factors, which shown as table IX.

Related UPH results are obtained.

Table IX  DESIGN MATRIX   Figure 9 Coefficients  The results which are obtained in the groups are input into DoE of CEDA software. The software can give the correlation parameters figure (Figure 9), export to the factor Pareto (Figure 10), and then run out of two factors with prediction of numerical figure. (Figure 11)   Figure 10 Effects Pareto for UPH   Figure 11 Predicted Graph   Figure 10 and Figure 11 can give the following conclusions: 1)   C/V is key factor for improvement UPH  2)  If the stud bump mode can be changed to A mode, UPH can be improved significantly.

3)  C/V and stud bump mode have interactive correlation function.

Finally, BoxPlot of Figure 12 under the F mode in different C/V is displayed by use of dummy wafers simulation running.

UPH increases about 23.3% in C/V12 comparing with C/V7.

Figure 12 F & C/V12 Box Plot   Figure 13 F& C/V 12 vs C/V 15 Box Plot

VI. PRODUCT PILOT RUNNING AND FINAL PARAMETERS OPTIMIZATION  Parameters optimization was done during dummy product run according to root causes confirming and dummy wafers simulation running. By optimizing the C/V parameters, the result can be seen in Figure 13. C/V parameter can be set to the up limit according to DoE results. UPH is increased by about 4.4% again while C/V increases from 12 to 15. UPH increases by 28.7% compare with C/V 7.



VII.  A FORMAL LONG-TERM OPERATION, THE FINAL RESULT AND CONTROL FOR PRODUCTS  After the pilot run, data can be collected from safe launch and mass production. FMEA is updated by data evaluation and those key parameters on chip-sheet are filed. W1 gold wire, C1 capillary, A stud bump and C/V 15 are well-defined in work instructions. The mean value of UPH is showed in Figure 14. UPH is improved from 9163 to 13184. The percentage is about 43.9%. The data is 30% more than the target requirement. The before Vs. after UPH data are compared in I-Chart by Mintab software. Figure 15 shows that process control is stable for requirement. Some cost saving is also approached due to wire saving and capacity increase.

Generally speaking, the target set is fulfilled.

Figure 14 UPH Original and Final Box Plot   Figure 15 UPH Before and After I-Chart

VIII. DISCUSSION The article came from a green-belt project. These ideas can  be a reference used in all aspects of quality management, engineering application and so on.



IX.   CONCLUSION By comparison of different stud bump modes, the UPH  capacity can be improved by process optimization using 6 sigma methodology. The key factors are then filtered by DoE experiments.  After that, data validation is performed based on the results of Box plot of CEAD software. The optimized process parameters are drilled for mass production to achieve stable higher UPH. The whole evaluation is finalized by data analysis.

