ASONAM 2013 Tutorials

Abstract:  Outlier detection has been studied in the context of many research areas like statistics, data  mining, sensor networks, environmental science, distributed systems, spatio-temporal mining, etc.

Outlier detection has been studied on a large variety of data types including high-dimensional  data, uncertain data, stream data, graph data, time series data, spatial data, and spatio-temporal  data. We present an organized picture of recent research in outlier detection for graph data for  both static as well as dynamic graphs. We begin by motivating the importance of graph outlier  detection and briefing the challenges beyond usual outlier detection. Static graph outlier  detection techniques include Minimum Description Length techniques, techniques based on  ego net metrics and random field models. For dynamic graphs, we discuss graph similarity based  algorithms, evolutionary community based algorithms and online graph outlier detection  algorithms. We also present applications where such techniques have been applied to discover  interesting outliers.

xliv    ASONAM 2013 Tutorial 2:  Title: Social and Behavioral Analytics (SBA): Mining Behaviors of a Socially Connected  World  Speaker: Jaideep Srivastava (Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota)  Abstract:  That computing is pervasive in society today is almost a cliche. However, treating this cliche as  one misses an essential truth of our times, namely, that our social existence has become  intimately intertwined with computing and communication technology. Smartphones and  broadband communication have fundamentally changed the way we interact and socialize, the  way we seek advice, basically the way we live our lives. This ubiquitous, 'on-the-go' availability  of both significant computing power, and high speed connectivity, has led the software industry  to create all sorts of 'apps' which people can take advantage of - and that too almost always for  free. Of course, what is hidden in plain sight is that fact that these apps collect data about people,  of all kinds, in all sorts of ways, and all moments and locations; and users of these apps are  usually not even aware of this. This has created a whole new world of data, at a scale, and of a  type that is unprecedented in history. This opens up all sorts of opportunities to achieve things  never before dreamed possible, and at the same time makes us once in a while think where we  might be headed, and if that is indeed the destination we want to get to. Technology, however, is  ethics agnostic, and moves at its own pace and in its own direction. The goal of this course is to  discuss, in a tutorial manner, through case studies, and through discussion, what these  technologies are, and where they seem to be taking us.

xlv    ASONAM 2013 Tutorial 3:  Title: Big Graph Mining: Algorithms, Anomaly Detection, and Applications  Speaker: U Kang (KAIST), Leman Akoglu (Stony Brook), Polo Chau (Georgia Tech)  Abstract:  Graphs are everywhere: social networks, the World Wide Web, biological networks, and many  more. The sizes of graphs are growing at unprecedented rate, spanning millions and billions of  nodes and edges. What are the patterns and anomalies in such massive graphs? How to design  scalable algorithms to find them? And what kind of real-world problems can we solve with such  tools? These are exactly the goals of this tutorial.

We start with important graph algorithms central to graph mining and pattern discoveries, and  describe how we can implement their fast, scalable versions using a unified framework on top of  Hadoop. Then we describe graph-based anomaly detection techniques (complement of pattern  discoveries) and how to scale them to massive graphs. Finally, we discuss how our  aforementioned techniques can help solve large-scale, real-world problems that make impact to  society, and to help solve challenging problems in visual analytics.

xlvi    ASONAM 2013 Hands-on Workshop  Arno H.P. Reuser, Reuser's Information Services / Ministry of Defence  Advanced search techniques in Google and other search engines  Bring in your laptop or handheld device which connects to the Internet  Goals:  Teaching hand-on best practices in finding the best results from free internet search engines as  well as commercial databases with low recall and high precision.

