Survey of Data Cleansing and Monitoring for Large-Scale Battery Backup Installations

Abstract?A continuous supply of electrical power is nec- essary for many areas of modern life, including industry, healthcare, and telecommunications. Therefore, battery backup systems, which can provide power in the event of emergencies, have become extremely important for many types of industries.

Due to the importance of these systems, they are often installed and maintained by large firms dedicated to this task, but such firms then must monitor a huge number of such systems.

Handling this Big Data problem requires facing two challenges: dealing with potentially noisy and erroneous data in a fashion which preserves the important information and may even help point towards repairable failures in the monitoring systems, and using the cleansed data to build models of the battery systems which will allow for prediction of their state. In this work, we survey the scope of progress in these two areas, presenting papers which have looked at the data cleansing and battery monitoring problems in the context of battery backup installations. We also consider the work which has yet been performed, areas which retain the potential for future research.

Keywords-Data Cleansing; Remote Monitoring; Battery Backup Systems

I. INTRODUCTION  Many aspects of modern technology depend on a steady supply of electrical power. From factory floors to medical equipment to communications gear, unexpected power out- ages can have expensive and potentially fatal consequences.

As a result, many industries turn to battery backup solutions to provide power in the event of emergencies which cause the primary power source to fail. Although these sources may not replace the power grid for an extended duration, they give workers time to activate generators or discover the cause of the outage. Because these systems must activate quickly and automatically in the event of unexpected power loss, their installation and maintenance is often beyond the scope of the industries directly relying on this power, and thus these industries rely on firms dedicated to the management of battery power installations.

While centralizing the management tasks to a single dedicated company has many benefits (their employees are trained and skilled specifically in this domain, they have a great deal of experience with such systems, and they can help companies deploy the systems most appropriate for their needs), this increase in scale brings its own problems.

Because a single firm can be in charge of hundreds or even  thousands of systems, it is infeasible to have humans directly monitor and maintain all batteries in their care. As a result, automated systems are necessary for these tasks.

Two main challenges face automated systems for moni- toring battery installations: the quality of the data received by the system, and processing this data to perform diag- nostic and prognostic analysis. The data quality issue arises because much of the source data generated by monitoring systems can be noisy. Static monitors can be installed directly within the batteries being monitored, but these monitoring systems can fail for many different reasons, such as humidity, heat, inadvertent tampering during inspections, and so on. These failures can mask actual errors, and also may require direct attention on their own. Thus, automated systems must first handle potentially-noisy data, to ensure that algorithms can determine the proper source and reme- diation for a given fault.

Once data has been cleansed, the process of analysis must begin. Multiple strategies exist for this analysis, depending both on the type of battery system being monitored and the level of modeling required by the scenario. For example, while Valve Regulated Lead Acid (VRLA) batteries remain a popular choice due to their reliability and safety, other options such as Nickel Metal Hydride (Ni-MH) and Pro- ton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell (PEMFC) have been explored, and each requires its own management framework.

In addition, even within the scope of VRLA batteries, there have been different models considering physics-based approaches, coulomb counting, and block-based systems which consider the interactions among different parts of the battery. Each of these has advantages, and different works have considered how they can be applied towards battery monitoring.

In the remainder of this work, we will present current literature on the problems pertaining to cleansing and mon- itoring data from large-scale battery backup installations, as well as consider future directions to advance this field.

Table I provides a brief overview of the works we will present. Section II contains our discussion on the problem of data cleansing, while Section III discusses the challenges of battery monitoring (with a special focus on VRLA systems and battery systems which are specifically used for backup power in the event of an outage). In Section IV, we examine   DOI 10.1109/ICMLA.2013.165    DOI 10.1109/ICMLA.2013.165    DOI 10.1109/ICMLA.2013.165    DOI 10.1109/ICMLA.2013.165     the areas of research which merit future work, and in Section V we present our conclusions.



II. DATA CLEANSING  In general terms, many studies have been conducted which highlight the importance of data cleansing (also known as data cleaning) in order to improve the quality of the data (and thus, the quality of further analysis). Rahm and Do [12] presented a classification of data quality problems in data sources differentiating between single- and multisource problems (that is, whether the potentially-erroneous data arises from a single sensor or multiple sensors), and between schema- and instance-level problems (depending on whether errors arise from minor faults in some instances or from the schema itself not properly handling the data), all in a single integrated framework. The authors outlined the major steps for data transformation and data cleaning and emphasized the need to cover schema- and instance-related data transformations to obtain good quality data. They also discussed a number of tools available for data cleansing.

However, although this work provides a good background on the problems of data cleansing, no case study was used to tie everything together and demonstrate these techniques on a real-world problem.

Van den Broeck et al. [18] presented data cleaning as a three-stage process, involving repeated cycles of screening, diagnosing, and editing of suspected data abnormalities. The authors recognized that data cleaning is an essential aspect of quality assurance and a determinant of study validity. They discussed the use of predefined rules for dealing with errors as well as how properly handling true missing and extreme values are a necessary part of a good practice, and then went on to explain that actively searching for errors improves detection efficiency. They further explained that the source of the errors in the data can be classified either as a lack or excess of data or as outliers and inconsistencies. However, as with Rahm and Do, they did not provide a case study to demonstrate the usage of their framework on real-world data.

Relatively little work has been conducted regarding the importance of data cleansing for improving the quality of sensor data, especially in the context of monitoring battery systems. In matching conference and journal publi- cations [7], [8], Jeffery et al. developed a framework called Extensible Receptor Stream Processing (ESP) oriented to build sensor data cleaning infrastructures for use in pervasive applications. The authors recognize the importance of clean- ing data captured from sensor devices before any application can use it and also remark that this preprocessing phase increases the complexity of the application development and deployment. In this sense, their proposed framework addresses missing and unreliable sensor data by introducing the concepts of temporal and spatial granule to capture the correlations between readings of nearby devices. As a result,  this framework recognizes that data points which are close in space and/or time tend to share similar values, and therefore readings that are faraway and thus do not share values in this manner are likely to be erroneous. They proposed a five-step preprocessing approach to address these potentially erroneous data points by removing outliers, interpolating missing values both temporally and spatially (in separate steps), handling duplicated readings, and combining readings from different sensor types. By employing this framework, only the useful data will be retained, while erroneous and missing values will be fixed, thus producing a more useful dataset. In the journal version, the ESP framework is demonstrated using a number of different case studies, including cleansing data from RFID tags and wireless sensor networks, as well as a heterogeneous home sensor network.

However, none of these case studies dealt with extremely large quantities of data, so further experimentation is needed to validate the scalability of the ESP framework.

Ratcliff et al. [13] considered the use of a data cleansing system for reducing noise in the resistance data collected from a battery backup monitoring system. Their system focused on three types of noise: duplicated values, values which exceeded thresholds given by domain experts, and values which were found to be mathematical outliers. They focused on these three types of errors because they were found to be the most frequent forms of noise in battery sys- tems. This system was demonstrated using real-world data collected from a number of different battery installations, and it was found that this approach could help produce cleaner data which is easier to process. They did note that this system fails to address missing values, however, and that future work could refine the outlier detection process.

In addition to ensuring data quality by removing or replac- ing faulty data, data quality models can be useful to retain information about the quality of each individual data point and ensure that this information is propagated to downstream systems. Klein [10] developed such a system, which uses a metamodel to assess data quality in terms of accuracy and completeness, which then either processes the data to improve its quality or simply marks the data as potentially low-quality so that it may be dealt with accordingly in the future. This system also takes into account the data storage and processing considerations which must be dealt with when handling large quantities of potentially faulty data.

Overall, this framework permits data to be interpreted and handled even in the event of data quality concerns so that all processing takes potential errors into account. No case study is conducted to demonstrate the use of this metamodel on real-world data, however.



III. BATTERY MONITORING SYSTEMS  As power consumption in various fields (such as informa- tion communication and healthcare) has increased, many au- thors have realized that the use of batteries for power failure     Topic Paper Summary  Rahm and Do [12] General discussion of different forms of data quality challenges  Van den Broeck et al. [18] Three-stage process for data cleansing  Data Cleansing Jeffery et al. [7], [8] Framework for cleansing sensor data  Klein [10] Metamodel for propagating accuracy, confidence, and completeness of data  Ratcliff et al. [13] Cleansing through removal of duplicate, outside-threshold, and outlier instances  Jan Bergveld et al. [3] Discussion of monitoring systems with focuson the charging and discharging processes  General Battery Monitoring Chaturvedi et al. [4] New model which uses a physics-based electrochemical model (with concentrations of electrically-active chemicals)  Cheng et al. [5] Block diagram model which incorporates State Of Charge (SOC)  Divakar et al. [6] SOC used as one of the states within a battery model  Bao et al. [2] Introduced a centralized and networked monitoring system  Karmakar and Chandna [9] Monitoring system which relies on the voltage regulator circuit and the actual voltage circuit  Battery Backup System Monitoring Rosolem et al. [15] Monitoring system which measures internal resistance and voltage  Tsujikawa [17] Monitoring system which uses battery voltage, ambienttemperature, and discharge circuit diagnosis  Ratcliff et al. [14] System to detect sudden changes in battery resistance values  Table I: Summary of presented works  mitigation has gradually become large scale. In this regard, much research has been conducted with the purpose of developing different technologies for battery backup systems such as Lithium-Ion [11], Nickel Metal Hydride [16], and Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell [19]. However, the majority of battery systems continue to use VRLA batteries.

In this section, we first discuss papers which consider the general problem of monitoring battery systems, and then focus on those which monitor batteries used for emergency power backup solutions.

A. General Battery Monitoring Systems  Battery backup systems should be properly working at all times, especially when the hardware associated to the system handles critical tasks that cannot be interrupted due to a power failure. Furthermore, despite the fact that different researchers have been looking for alternative technologies, VRLA based battery backup systems still remain as the most used type of alternative power source due to their proven effectiveness and efficiency for such purpose. As a result, different researchers have developed battery monitoring sys- tems also known as battery management systems (BMSs) in many different application domains. In this regard, Jan Bergveld et al. [3] explained that the basic task of a BMS is to ensure that optimum use is made of the energy inside the battery powering the portable product and that the risk of damage inflicted upon the battery is minimized. The authors further explained that this is achieved by monitoring and controlling the battery?s charging and discharging process.

Some of the BMSs developed are explained below.

Chaturvedi et al. [4] explained that Li-ion batteries have beneficial properties as well as decreasing costs that have established them as a leading candidate for the next gen- eration of automotive and aerospace applications. Some of these properties include: providing one of the best energy- to-weight ratios, exhibiting no memory effect, and having low self-discharge when not in use. The authors presented a BMS that uses a physics-based electrochemical model instead of an equivalent circuit model, which is what a typical BMS uses. Their proposed electrochemical model can predict the spatially distributed behavior of the essential states of the battery (such as concentrations of lithium ions and potentials in the electrolyte and the solid electrode material) and various safety-relevant quantities as the battery is charged and discharged. The authors further explained that knowledge of these quantities helps to determine the state of the battery as well as its ability to provide energy.

Both a full electrochemical model and a simplified single- particle version (dubbed the Single Particle Model, SPM) were considered. To test this model, the authors used data gathered from the battery of a hybrid electric vehicle, with the parameters of the model having been either directly measured or (in the case of values which could not be directly measured) fit to the data obtained in the experiments.

They found that the full model performed better, especially during and after periods of high current. This was confirmed by additional experiments which specifically focus on high- power and high-energy batteries. However, despite having contrasted the principles of their techniques with equivalent- circuit models, these were not directly tested in their exper-     iments.

Divakar et al. [6] recognized the importance of BMSs  for any electrical vehicle in order to guarantee safety of the battery and the passengers. The authors proposed a block- based BMS with multiple separate modules for components such as battery measurement, battery state estimation, ca- pacity estimation, cell equalization, ground fault detection, and thermal management. The battery state estimation block estimates the current State Of Charge (SOC), using a SOC reset mechanism along with coulomb counting to overcome the limitations of stand-alone coulomb counting (such as the potential for error accumulation). To demonstrate this system, the authors simulated a typical BMS for hybrid electrical vehicles (HEVs) and concluded that their proposed model is potentially useful for HEVs, and that it can be extended with modifications to other types of electrical vehicles. However, no actual experimental data was used in this study.

Cheng et al. [5] (sharing the same first three authors as Divakar et al.) also proposed a BMS block diagram that uses various functional blocks including battery model, thermal management, and battery capability estimation. The authors explained that one of the most important parameters that are required to ensure safe charging and discharging of the batteries is the State Of Charge (SOC). In this regard, they pointed out that SOC helps in the management of batteries because it provides the current state of the battery and enables batteries to safely be charged and discharged at a level suitable for battery life enhancement. SOC is estimated by finding the open circuit voltage and using this to predict the terminal voltage, and the difference between this predicted value and the actual battery voltage drives a Kalman filter to update the SOC. This usage of open circuit voltage goes beyond simple coulomb counting and helps prevent errors from accumulating. To test their model, Cheng et al. performed experiments on charging and discharging a Li-ion battery, and compared a set of simulated results with the actual measured values. They found good agreement between their techniques, but do not directly consider other methods, and their experiments only focus on one of the functional blocks discussed in their general framework.

B. Battery Backup System Monitoring  Due to the continuous increase of battery backup systems used by many electricity end-users that require assurance that power will not be interrupted, many researchers have developed different types of monitoring systems. Such moni- toring systems allow to keep track of the state of the batteries with the purpose of preventing battery failure in order to guarantee their maximum availability. Some recently- developed monitoring systems are explained bellow.

Bao et al. [1] introduced a centralized and networked monitoring system for VRLA batteries based on existing electric power and telecommunication networks. Their sys-  tem transfers data and commands via the electric power and telecommunication network and is able to perform many critical functions for VRLA such as real-time monitoring, intellectual diagnosis, capacity evaluation, automatic SMS alerts on faults, and remote maintenance operations. The authors pointed out that the system has proven to work fine after being installed in various power supply corporations in the country. However, their work primarily focused on the network and computer infrastructure needed to support a large-scale monitoring system, and not on the actual mon- itoring and analysis algorithms which must be employed by such a system. Thus, their work is best viewed in conjunction with other studies on the more algorithmic components of monitoring solutions.

Karmakar and Chandna [9] designed a system for con- tinuous on-line charging level and voltage monitoring of VRLA batteries. The proposed design relies on the voltage regulator circuit and the actual voltage monitoring circuit, and provides a medium for successfully monitoring the voltage of VRLA batteries. The authors explained that the major advantage of the above mechanism is that it is user friendly and economically viable. Although this solution is an effective hardware tool, it has no software component, which may limit its scalability to hundreds or even thousands of batteries being monitored (where it is infeasible to have a human manually determine which LEDs are lit up, and remote solutions are preferred).

