A Computing Resources Market Model and  Supply-Demand Matching Mechanism

Abstract?To facilitate computing resources commercialization  and to encourage more users to participate in the trading, we propose a computing resource market model CR-Market in this paper. Compared with existing Grid and Cloud markets, CR-Market has the following distinctive features: (1) Its architecture is based on the combination of Grid and Cloud.

Market participants include buyers and sellers of Cloud providers, Cloud users and ordinary Grid users. (2) The transaction prices are floated by the matching mechanism and current supply-demand circumstances. Both sellers and buyers have the same right to affect the deal price. (3) Quality-aware models of supply and demand are used to express different resource qualities of and individual user?s quality requirements.

(4) Quality-aware matching algorithms based on double auction are designed and studied by simulation in this paper. Compared with traditional double auction, the simulation results reveal that the Quality-aware matching algorithms can not only guide users to rational pricing but also get higher matching success ratios and total transaction amounts.

Keywords- Computing Resource Market; Cloud Market; Grid Market; Trdaing Mechanism; Quality-aware Supply-demand Models; Quality-Aware matching Algorithms; Double Auction

I.  INTRODUCTION  Cloud computing [1] presents an attractive resource sharing mechanism to allow users to make on-demand access on computing power, storage space, data resources, and services.

As a representative example of computing cloud, Amazon EC2 [2] has been created to provide users with computing power and computing service on the pay-per-use basis. This resource model is a form of the utility computing, although we consider it as the "monopoly"-type market. This is because users can buy resources or services only from certain cloud providers who have the power to decide the trading models and prices.

Moreover, there is no sharing channel among different clouds.

It is inconvenient and unsatisfying for users for two reasons: (1) Sellers always have the absolute control so that it is not attractive for many buyers to participate; (2) The price is fixed and set by the seller alone instead of the market mechanism so that it cannot react to the equilibrium of supply and demand.

To meet users? needs, some emerging enterprises, such as DigitalRibbon [3], try to build a virtual environment, the ?electronic shopping mall? business model, where anyone can sell or buy their computing resources. Zimory [4] also provides users with a business cloud resource market platform. On the  other hand, such a market environment allowing users to easily sell their extra resources or buy needed resources is not currently available. The corresponding market management mechanism has not been fully studied.

We are interested in the study of market management mechanism for trading computing resources based on existing cloud and grid market. A computing resource market model called CR-Market is proposed in this paper. The architecture is based on the combination of Grid and Cloud. from cloud providers, cloud users and ordinary grid users. Different from existing cloud markets, such as EC2, resource prices are floated and updated by the matching mechanism and current supply-demand circumstances. Both sellers and buyers have the same right to affect the deal price. Different from most existing grid markets, the trading resources are organized as VMs with different configurations and different qualities instead of only CPU speed defined in MFlops. We have built quality-aware models of supply and demand respectively to express different seller resources? qualities and users? quality requirements. We have also designed the supply-demand matching algorithms using the traditional double auction idea to design the matching algorithm. However, we found that it is not ideal to consider the quality information or give users rational price guidance. Therefore, we have designed quality-aware matching algorithms using the quality attributes to sort orders in the matching queue in order to receive better results. A simulation study has been conducted in our study.

The algorithms are compared using the criteria of matching success ratio and the total transaction amount.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews existing research on commercialization and marketization of computing resources in IT industries. The construction and main trading management model of CR-Market are shown in Section 3. Section 4 presents the commercialization and unified description of computational resources as well as the quality-aware model for supply and demand. Three matching algorithms are designed, presented and analyzed in Section 5. A simulation system has been implemented and the matching algorithms were simulated and compared in Section 6. Section 7 concludes the paper and discusses development prospects and future research direction.



II. RELATED RESEARCH ON COMPUTING RESOURCE MARKETIZATION  Following the development of grid economics, grid market, cloud computing and other emerging distributed platform, the   DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.15    DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.15     commercialization and marketization of computational resources are finally coming true.

Traditional grid aims to enable resource sharing and coordinate problem solving in dynamic, multi-institutional virtual organization [5,6] by utilizing geographically distributed resources including supercomputers, storage systems, data sources, and specialized devices owned by different organizations. Resources are provided voluntarily, and thus do not have an effective incentive for resources owner on their contribution of computing resources. This hinders the promotion of grid development.

In order to attract more resources, economic factors are included in grid to produce Economic Grid and Market Oriented Grid where resource users need to pay resource providers for using the computing resources. GRACE [7,8,9], the Grid Architecture for Computational Economy, is the main driving force in grid economy development. A few grid markets have also been proposed such as Popcorn [10], Spawn [11], Nimrod-G [12] and Tycoon [13]. These markets differ in service forms to users but all assume that default consumers have already accepted the market environment, learned to deal with risks and have enough knowledge to use market. However the scheduling management on system performance often is unable to effectively satisfy the users? quality requirements.

Some research aims to propose suitable market mechanisms involving trading management, price management and user services. An auction mechanism and a proportional distribution scheme applied to resource allocation system in Tycoon market is introduced in [13]. [14] and [15] focus on the grid market resource pricing and introduce a double auction mechanism for different commodity pricing. How to meet the deadline for a specific job with a given budget is discussed in [16] and three types of high level prediction techniques are introduced. The GridEcon marketplace is introduced in [17] in which the main contribution is an environment for integrating value-added support services including capacity planner, risk broker, workflow broker, portfolio broker and insurance broker.

In most prior study on the grid market, computing resources are defined by functional parameters such as CPU speed. The market matching is then modeled as a scheduling problem without considering users? individual requirements on the quality of resources. Such model is difficult to facilitate user-specific scheduling strategies.

Cloud computing [1,18,19] has been proposed as ?the fifth utility? and quickly becomes very popular since 2007. Many IT corporations, such as Google, Amazon, IBM, Oracle, and AMD, have proposed their new services or new products as cloud computing. However, there is no standard definition or service rules among them. Each cloud service aims to construct a service environment with some characters of monopoly instead of an effective solution to realize resources sharing among different clouds. Users act as mere consumers and pay for services in accordance with the rules and regulations formulated by the cloud owners.

Many current cloud platforms provide users with IaaS, SaaS and PaaS through virtual technologies running on the resources owned by cloud providers. Most service interface is designed to be convenient and friendly to users. However, the underlying resource scheduling and resource matching solutions are usually designed for the interest of resource  owners without a fair consideration to buyers. Users only can follow the rules, parameters and prices set by cloud providers.

Amazon [2], Zimory [4] and DigitalRibbon [3] respectively offer a marketplace for customers to consume their resources but all these platforms operate outside of a common market and uniform market constraints. Users need a market that is effectively controlled by business laws so that they can buy or sell computing resources fairly, efficiently and safely.

We propose the CR-Market that is a platform for sellers and buyers to trade resources and services under the control of market rules. The work in this project includes the design of trading manager, the description and commercialization of computing resources, quality-aware models of supply and demand, and the design of quality-aware matching algorithms.



III. TRADING MANAGENMENT MODEL IN CR-MARKET  Computing Resources Market (CR-Market) is designed for common economic settings such as a large number of buyers and sellers, plenty of supplies and demands, efficient transaction management mechanism, effective market behavior restraint mechanism and safe payment and supervision system.

