2013 IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)

ABSTRACT  Teaching mathematics has been a complex issue for educators as well as learners. Same is the condition for the hearing impaired learners. Multimedia can be a big facilitator in order to render simpler and effective learning methods in the field of teaching mathematics to the hearing impaired students. The guidelines of United Nations Convention of Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD, 2007), makes provision for creation of information in accessible format.

However there are no research studies to establish that teaching mathematics through the accessible format of multimedia would increase comprehension levels in children with hearing impairment.

According to Mary Ellen Foster (2003) in her study on visual comprehension found that ?Intuitively, one way of determining the usefulness of any presentation of data is by measuring the ease with which tasks involving that data can be performed using that presentation?.

It may be noted that children with hearing impairment use visual techniques in their thought process, therefore accessible format of multimedia will enhance their comprehension levels. Accessible format includes techniques such as captioning, sign language and audio description.

This can be very helpful in processing information by hearing impaired children. The study investigated the effects of multimedia in accessible format, through the use of captioning and Indian sign language (ISL), on hearing impaired children. Hearing impaired viewers watched twice, the short multimedia with and without accessibility formats respectively. Their reactions were recorded on a questionnaire developed for the purpose of the study.

Forty nine students participated in this study from two deaf schools of Mumbai,India. Analysis of the data showed that there was difference in the effects of accessible and non accessible formats of on the Hearing Impaired viewers.

The study also showed that accessible formats increase the comprehension of the subject of the multimedia and use of ISL and captioning helped hearing impaired students to understand concepts better. The hearing impaired persons correlated watching the ISL interpreter with understanding the concept of the topic of multimedia. Placement of the ISL interpreter in the screen was also covered under the study.

KEYWORDS  Accessible format, Comprehension, Education Multimedia, Hearing Impairment, Indian Sign Language, Captioning.

2013 IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)   INTRODUCTION  Mathematics is not learned through words alone; images are also very important in the study of Mathematics. Anxiety in learning Mathematics is a phenomenon that is often considered by a teacher, when he/she examines student?s problems in teaching Mathematics. This can also be called as ?Mathematics Anxiety?. Ashcraft M.H. et al., (2002) defines Mathematics anxiety as ?a feeling of tension, apprehension, or fear that interferes with Mathematics performance?. Anxiety in learning Mathematics can start in children as early as the first grade.

There is need for special education for all children. All children learn differently, learning the ?oral counting string? is fairly straightforward for hearing children. But it is difficult for hearing impaired children.

Nunes (2004) found that many deaf children in their second and third year in primary school were not able to count till 60.

The Deaf child thinks visually and prefers visual codes for learning therefore they do those tasks better that are presented spatially. Teachers of Mathematics show great interest in visualization of the Mathematical terms and emphasize that visualized lectures are of great help for students in abstract thinking in Mathematics Bishop (1989). This research examines those students who are hearing impaired and their process in learning mathematics using multimedia in accessible format to ease in the learning of Mathematics.

ACCESSIBLE MULTIMEDIA IN EDUCATION  Accessibility is essential to enable persons with disabilities to live independently and participate fully in all aspects of life. It has been drafted in article 9 and 20 of the Convention on the Rights of Person with Disabilities and Art 14 as well.

The study of this research is a first step in a thousand miles journey. To create multimedia in accessible format in education and to bring a person with disability to comprehend and understand his/her academic subjects better, as well as to enable him garner a keen interest in education. Accessible format of multimedia includes captioning and sign language for hearing impairment.

CAPTIONS  The process which converts narration, dialogue as well as music and sound effect of video production into text that is displayed on a television screen is known as captioning. The captions are typically white text against black background. Same language captions, i.e. without translation, were primarily intended as an aid for person with hearing impairment.

INDIAN SIGN LANGUAGE  India Sign Language is the mother tongue of Deaf Indians (Poothullil et, al.2013). Sign language is unique in many ways. It cannot be written like English or Hindi. ISL is a complete language. Anything expressed in spoken language can be expressed in sign language as well. ISL is a concept-based language. It is also not true that sign language has no grammar. All sign languages have complex and difficult grammars.

2013 IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)   NEED OF THE STUDY  Awareness about education and rehabilitation of hearing handicapped is low among the general public and even among the medical fraternity. According to UNCRPD article 8, creation of awareness about disability is mandatory for all states. India has ratified UNCRPD in 1st October 2007. The article 21 of UNCRPD mandates that information should be made available in accessible format. Hence it make mandatory for providing educational and informational materials in accessible format for institutes in the country for education.

The above law & rights establish a great need for the use of multimedia in accessible format to be made available to children with hearing impairment, this research paper is an humble step in that direction.

AIMS AND OBJECTVES  This research aimed at examining the use of multimedia in accessible format in the field of teaching Mathematics concepts of ?Angles? to students with hearing impairment. In addition to the above, our objective is to examine the suitability of Multimedia in meeting the requirements of students who are deaf in India and initiating the development of guidelines in adopting and using multimedia environment.

RESEARCH QUESTIONS  Does multimedia in accessible format enhance the comprehension of deaf student?

Does captioning increases the comprehension of deaf student?

Does sign language enhance the comprehension of deaf student?

What is best position of sign language interpreter in the screen?

HYPOTHESIS  Students with hearing impairment will be able to comprehend the multimedia with accessibility.

The use of captioning enhances the comprehension of multimedia in accessibility format.

The use of sign language does not enhance the comprehension of multimedia in accessibility.

The right bottom corner is the best position of sign language interpreter in the screen.

LIMITATIONS  Due to lack of time and resources, data collected from only 49 deaf viewers were studied. Among the viewers, 28 belonged to Hindi medium school, 21 belonged to English.

The screening of the multimedia was done in a class using LCD projection The captioning was done  in English with Arial fonts of size 32 and in Hindi with Akruti fonts size 50 to 61  Viewers were in the age group of 8 to 16years.

Educational qualifications of all the viewers were from 4th class to 7th class.

There was tool to control the cognitive ability of the viewers.

2013 IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)   METHODOLGY In this study, the analysis of the conceptual model is based on a regression model that includes three dependent variables for profile of viewer, knowledge assessment of topic featured in the multimedia and assessment of accessibility format (captions, and ISL). The data is drawn from a sample of 49 viewers of multimedia in Hindi & English. The research was conducted based on a survey using questionnaire developed for the purpose of the research. The data were collected with convenient sampling. As this study is essentially aimed at finding the effects of accessible formats in multimedia on hearing impaired students, profiles of the multimedia  ?Types of Angles? of  in terms of quality of comprehension of ?subject? featured in multimedia, design, accessible format, functional and accessible features were studied. Due care was taken to choose the multimedia ?Types of Angles? available in the ?YouTube? without loss of quality.

Hence, ?YouTube? downloader software was used to download the multimedia. Since the same was in .flv format it was later converted into wave file for sign language and captioning using ?Adobe Premier Pro-2? software using a desktop. No changes were made to the quality of the image, screen, background, and audio track of the multimedia.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In order to establish the aims & objectives of the research, the data was gathered using research tool developed for the purpose of the study. The data gathered from the viewers of the multimedia was analyzed using Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) Version -19. The result of the analysis and discussions are given below.

CLASS AND AGE WISE CLASSIFICATION In order to find out the educational level of viewers of multimedia, their Class and Age wise classification was analyzed. The result of analysis is given below.

Chart 2. Comparison of class and age of hearing impaired viewers of multimedia Table 2. Comparisons of Age and Class of Hearing Impaired Viewers of Multimedia  Age Class 4 Class 6 Class 7 Class 10 Total  11 to 12 yrs 7 3 0 0 10  13 to 14 yrs 0 7 0 0 7  15 to 16 yrs 0 4 19 9 32    2013 IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)   Total 10 10 10 10 49  p- value = .000 In the above Table 2 and Chart 2 it may be seen that in the classwise and agewise classification there is significant difference among the hearing impaired viewers of the multimedia.  In fact the vast majority of the viewers (  65.30 %) are  in the age group of 15 to 16 years and except Class 4 the students in the age group of 15 to 16. It may be noted that p- value is .000.

USAGE OF MULTIMEDIA IN ACCESSIBLE AND NON-ACCESSIBLE FORMAT  In order to find out the increase of comprehension of hearing impaired viewers from the multimedia about ?Angle? a comparison of multimedia in accessible and in non-accessible format was screened. The data was gathered regarding the usage of instrument used to measure angle from the viewers after screening the multimedia. The same was analyzed. The result of the analysis is given below.

Chart3.Multimedia in non accessible format and comprehension about concept of instruments used to measure angle  Chart 4. Multimedia in accessible format and comprehension about concept of instruments used to measure angle    2013 IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)   Table 3. Multimedia in Accessible & Non-Accessible Format and Comprehension about Concept of Instruments Used to Measure Angle  Accessible Format Total  Compass Scale   Protractor None  Non- Acces sible  forma t  Compass 1 0 1 0 2  Protractor 0 0 34 1 35  Sets of Square 0 0 1 0 1  None 0 1 3 7 11  Total  1 1 39 8 49  p- value = .000  The Table 3 depicts that  there is 10.21% increase in the correct answers to the question,  with reference to the instrument used for measuring degree of ?angles?, which is ?Protractor?. This increase is demonstrated, after  viewing multimedia in accessible format from 35 correct answers to 39 correct anwers. It is observed that after viewing of non-accessible multimedia format, viewers have given  less correct answers as compared to those who have answered after viewing the  multimedia in accessible format. In fact there is a significant difference the answers given by the viewers after watching the multimedia in accessible and non- accessible format, as the p- value was .000.

COMPREHENSION ABOUT NAME OF ANGLES Comprehension plays a significant role in learning process of the hearing impaired children in schools.

According to the aim of the research study, in order to compare the effectiveness of multimedia in accessible and in non accessible format, the comprehension about names of ?Angles? given by the viewers, after screening the multimedia were analyzed. The result of analysis is given below.

2013 IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)   Chart 5. Comparison of multimedia in non accessible format and comprehension about name of angles for hearing impaired viewers of multimedia.

Chart 6. Comparison of multimedia in accessible format and comprehension about name of angles for hearing impaired viewers of multimedia  Table 4. Comparison of Multimedia in Accessible & Non Accessible Format in Knowing Name of Angles for Hearing Impaired Viewers of Multimedia  Accessible Format  Total No of Answers 0 1 2 3 4 5  Non Acces sible Form at  0 3 0 1 0 0 0 4  1 1 2 2 2 1 0 8  2 0 1 1 1 0 2 5  3 0 2 0 1 0 5 8  4 0 0 0 1 9 5 15  5 0 0 0 0 0 9 9  Total 4 5 4 5 10 21 49  p- value = .000  In the above Table 4 depicts that there is 24.49% increase in the full correct answers, after  viewing multimedia in accessible format. It is observed that  only 9 viewers had all correct answers as compared to those 21 viewers who had given all correct answers  after watching multimedia in accessible format. In fact    2013 IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)   there is significant difference in the answered given by viewers after viewing the multimedia in accessible and non accessible format, with reference to the question of naming the angles,  as the p- value was .000.

USE OF CAPTIONING IN MULTIMEDIA IN ACCESSIBLE FORMAT  Captions play a significant role in the comprehension of multimedia by the hearing impaired children during learning in school. Captioning of ISL can lead to better comprehension of abstract concepts among the deaf and hearing Poothullil et.al, (2013).  In order find out the percentage and frequency of viewers of multimedia, who prefer captioning in the multimedia was analyzed. The result of analysis is given below.

\  Chart 7. The Percentage and frequency of viewers preference for captioning in accessible multimedia.

Table 5. The Percentage and Frequency of Viewers for Captioning in Accessible Multimedia  Answers Frequency Percent  Yes 44 89.8  No 5 10.2  Total 49 100  In the above Chart 7 & Table 5  depicts there is majority of viewers prefer captioning in multimedia.

Among the viewers 44 prefered to have captions in multimedia.

USAGE OF INDIAN SIGN LANGUAGE IN ACCESSIBLE MULTIMEDIA  Indian Sign Language is the mother tongue of the Deaf in India. Majority of the Deaf children in India use Sign Language for their communication in schools among their peers. Usage and benefit of Indian Sign Language among the Deaf Children in learning is still not established through research.  However in this research study, in order to demonstrate the usage of Indian Sign Language viewers perspective was gathered using the research tool developed for the study. In order to find out the percentage and frequency of viewers of multimedia who understood sign language in accessibility multimedia was analyzed using the available data. The result of analysis is given below.

2013 IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)   Chart 8. The Percentage and Frequency of Viewers Understood Sign Language in Accessible Multimedia Table 6. The Percentage and Frequency of Viewers who Understood Sign Language in the Accessible.

Multimedia  Answers Frequency Percent %  Yes 38 77.6  No 11 22.4  Total 49 100.0  Table 6 depicts there is majority of viewer that understood Sign Language used in multimedia in accessiblity format. The 38 viewers of multimedia understood Sign Language used in multimedia in accessible format.

MULTIMEDIA IN ACCESSIBLE FORMAT INCREASED UNDERSTANDING OF THE TOPIC  In order to find out the percentage and frequency of viewers of multimedia whether in multimedia in accessibility has increased the understanding of topic was analyzed. The result of analysis is given below.

Chart 9. The Percentage and frequency of viewers had increased understanding of topic using multimedia in accessible format  Table 7.The Percentage and Frequency of Viewers had Increased Understanding of Topic Using Multimedia in Accessible Format    2013 IEEE 63rd Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)   Viewers Frequency Percent  Yes 46 93.9  No 3 6.1  Total 49 100.0  CONCLUSION  As per the research methodology research study was implemented and the hypothesis was tested. The findings of the research showed that the comprehension of the hearing impaired viewers about the concept of ?Angles? has increased, after viewing the accessible format (Chart 9 & Table 7). Hence the hypothesis that student with hearing impairment will be able to comprehend the multimedia with accessibility is proved correct.

The use of captioning in multimedia was tested and it was found that viewers with hearing impairment preferred captioning (Chart 7 & Table 5) in multimedia. Hence the hypothesis that the use of captioning enhances the comprehension of multimedia in accessibility format is true.

The comprehension of the India Sign Language (ISL) among the viewers with hearing impairment was tested and it is found (Chart 8 & Table 6) that the viewers with hearing impairment had high comprehension of the ISL used in the accessible multimedia. Hence the hypothesis that the use of sign language does not enhance the comprehension of multimedia in accessibility is proved wrong.

Results derived from the investigation and analysis of the use of multimedia in the schools for the deaf identified a gap in the education of deaf children vis-?-vis Mathematics. This gap identified in this study in the literature can be used in the future by governments, organizations, e-learning companies and future research in targeting financial and human resources to support deaf education through multimedia in accessible format in the Indian subcontinent.

