A New Model of Information Content for Measuring  the Semantic Similarity Between Concepts

Abstract?The information content (IC) of concepts is a fundamental dimension in semantic similarity calculation. The IC of a concept is able to provide an evaluation of its degree of semantic generality and concreteness, which is great important semantic evidence modeled in the ontology. A proper quantification of IC requires an accurate evaluation of the structural differences among different concepts. This paper analyses several existing IC models and some structural factors in the ontological structure. After that, this paper proposes a criterion for evaluating IC models and a novel model employing three important factors to compute the concept?s IC. This model is evaluated on two different test datasets, and the experiments show that our IC model distinguishes concepts with different topology in the taxonomy more effectively than other IC models, and the corresponding similarities are better correlated with human judgments than most other works.

Keywords?information content; semantic similarity measure; ontology

I. INTRODUCTION The semantic similarity measure between concepts  is of  great importance in many knowledge-based applications [1], as it enables a better understanding of the semantics of textual resources. In fact, it has been successfully applied to some basis natural language processing tasks and to some knowledge management fields, such as word sense disambiguation [2], automatic language translation [3], information retrieval [4], semantic annotation [5], ontology merging [6] and ontology learning [7]. In  addition, it is also useful in  such fields as question answering [8], recommender systems [9] and multi- agent systems [10].

In the recent years, many measures have been proposed for computing semantic similarity in related literatures. The information content-based measure is one very important and effective measure among all the similarity measures. It has been validated in papers [12, 13]. All the IC-based measures proposed in related works take two  steps to compute the similarity between concepts. The first step is to calculate the IC of each concept found in the ontology and then the evaluated IC values are used to calculate the similarity between concepts.

The information content (IC) of concepts provides an accurate evaluation of the concepts? structural information. A proper calculation of IC is of great importance to similarity  measure between concepts . The conventional way of calculating the IC of concepts is through statistical analysis of corpora [14]. In the past several years, taking ontologies as knowledge sources has become a popular research area, since ontologies are able to offer a structured and unambiguous representation of shared concepts [11]. In the ontological taxonomy, the IC of a concept provides an estimation of its degree of taxonomic generality or concreteness, which contributes to a better understanding of the concept?s semantics in context [1].

In order to compare the effectiveness of our IC model with the existing IC models, an evaluation criterion is put forward in this paper. It is important to note that the topological differences between concepts are great important semantic evidences found in the ontology. Hence, the ability to distinguish concepts with different structure is our proposed evaluation criterion of IC models.

This paper also proposes a new IC model based on the structural information of concepts. This information main ly refers to the concepts? degree of generality and concreteness . In fact, several IC models are proposed in the previous works [12, 13, 15, 16], and most of them also exploit  the structural information available in the ontology [15]. However, different from the existing IC models, the new IC model pays more attention to evaluating the structural differences between concepts to capture more of semantic information of concepts, so it employs three important structural factors, which are concept?s hyponyms, hypernyms and relative depth, to compute the IC of a concept. Thus our model is better able to distinguish concepts with different structures.

Two evaluations of the new IC model are performed and discussed based on two different test datasets. For the smaller test with a simple ontology, it is found that our IC model is able to distinguish different concepts in the ontological taxonomy more effectively than other IC models. The bigger one uses WordNet [17] whose taxonomic structure are organized in a meaningful way as dataset, and the  evaluation demonstrates that the semantic similarity measure based on our IC model provides more accurate similarity evaluation than most other methods, which means our similarity estimation is well correlated with human judgments .

DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.25    DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.25     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews related works, including the three classic IC-based similarity measures and several existing IC models. Section III proposes an evaluation criterion of IC models and defines several structural factors of concepts in the ontology. Section IV proposes a new IC model. A small test of the new model is described in this section too. In Section V, the new model is applied to semantic similarity calculation and the results are given. The final section draws some conclusions.



II. RELATED WORKS  A. Information Content-based Similarity Measures Resnik [2] was the first to measure the similarity between  concepts based on the Information Content of concepts. In his opinion, the semantic similarity between concepts is expressed by the amount of their shared information. In other words, if two concepts are similar, they should share some informat ion, and the more informat ion they share in common, the more similar they are.

In practice, the similarity between two concepts  is represented by the IC of their Least Common Subsumer (LCS), which is the most specific common ancestor subsuming both concepts found in the ontology. The discussed model is defined as follows:  ? ? ?  ? ? ? ?? ?  ? ?? ? 1 2  1 2 ,  1 2  , max  = ,  res c common c c sim c c IC c  IC LCS c c ?  ? ? ????  Where ? ?1 2,common c c  are the set of concepts that subsume 1c and 2c .

A problem with the Resnik approach is that any term pairs that share the same LCS results in exactly the same semantic similarity. Obviously, this is inconsistent with human judgments. In order to tackle this problem, Lin [18] and Jiang and Conrath [19] extend Resnik?s work and propose two new approaches, both of which take the IC of the evaluated concepts into account and are given as follows:  ? ? ? ? ?? ? ? ? 1 2  1 2 1 2  2*sim , sim , reslin  c c c c  IC c IC c ?  ? ? ?	??  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?&C 1 2 1 2 1 2, ,j resdis c c IC c IC c sim c c? ? ?????  B. IC Calculation Models The notion of Information Content states the amount of  information of the given terms, which is based on its probability of appearance in a corpus  [20]. Formally, the IC of a concept is the inverse of its appearance probabilities in textual corpora [4]. However, Such methods are corpora- dependency, which lead to a series of problems such as scalability issues, due to the need to perform a manual and time-consuming analysis  and annotation of text, or data  sparseness, when comprehensive and detailed textual corpora are not available [15, 21].

To overcome the corpora-dependency issues, several papers [12, 13, 15, 16] propose different intrinsic IC [15] models.

Seco et al. [16] were the first to calculate the IC based on ontology and to apply their IC model to semantic similarity calculation. From the Information Theory point of view, abstract ontological concept appears more probably in a corpus as the emergence of the concrete concepts subsuming it means its appearance. In their model, therefore, the IC of a concept in the ontology is regarded as the function of the number of its hyponyms.

In the Seco et al. approach, concepts with the same number of hyponyms are considered equally informative, even though it presents different degrees of taxonomic concreteness by its depth or hypernyms. In order to improve the performance of IC calculation, Zhou et al. [12] add the relative depth factor into their IC model to solve the issue.

S?nchez et al. [15] consider that the set of leaves of a concept in the ontological tree is enough to describe itself and differentiate from each other. Therefore they use a concepts? leaves instead of its hyponyms to express its degrees of taxonomic generality to eliminate the influence of the level of detail of inner taxonomical in the ontology [15], and  in order to capture more semantic evidence, the subsumers of a concept is also an important factor considered in their IC model.

S?nchez et al. [13] put forward another model. In this model different methods are used to calculate the upper concepts (inner taxonomic concepts) and the leaves concepts , since they think the two kinds of concepts are very different in the structure. In this model, the subsumers of concepts are used to calculate the IC of the leaves concepts, and then the IC of the leaves concepts are used to calculate the IC of the inner taxonomic concepts .



III. AN EVALUATION CRITERION OF IC MODELS  A. An Evaluation Criterion of IC Models In most situations, the understanding of a term depends on  the knowledge of the difference between it and other terms.

Furthermore, concepts with different topology in the taxonomic structure express different semantic information [14]. Hence, evaluating the structural differences between concepts plays a very critical role in d iscriminating different concepts and capturing concepts? semantics.

In fact, the process of measuring the Information content of concepts is to capture and evaluate the topological differences among concepts in the ontology and then assign an appropriate value (Information Content) to each concept according to their differences. According to this view, in the ontological tree, concepts with different topology should be considered as different entities, no matter what and how much the differences among them are. That is to say, the different topologies should result in different IC. For example, a concept with more hyponyms expresses less informat ion than concepts with fewer hyponyms and correspondingly it should provide less Information Content. In order to compare the performance of     different IC models, we take the ability to distinguish different structural concepts as a criterion to evaluate the IC model. In other words, the stronger ability to differentiate different concepts an IC mode has, the better it performs. Besides, it is important to note that an IC model, taking more structural factors into account than others, should find more differences and obtain a better performance.

B. Discuss the Several Structural Factors of A Concept in the Ontological Tree Structure Generally speaking, the concepts in the ontology are able to  be organized into a hierarchical tree structure according to their IS-A relationship. An example of such a relationship is shown in Fig. 1. Different from [14], mult i-inheritance relationships are available in this ontology, such as C17, C27, C30 and C32.

Fig. 1. An example ontology of IS-A relationships  According to Information Theory, the more specific and concrete a concept is, the more informative it is [20]. In the hierarchical tree structure, the deeper concept is more specific and concrete than the upper one, while the upper concept is more general and abstract. Therefore, the relative depth of a concept is very important structural information in the ontology.

Relative depth should be considered as an important factor in the IC calculation.

According to ontological tree structure, excluding the top concepts (the root concept) and the leaves concepts, each inner concept presents hypernyms and hyponyms. The hypernyms present its degrees of concreteness, while the hyponyms estimate its degrees of generality [13]. Generally speaking, a concept with more hyponyms would refer to abstract and general entities, which provides less semantic information than those with fewer ones. In the IC calculation model, both the degrees of concreteness and the degree of generality of a concept should be considered.

When multi-inheritance relationships are available in the ontology, using the leaves of a concept instead of its hyponyms to externalize its degree of specialty is a good idea [15], because the leaves concepts represent the semantic information  of the most specific concepts of a domain and accurately define that domain scope. As a result, the number of leaves of a concept is another important factor in IC model.

According to the analysis of several IC models in the Section II, some definitions to illustrate the above structural factors of a concept in the ontological structure are given as follows:  ? ? ? ? ?? ?? ?_ log  log max_depth depth c  f c depth  ? ? ????  ? ? ? ? ?? ?? ?_ log 1 log max_hypernyms  hyper c f c  nodes ?  ? ? ???  ? ? ? ? ?? ?? ?_ log  log max_hyponyms hypo c  f c nodes  ? ? ????  ? ? ? ?? ?? ?_ log 1  log max_ 1leaves leaves c  f c leaves  ? ?  ? ? ????  Where c  is the evaluated concept in the ontology, and ? ?depth c ? ?hyper c , ? ?hypo c  and ? ?leaves c corresponds to its depth, the number of its hypernyms, the number of its hyponyms, and the number of its leaves respectively. In addition, max_ depth , max_ nodes  and max_ leaves are three constants concerned with the background ontology.

In order to evaluate the influence of d ifferent structural factors in the IC assessment, we calculate the above factors value of each concept coming from Fig. 1 respectively, and Fig.2 illustrates the results as follows:  Fig. 2. Trends  in Different Structural Factors  From the above graph, we can come to several conclusions:  1) Both the polyline of the depth factor and the polyline of the hypernyms factor are proportionate to the IC of a concept.

This means that both of them can be used to describe the degree of concreteness of concepts. Howere, in multi- inheritance relation cases, such as C17, C27and C32, the latter performs better in distinguishing different concepts.

2) The polyline of leaves factor is similar to the polyline of hyponyms factor. This means that both of them can be used to express the degree of generality of concepts. Furthermore, they are interchangeable in most instances.

3) Generally speaking, compared with the degree of taxonomic concreteness, the degree of generality expressed by concepts? hyponyms or leaves performs a better in describing the structural differences between concepts.



IV. A NEW IC MODEL BASED  ON THREE STRUCTURAL FACTORS IN THE ONTOLOGICAL TOPOLOGY  The polylines in Fig.2 and the above analyses state that concept?s depth, hypernyms and leaves are necessary to express the structural differences between concepts in the taxonomic structure. They have a direct influence on the significance of the IC calculation. Therefore, our model taking the three factors into account is defined as follows:  ? ? ? ? ? ? ?? ? ? ?_ _ _* 1new depth leaves hypernymsIC c f c f c f c? ? ? ???? Where ? ?_depthf c , ? ?_ leavesf c and ? ?_ hypernymsf c have  the same meaning as eq. 4, eq. 6 and eq.7. The new model uses the concept?s  hypernyms to express the degree of generality and the concept?s leaves to describe the degree of concreteness.

At the same time, the relative depth of a concept is regarded as a factor in adjusting the weight of the two taxonomic features involved in the IC assessment.

Based on the new model and the IC models mentioned in Section II, the IC value of every concept in Fig.1 are calculated to observe the behavior of different IC models. Fig. 3 shows the comparison results.

Fig. 3. Comparison of different IC computation models  Fig. 3 shows that the Seco et al. IC model which just takes the concepts? hyponyms into account cannot distinguish leaves concepts effectively, since all leaves concepts generate the same IC value, even if these leaves concepts have different depth or present different number of hypernyms. The Zhou et al. IC model is better at distinguishing leaves concepts  than the Seco et al. model, but this model cannot support the multi- inheritance relationships. For example, the model considers that C30 and C31 are equally informative because both of them are leaves concepts and have the same depth. In practice,  thanks to the existence of mult i-inheritance relationships, C30 presents more hypernyms, correspondingly it should generate more information content.

Different from the above two models, both concepts? degrees of concreteness and concepts? degrees of generality are taken into account in the S?nchez et al. IC model and it performs better according to the above graph. However, in the model, due to ignoring the relative depth factor, upper concepts provide too much Information Content, which it is not useful in distinguish between them and the lower. Besides, most of the concepts? IC values  calculated by this model range from 1 to 1.2, which states that this model cannot capture the structural difference of concepts. The S?nchez et al another model is able to distinguish the lower concepts effectively, but sometimes it has some difficulties to calculate the IC of general concepts, such as concept C6, C11 and C15.

As to our model, thanks to taking three important structural factors into account comprehensively, it is able to distinguish concepts with different topology in the taxonomy effectively.

The overall polyline of IC value is  slowly rising, which is in accordance with human intuitive understanding of concepts in the taxonomy. In a word, according to the evaluation criterion of IC models proposed in Section III, the new model performs better in distinguishing concepts with different topology than other models.



V. EVALUATION ON WORDNET As introduced in Section I, the IC calculation is the first  step to semantic similarity measure between concepts. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the new IC model, it should be put into the task of semantic similarity measure. Hence, this paper puts our IC model together with other models into three classic IC-based similarity measures introduced in Section II to complete similarity estimation. Our paper also assesses these IC-based measures by calculating the coefficients of correlation with human judgments [13] as other works did.

Just like other works, this paper also explo its WordNet as background ontology. WordNet is a general purpose and domain-independent ontology and it organizes and describes more than 100,000 general English concepts. WordNet is organized in a meaningful way according to the principle of cognitive saliency [11], which states that humans specialize concepts when they need to differentiate them from already existing ones.

In order to enable fair comparisons , this paper takes the Miller and Charles benchmark [24] as test bed, which consists of 30 English noun pairs whose similarity value has been provided by 38 students in a scale from 0 (semantically unrelated) to 4 (synonyms). In fact, many related works [13, 15, 16] have used Miller and Charles benchmark as  test bed, which is becoming a de facto standard to compare and evaluate the performance of similarity measures. The coefficients of correlation with human judgments values  for the Miller and Charles benchmark reported by related works are summarized in Table 1. The last row in bold is the result calculated by our model.

TABLE I. CORRELATION VALUES FOR DIFFERENT IC-BASED SIMILARITY MEASURES.

IC Calculus. Measure M&C  Resnik IC model Resnik [20] 0.72 [3] Lin [18] 0.70 [3] J&C [19] 0.73 [3]  Seco et al. IC model [16] Resnik 0.77 [16] Lin 0.81 [16] J&C 0.84 [16]  Zhou et al. IC model [12] Resnik 0.82 [15] Lin 0.82 [15] J&C 0.82 [15]  S?nchez et al.2011 IC model [15]  Resnik 0.84 [15] Lin 0.85 [15] J&C 0.87 [15]  S?nchez et al.2012 IC model [13]  Resnik 0.83 [13] Lin 0.86 [13] J&C 0.89 [13]  The new IC model (this work)  Resnik 0.82 Lin 0.87 J&C 0.90  In the above table, the correlations coefficient values with our model are 0.82, 0.87 and 0.90 based on the three classical IC-based measures mentioned in Section II. It states that IC- based measures are very effective measures and ontology-base measures obtain the better performance. It is important to note that accurate IC calculation has a direct influence in the accuracy of similarity measure. In the Resnik?s measure, our model obtains an acceptable result. In addition, it is very important to note that our IC model can provide more accurate similarity evaluation than other works in Lin?s and J&C?s measure. Especially, in  J&C?s measure,  the  similarity values  based on our  new  model provide h ighest correlations with human judgments .



VI. CONCLUSIONS Accurate IC calculation exploit ing the semantic information  coming from knowledge resources is critical in providing reliable similarity assessments . In the ontology, the information content of a concept provides an estimation of its structural information, which enables a better understanding of its semantics in the corpus. Furthermore, the structural differences between concepts are of great importance for IC calcu lation.

According to this theory, this paper proposes an evaluation criterion to measure the effectiveness of the IC models  and a new IC model to compute the IC of a concept. Fig. 3 shows that our proposed IC model is able to effectively d istinguish different concepts in the ontological taxonomy, which means that the new model meets our proposed IC evaluation criterion better than other models. Table 1 suggests that the similarity method based on the new model provided higher correlations with human judgments than most other IC-based semantic similarity assessments. In a word, both the new IC model and the evaluation criterion of IC models are proper and effective.

