Trust Evaluation based Content Filtering in Social Interactive Data  Lingshan Xu 1, Xianghan Zheng 1, Chunming Rong 2

Abstract?A new Cloud-based Trust Awareness and Interaction Model (CTAIM) is proposed for trust evaluation based content filtering in social interactive data. The research is based on diversified information from social interactive data to analyse people?s intention and evaluate people?s trust. The proposed model is composed of Bayesian content filtering algorithm and Bayesian inference algorithm in Dirichlet distribution, and it?s capable to provide 3rd party trustworthiness evaluation according to node behavior and interaction history with high-efficiency, security, and neutrality. Additionally, MapReduce-based computing and HBase storage framework are implemented for parallel computing among mass interactive data.

Keywords-social interactive data; cloud computing; trustworthiness evaluation; Bayesian algorithm

I. INTRODUCTION Currently, data mining in social network has attracted  much attention from both academia and industry. Social interactive data is the reflection of people?s behavior, such as speech, behavior and activity in interpersonal communication. However, social interactive network today (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, etc) contains a multitude of untrusted and useless information (such as SPAM, advertisement, fraud message, etc). Although traditional approaches[1][2] have been widely implemented and are capable to achieve a few level of content filtering and mining, they are still not inconvincible and inefficient.

Firstly, a lot of advisement information is difficult to filter because those malicious nodes publish more contents than others and could be easily regarded as high activity node which is highly recommended, and this increase node?s attractiveness so that it helps malicious node to create better advertisement environment and be considered as higher priority node in network. It makes an opposite effect on content filtering.

Secondly, current data mining in social interactive data is mainly solving specific problem, but never considering the data?s trustiness, so it can not tell whether the result is convincible. If the data has been filtered by content, the result must be more reliable.

Thirdly, massive data in social interactive network is interconnected with high complexity. And more and more requirements are asked for handling big data and reducing computation complexity. What?s more, current data mining is hard to clear off the relationships among the data, so most  algorithms are directly working on the data without figuring out their relationships, so it makes computation more complexity and inefficient.

This article proposes the Trust Evaluation Model based content filtering in Social interactive data. The main contributions of the approach include: (a) It adopts Bayesian- based Content Category Algorithm, which combines Word- Separating technology, to obtain a categorizer by statistical training data.

(b) It use Dirichlet Distribution of Bayesian Inference Algorithm to get a trust probability distribution of mobile node?s history-records, and obtain mobile node?s trust by calculating expected value of distribution. It reduces the computation complexity of trust measurement.

(c) Considering trust dynamics, a weighting factor of time is referenced to design Trust Update Mechanism with time. It insures that model is accuracy and dynamic adaptability.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the system architecture and construction of the Trust Evaluation Model; Section 3 presents the computation of trust measurement; Section 4 concludes the paper and discusses future work.



II. TRUST EVALUATION Traditional security schemes are widely used in Mobile  Computing Platform, such as safety certification, encryption and decryption technologies, etc. But the primary aims of encryption and decryption technologies are making sure of message?s confidentiality and protecting message from being altered. Safety certification makes sure that the message comes from source node, not other nodes. So these technologies are not able to ensure that the message?s content is security, and the intention of source node is positive, even the message content is what destination node wants. Therefore, trust evaluation based on content is proposed to build trust between two sides of communication.

The existing network trust measurement schemes provide theory basis and feasible measure for trust research between interactive mobile nodes. Those schemes can be of two types: Centralized Trust Measurement and Distributed Trust Measurement.

In Centralized Trust Measurement, Centralized Trust Server collects evaluations among interactive nodes at every transaction, then calculates each node?s trust and stores the results. In Distributed Trust Measurement, it discusses characteristics, behaviors and results of interactive   DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.106    DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.106     communication among mobile nodes by subjective views and the concept of trust [3].

However, the two types of measurements still have a certain limitation. Although Centralized Trust Measurement has advantages of simple in design and easy to implement, an over reliance on few centralized servers could lead to Single Point of Failure, which effects reliability and extendibility of systems. Secondly, high complexity of trust measurement algorithm and updates mechanisms place an intolerable burden on centralized servers while serving for large scale and high connection-frequency network. Besides, the heterogeneity of networks (for example, mobile nodes access to the Internet) and the connection-frequency would increase the delay of accesses and responses. Compared with Centralized Trust Measurement, Distributed Trust Measurement does not have problems on Single Point of Failure and limitation of reliability and extendibility; moreover, the computation of measurement is allocated to mobile nodes who participate in, so it reduces the effects of computation complexity. However, this measurement still has some limitation: lack of centralized administration would lead to massive data-transmission and data-collection among mobile nodes, not only does it place a burden on nodes, but also it increases higher delay; on the other side, when data is stored in different nodes, it would be difficult to ensure the data?s confidentiality, integrity and convenience in data access. The storage pattern would directly affect the security and application of system in reality.

Cloud Computing Platform combines some advanced technologies, such as distributed computation, load balance, etc [4][5]. What?s more, it has overcome the Single Point of Failure, provided high-performance computation for large amount of users, served for heterogeneous access to the Internet whenever and wherever possible. On the other side, Cloud Computing Platform has adopted distributed storage, authentication, encryption and decryption technologies to make sure confidentiality, integrity in data storage process, and convenience in data access. Moreover, it solves the limitation of distributed trust measurement scheme in aspects of data storage and security. It could be predicted that Cloud Computing Platform can serve for large amounts of users by providing high performance, reliability, security, convenience services in trust monitoring, measurement and evaluation.



III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE System architecture of Trust Measurement Model  includes two parts: Local Trust Maintenance & Measurement Scheme and Cloud Trust Maintenance & Measurement Scheme, as shown in fig.1. The local scheme implements that Local Trust Maintenance is able to be stored, updated, maintained local history-records for Local Trust Measurement in local nodes. The duty of Cloud scheme is providing Cloud Trust Maintenance consisting of Cloud Records Storage, Trust Initialization and Multilevel Trust Definition for Cloud Trust Measurement of Mobile Nodes.

This section will make a depth introduction around both themes.

Figure 1. System Architecture  A.  Trust Measurement Mechanism Model The paper references Cloud Computing technology for  trust measurement and maintenance with the help of characteristics on security and neutrality, then it provides trust evaluation as a third party for mobile nodes. Then Trust Measurement Model is to be established. The model includes design of synchronization mechanism between Cloud platform and mobile nodes, and definition of information transmission with establishments of trust-inference, dynamic-updates and punishment for distrust.

Trust Measurement Mechanism could be implemented by following steps: (a) Define a 3-dimentional vector {Trust, Generated-Time, Destination} to describe a history-record.

According to fuzziness of trust and extent of record?s trust, each record is classified into 5 levels (1st-level is full-trust and 5th-level is distrust). (b) Establish a Dirichlet distribution of Bayesian Inference Algorithm [6][7][8] by statistical each level?s trust probability densities, and evaluate mobile node?s trust by calculating expected value.

(c) Considering few amounts of records may lead to inaccurate trust evaluation, a variable is imported to judge if the records are enough to evaluate trust, and the variable is the variance of distribution. The lower variance is, the more accurate measurement will be. When the variance is higher than a threshold, trust measurement will be calculated in Cloud platform because it have enough data for getting an accurate result, fig.1.

Based on above work, a weighting factor of time is imported for designing trust update mechanism with time, and it?s designed to avoid malicious behavior from some users who have achieved good trust. Besides, it?s capable to distinguish malicious behavior by comparison of current record?s trust and former trust value. What?s more, another     factor is designed for trust punishment, and it substantially reduces mobile node?s trust when it behaves maliciously.

B. Data Initialization Mechanism Due to massive data transmission among mobile nodes,  it?s necessary to have large scale data storage and high- performance computation. A hybrid storage mechanism consisting of local storage and Cloud storage can solve big data problem. So local space stores records relating to local interaction, and mobile node periodically transfers records to Cloud for storage.

Data Initialization is implemented by following steps: ? Apply Word-Separation technology to transform  text-record into recognizable words or phrases, i.e.

use an n-dimensional vector to present a record.

? Filter the phrases in the vector which are irrelevant to classification subjection, so that it reduces vector?s dimensions and computation complexity, and the filtered phrases are attribute phrases. On the other side, using Information Gain algorithm to filter a table of Eigen Value, which consists of the most informative phrases or words in aspect of category.

? Adopt Bayesian Filter algorithm for Posterior Inference of history-records, then obtain the record?s trust. In this paper, Mult-variate Bernoulli event Model is to transform the relationship between text- record and categories to the relationship between attribute phrases and categories, then the Posterior Probability is only related to attribute phrases. This model is suitable for computation of massive short text, and it performs high flexibility and good calculation speed.



IV. TRUST COMPUTATION As shown in fig.2, the trust computation includes two  processes: the one is to deal with data initialization by Bayesian-based Content Category Algorithm; the other is to evaluate node?s trust by modeling of Dirichlet Distribution based on Bayesian Inference Algorithm. In this section, we give a demonstration on computation process, and define the concept of trust.

Figure 2. Process of Trust Measurement  A. History-records Trust Computation History-record?s trust computation is to evaluate record?s  trust. Considering the fuzziness of trust [9], it?s necessary to define a categorizer with some standards, which can filter each record and compute every relative probability between the record and each category. Then, the biggest relative  probability presents the record?s trust, at the same time, it means which category the record belongs to. According to the inferences above, Bayesian-based Content Category Algorithm is adopted to describe the relationship between records and categories, and the computation result is the relative probability.

Assuming that an Event A from Test E can be classified to a set of samples, such as , and ?? , ? . So the Bayesian formula is as follow:  ??  ??  ?  ?  ?  ?  (1)  In this paper, Event A presents a history-record, and it would be classified to two samples, which are Trust- Behavior Class (B1) and Untrusted-Behavior Class (B2).

presents the probability of history-records belonging to . And  presents the probability of Event A  belonging to while Event A has happened. What required is to calculate  and , compare these two probabilities, chose the bigger one as Record A?s trust value.

Assuming that history-record A is a text, the Attribute ?  presents one of characteristics of Record A,  which are phrases and words of Record A. Secondly, research subjects are Short-Text records, accordingly, BIM (Mult-variate Bernoulli event Model)[10][11] is chosen as calculation model. The model transforms the relationship between Record A and Category  to the relationship  between Attribute and Category . The BIM feature is to  consider that whether Attribute  exists in Record A, and not to consider how often it shows in Record A. So we  defined  to present the status of Attribute existing in Record A, and ?  presents its existence, otherwise,  ?  presents its non-existence. So according to the model, the relationship formula is shown in below:  ???? ? ? (2)  In the formula, the probability of existing in  is  , and the probability of not existing is ? . If  is Untrusted-Behavior Class, so:  ? (3)     According to Total Probability Formula,  can be presents as below:  ???            (4)  The statistics of , and  can be obtained from Training Data.

B. Mobile Nodes Trust Computation We attempt to divide history-records into 5 levels (1st-  level is full-trust and 5th-level is distrust), and assumed that each record has an equal probability to be one member of each level. In this article, Dirichlet Distribution of Bayesian Inference is used to analyse and evaluate user?s trust trend.

Interactive records are generated in each communication of mobile node. It is defined to be a 3-dimension vector {trust value, generated time, destination}, and it is capable to be classified to a level by Bayesian Filtering Algorithm.

When these records are synchronized to Cloud platform, all of them are marked as , ??	 ,  ? is a set of Mobile Node A?s records. is the 3-dimension vector mentioned before, so  is trust value  of this record, is the destination that current node A  communicated with, and  is the generated time of this record.

Assuming that destination node B has its trust value ,    ?? presents B?s number of history-records in  each level, for example, presents that how much records B has in 1st ?level. ??? ?  ? is random variables of  5-levels, and ?? ? . So according to Dirichlet Distribution, the formula as below [12]:  ?? ?  ?  ? ? ??  ? ? ?      ?  ??  (5)  And Gamma function is:   ? ????  (6)  The expected value of the distribution is:   ? ?  ?      ? ??  (7)  Thus, the expected value of distrust level is:    ???  ? ?        (8)  If  is bigger than a threshold, it means this node is untrusted. So it presents trust value of mobile node B.

Meanwhile, a weight factor ?  is imported to express the effect of time. The influence from past records should be decreased with time, so the formula could be described as following:   ? ?  ?  ??     (9)  And it uses   ? ?  instead of   ? ?  in Dirichlet Distribution.

C. Trust Measurement in MapReduce In Could Computing, we design a Mapreduce Model for  Trust Measurement, and the design follows the steps as below:  ? The fisrt preparation is to store Training Data and Test Data in Hbase DB. In the process of Data Initialization, Ictcla2013 [13] is used to reduce history-records (such as, micro-blogs, messages, etc.) to attributes, while filtering unrelated attributes.

? When initializing categorizer of records trust evaluation, it uses MapReduce Framework as a parallel processor for operating massive training data.

After that, it provides  and the table of Eigen Value for next step calculation.

? Using MapReduce Framework to establish Dirichlet Distribution of Bayesian Inference Model, as shown in fig.3. Each MapReduce implements a user?s trust evaluation. According to the result from step (b), a Map is capable to implement trust calculation of each records. So the result of Map is Key-Value pairs, each of which consists of a record ID and its trust value.

Figure 3. MapReduce Model     ? Reduce processor collects the Key-Value pairs, and implements record classification and computation of user trust.



V. CONLUSION In this article, a trust evaluation model is proposed to  solve content filtering in social interactive data. It?s implemented on the basis of history-records of communication among mobile nodes and uses Dirichlet Distribution of Bayesian Inference Algorithm, while considering the stability and time relativity of mobile nodes.

For the sake of high performance computation, a combination of Cloud platform is imported to solve the limitation of data storage and security in traditional scheme.

The model is capable to bring good practicability, usability and efficiency.

This research has not considered other factors in trust measurement, for example, malicious attack (privacy steals, Cloud database attack, etc.), these all need to be improved in the future.

