Cloud Bank Model Based on AHP Resource Scheduling Strategy Research

Abstract: Under the circumstances of the cloud bank model, this paper studies resource scheduling problem on cloud computing. Considering the the user's needs for optimal allocation of resources and the shortest time to complete the total task, cloud computing resource scheduling of analytic hierarchy process model (AHP) is established. Under this model, conduct simulation experiment through the CloudSim platform. Results show that the AHP algorithm under the model, while protecting users? (quality of service) QoS, is even shorter than the general algorithm in completing the total task time. It is an effective resource scheduling algorithm.

Keywords: cloud bank; resource scheduling; AHP model  1 Background  Cloud Computing is a kind of implementation vir the Internet anytime, anywhere and on-demand access to a shared resource pool of computing model. Shared pool of resources includes computing facilities, storage devices, and applications, and so on[1].

NIST defines four types of cloud computing deployment models: public cloud, private cloud, hybrid cloud and community cloud[2].

In a hybrid cloud model, basic IT resources belong to different institutions, organizations or individuals. Different institutions, organizations or individuals may have different resource management strategies, different types of resources and services used. In order to eliminate these isomers, the establishment of a comprehensive and complete resource management model to manage the hybrid IaaS cloud platform inside and outside of basic IT resources configuration, flow and integration, is very necessary.

In recent years, compared with the use of private cloud or public cloud alone in the problems of utilizing cloud services efficiency, convenience and elasticity, people have begun to realize hybrid IaaS cloud platform has a natural advantage.

Hybrid IaaS cloud environment, however, there are still many problems need to be resolved, such as when basic IT resources allocate, flow in different institutions, organizations or individuals ,it faces with the problem of resource scheduling.

This paper adopts AHP model to solve basic IT resource scheduling strategy problem under the hybrid cloud environment, and introduce the SLA mechanism to ensure the QoS of the user.

2 Hybrid Cloud Platform Resource Scheduling Research  Basic resources in the cloud computing is heterogeneous, geographically distributed, especially in the hybrid cloud platform, this heterogeneous degree is more deeply, but  cloud computing need to integrate these resources through virtualization technology to deliver services to outside .

Therefore, the mechanism on the basics of the principle of operational research is an effective solution to the scheduling problem. Such dynamic ,coordinate mechanism is appropriate for cloud resource. Resource scheduling is a NP problem, and a variety of heuristics algorism can be used for task allocation problem of resource scheduling. Joanna Kolodziej, etc.[3]  proposed based on genetic algorithm (GA) resource scheduling, whose main consideration was resource security and trust mechanism problem in the cloud computing environment.

Vincenozo[4] proposed a genetic algorithm-based sub-tasks resource scheduling, whose main idea was to use a first-come, first-served (FCFS) scheduling guidelines. Suraj Pandey, etc.[5]  proposed that the particle swarm optimization (PSO) was used for resource scheduling in cloud computing environment, whose main consideration was the dependency between the characters, with the task representation using DAG. Maheswaran[6]  proposed that Sufferage algorithm was used in a heterogeneous environment resource scheduling, whose main purpose was to maximize the throughput of the system, but it didn?t apply to intensive tasks under multi-cluster environments[7]. YarKhan A, etc.[8] introducted the simulated degradation algorithm (SA) in a heterogeneous environment of resource scheduling application.

Resource Scheduling guidelines are based on trust mechanism guidelines[9], QoS[10] guidelines, Agent mechanism[11], the shortest completion time criteria, optimal span standards, safety standards, etc. This paper mainly proposes AHP resource scheduling algorithms based on QoS and the shortest completion time criteria in cloud bank.

3 Introduction of Cloud Bank Model 3.1 cloud bank model  Cloud bank model is a new virtual infrastructure resource management model. Cloud bank is based on commercial bank operation and laws of the market, have the different roles in cloud computing deals respectively defined as cloud resource providers, consumers, and the cloud bank (CB), which come from one or more different cloud (private cloud , public cloud or community cloud), under the premise that retain their own characteristics, framework by standardized or proprietary technology to bind together to form the overall, so that the best interests of all parties involved to get,  a hybrid cloud architecture. The resource transaction management model is mainly divided into the following five layers: physical resource pool, service level agreement (SLA) pool, risk resistance, resource scheduling, pricing strategy. The following will mainly introduce CB-SLA pool and resource scheduling.

1  CB-SLA pool To make the cloud bank born can provide more high quality  IT services than other cloud model, how to guarantee QoS is the most important and it urgent need a good solution. SLA is the best tool to describe QoS parameters, which involves the level of availability, service capabilities, performance, operation and other service attributes, such as bookkeeping. Cloud Bank SLA is designed using a formal way to capture service agreement in a cloud bank environment[12].

All of the information described above can be measured and converted to the standard available information by CB-SLA system. In the cloud banks, SLA system is no longer just the traditional sense of a tool to protect the quality of service, but rather an information conversion, collection, sorting and delivery systems. CB-SLA is an essential part of the cloud bank,   DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.49    DOI 10.1109/CLOUDCOM-ASIA.2013.49     and supports the other components in the cloud banks properly and smoothly running.

2  Resource allocation In the field of distributed computing, how to effectively  schedule resources between computing nodes and at the same time gurantee QoS is a traditional problem. For this NP-hard problem, currently there is not a universal solution that applies to all distributed scenario. In order to meet the demand of resource consumers, this paper adopts the resource scheduling strategy based on AHP model to effectively, conveniently schedule basic computing resources in the cloud bank environment.

3.2 cloud bank's resource management  Resource providers are also known as resource producers, and the requestors of initiating resources and service requirements are called resource consumers in the cloud bank environment. Cloud bank model components include: consumers, resource user agent (CCA), the cloud bank (CB), the resource provider agent (CRA), producers.

CCA accept the resource application task from consumers, upload the task to the cloud bank, and instead of consumers and cloud bank to establish the SLA agreements. These SLA agreements need to include the task ending time, QoS attributes and other parameters. CRA accept the task application that producers put its own resources into the cloud bank, and quantify and pricing, then instead of producers signed SLA agreements with the cloud bank, and utilize the SLA agreements registering resource price, resource execution efficiency and the waiting time of resource scheduling and other parameters into the cloud bank.

4 Based on AHP Model Resource Scheduling Strategy  In the big environment of cloud bank, the SLA agreement is established between resource consumers and the cloud bank.

These SLA agreements need to include the task ending time, QoS attributes and other parameters. The SLA agreement is also established between resource producers and the cloud bank, utilizing the SLA agreements registering resource price, resource execution efficiency and the waiting time of resource scheduling and other parameters into the cloud bank. The resources are also producers SLA agreements with cloud banks to establish and use SLA agreement will perform resource prices and resource efficiency and resource scheduling parameters such as the waiting time when registered into the cloud bank. So how to utilize these parameters, allocate the best resource for the user, to achieve the optimal combination matching, and on this basis, make the total task ending time shortest? Here we present AHP model.

4.1 AHP Model  Analytic Hierarchy Process Model (referred AHP) is a simple, flexible and practical multi-criteria decision making model, proposed by an American operational researcher professor T.L.Saaty in the early 1970s. The decision problem is divided into three levels: the object layer 0, criterion layer C, solution layer P. Each layer has a number of elements, the relationship between the elements of each layer is connected with the straight line. Though mutual comparison we can determine the weight of each criterion to the object, and the weight of each solution to each criterion. The above two sets of weights are integrated to determine the weight of each solution  to the object, to select the maximum weight value as the best solutions of the object. AHP let qualitative analysis and quantitative analysis combine to complete the above steps, the quantitative results are given to the decision problem.

Below is a selection model of tourist sites: how to choose the best destination in three destinations according to scenery, fees, housing, diet and other factors.

Fig.1  Select best destination 4.2 AHP in the Cloud Bank Resource Scheduling Application  The AHP model can also be used for resource scheduling in cloud computing.

According to the SLA agreement of resource consumers and parameters of the CPU, memory, disk storage, bandwidth, I/0 devices, determine the preference relationship of resource consumers to each parameter (preference data given below is changed from qualitative into quantitative). And according to the SLA agreement of resource providers, determine the preference relationship of the virtual computing node preference relationship to each parameter. Then establish AHP model.

Regard resource consumer demands as the object layer O.

Regard the parameter CPU, the memory, storage disks, bandwidth, I/O device as the criterion layer C. Regard the virtual computing nodes ?? , ??  , ??  as the solution layer P.

Then for the object to find the best solution, that is scheduling the best resource for the user?s needs.

First, according to the preference relations, conduct pairwise comparison between the elements of the criterion layer.

Comparing adopts the relative scale to build a pairwise comparison matrix.

compare the importance of each criterion ??,??,?,?? for the object O ? ?? ? 	?? ? ? ?	?????? 	? ? ?? 	? ? ??	?  ? ? ?? ?? ? ? ??? ? ? ?? ? ? ? ???? ??? ? ??? ?????? ??? ? ? ???? ??? ? ? ? ?   !

At this point the matrix A is both a pairwise comparison matrix and a positive reciprocal matrix. The weight vector of ??? ???? ? ??"to O is determined by matrix A.

The ?? ? ?????? ???? ?? ? ???? ??? can be obtained ?? ? #??? ??? , however, ??  = 7, so the matrix A is inconsistent. Solution for our requirements, allow A inconsistent, but need to meet the inconsistent allowable range.

Following let us investigate the case of fully consistent Suppose ?? $ ?? $ ?$ ?? ? ?""" so that 	? ? ?	?%?"",can be obtained     A=  ?? ?? ?????? ????? ????? ????& ????'????? ????? ????? ????& ????' ????? ????? ????? ????& ????' ?&??? ?&??? ?&??? ?&??& ?&??' ?'??? ?'??? ?'??? ?'??& ?'??'?   !

Then ? ? ???? ???? ? ???( is eigenvectors of the matrix A (weight vector), and A is the solution. So we can obtain: paired comparison under the condition of identical meet 	? ) ?* ? 	*?"""+? ,? - ? ????? ? .  , and this kind of positive reciprocal matrix A is called consistent matrix.

The nature of consistent matrix meet: 1) Matrix A?s rank is 1, and its only non-zero eigenvalue  is n; 2) Any of matrix A?s column vectors is corresponding  to the n?s eigenvectors; 3) Matrix A?s normalized eigenvector can be used as  weight vector.

For inconsistent (but within the allowable range) paired  comparison matrix A, we select corresponding to the maximum characteristic root ??s eigenvector ? as the weight vector, that is A?=??.

Saaty, etc. put forward a 1-9 scale ---- 	? values 1,2, ..., 9 and its reciprocal number 1,1 / 2, ..., 1/9---- facilitate qualitative to quantitative transformation:  Scale /01 The importance 1 Same   3 Strengthen   5 strength   7 Significantly stronger   9 Absolute intensity ? ? ?? ? ?2 ?? ? ? 32 4? ??"importance is contrary to the  above.

With ?4???4??? ??4??? ?5435?6 ? ????????? 7 $?8?47 $ ?83?7 ? ???????? and other 27 kinds of comparative  scale, structuring paired comparison matrix for several instances, calculate the weight vector, and the actual comparison, the optimum scale is 1 to 9.

Consistency test described below Known: the only non-zero eigenvalue of n-order consistent  matrix is n Permit: n-order positive reciprocal matrix largest  eigenvalue ? 9 ., and when ? ? ., it is consistent matrix Define the consistency index ?: ? ?; < .???. < ?? (the  greater the CI value, the more serious the inconsistency) To measure the size of the CI, introduce random  consistency index RI - stochastic simulation to get 	?, form A, calculate CI that was RI.

Saaty's results are as follows: n 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  RI 0 0 0.58 0.90 1.12 1.24 1.32 1.41 1.45 1.49 1.51  Define the consistency ratio ?= ? ?:?=:, when CR <0.1, through the consistency test.

The following work out the weight vector of C to O: By the  ? ? ?? ?? ? ? ??? ? ? ?? ? ? ? ???? ??? ? ??? ?????? ??? ? ? ???? ??? ? ? ? ?   !

Obtained A?s maximum eigenvalues ? = 5.037. According to the maximum eigenvalue obtained A?s eigenvector (weight vector) > ?" ??8?????8?????8?????8?3???8????(.

Based on ?, calculate consistency index:  ?: ? '8@?AB''B? ? ?8??# Random consistency index RI = 1.12 (look-up table) Then the consistency ratio  "?= ? @8@?C?8?? ? ?8??? D ?8?, through the consistency test.

Remember the second layer (criterion) for the first layer  (object) the weight vector is: """???? ? ???????? ? ??????""("" Similarly obtain the third layer (project) for the second  layer (criteria) each element?s weight vector:    The paired  comparison  matrix of ?? The paired  comparison  matrix of ?? E  The paired  compariso  n matrix  of ??   F? ? G ? ? ???? ? ???? ??? ?H  F? ? G? ??? ??#? ? ???# ? ? H  E F? Largest  eigenval  ue  ;? ;? E ;? Weight  vector >???? >???? E >????  The third layer?s calculation results for the second layer as shown below:  K 1 2 3 4 5  ????* 0.595 0.082 0.429 0.633 0.166 0.277 0.236 0.429 0.193 0.166 0.129 0.682 0.142 0.175 0.668  ?* 3.005 3.002 3 3.009 3 ?:I 0.003 0.001 0 0.005 0 RI = 0.58 (n = 3),  ?:I through consistency test.

From above we can obtain the combination weight of  project ?? to the object O: ?8?3?J?8??? $ ?8?#?J?8??? $ ?8??3J?8??? $ ?8???J?8?3?$ ?8???J?8??? ? ?8??? In turn we can obtain the combination weight of project ??, ??  to the object O: 0.246,0.456. So the combination weight  vector of project to the object is ??8?????8?????8????( From the combination weight vector we can draw project ?? is the best choice, that is project ?? is the optional resource,  then allocate project ?? to the user.

5 Simulation Experiment  In this paper, the algorithm simulate on CloudSim. Since the CloudSim CIS (Cloud Information Server) and     DataCenterBroker realize resource discovery and information interaction, is the core of the simulation scheduling, the proposed algorithm is implemented mainly in DataCenterBroker.

Experimental environment: utilize random simulator to get 	?, form A, assigned tasks to five virtual computing nodes, change the number of tasks from 10 to 100, record the task completion time (ms), and compare with known GA algorithm.

Comparing two kinds of resource scheduling strategies, the results is shown as below:    Fig.2  Tasks completion time comparision As can be seen from figure 2, this paper?s method makes  the task completion time shorter. It shows that the AHP model is a good resource scheduling strategy.

6 Conclusion  In the cloud computing business model, the user's QoS has become extremely important, so to ensure the user's QoS, meet user?s requirements, is a long-term solution of cloud computing.

The AHP model presented in this paper not only has the advantage of the natural ensuring user?s QoS, but also has the advantage of distributed concurrent operation. Regardless of how many tasks, parameters, virtual computing nodes, task execution only can be divided into two steps under the AHP model. The first step is to calculate the weight time-consuming, and the second step is the combination weights time-consuming.

Due to the structured paired comparison matrix is not ordinary matrix, it has great flexibility and regularity, simplifying the calculation, making the time complexity of algorithm greatly less than K?.??, which will greatly reduces the task execution time. The AHP model also has the advantages of a clear structure and solving the problem of qualitative. Although maybe there are some gray reasons, causing preference relations deviation, generally speaking, the AHP model is an ideal resource scheduling strategy.

