A QoS-aware Service Group Evaluation Method Among Similar Services

Abstract- The traditional methods of QoS-aware Web services selection needs accurate weights given by users to empress their preferences of QoS properties. A QoS-aware service evaluation method of the Web services is proposed to solve the problem of service selection of users whose preferences are indeterminate. We first analyze the necessity of the web services group evaluation in detail.

Then it can help users who have no specific QoS preferences select a service referring to a evaluation result, which uses the Condorcet and Borda function of group decision-making theory to obtain the group evaluation of web services on the basis of gathering the historical selection results of users who have explicit preferences.

The purpose of the theoretical analysis and simulation experiment is to rationality and availability of the Web services evaluation method.

Keywords: Web service; quality of service; service community; service evaluation; decision-making method; social choice function

I.  INTRODUCTION  A Web service is a kind of software application identified by a URI, which can be advertised, located, and accessed through a group of encoded messages [1].

Since Web services often collaborate each other to build a more complicate application, they should to be described in terms of functional capabilities and Quality of Service (QoS) properties [2]. As the spectacular development of Web services, there are more and more services with similar or overlapped functions. To facilitate and speed up Web Services discovery, the similar web services can be grouped into communities [3]. Thus users can select an ideal web service from the community. Many efforts aim at selecting a qualified web service by considering the QoS(Quality of Service) [4]. Some approaches rely on the utility function to select the optimal service, which requires users to express their preferences as weights that can be involved in calculating [5][6][7]. But, for users that have specific preferences, it is difficult to make accurate weighting evaluations of QoS property. Besides, if some users? preferences are obscure, it may be difficult to obtain preference information and weights about QoS properties. For this reason, many research use skyline to narrow the scope of service selections [8]. However, users still need to decrease their alternatives when candidate web services  of the skyline approach are too much. Therefore, there is an urgent need to improve a selection method of web services to those who have no clear preferences.

In view of this situation, this paper proposes a QoS-aware group evaluation method of web services to get the overall sequencing of web services as references to select and solve the problem of service selection of users with discriminate preference by utilizing the selection results of other users. At first, the method should to obtain the history service evaluation information of each user who has selected a service.

Furthermore, in order to facilitate concrete overall service evaluation, it should employ decision-making theory to integrate such information of a group of users with different preferences into overall evaluation of the community services. Finally, theoretical analysis and experimental verification are investigated to demonstrate rationality and efficiency of our proposal.



II.  PRELIMINARIES As the number of Web services continues to increase, gathering similar Web services into the same community can improve Web services selection efficiency [1]. In a community, although Web services own common functionality, they also can have different QoS. After a Web service joining in a community, the process of describing, announcing, and invoking of the web services remains unchanged. The selection process is transparent, so users don?t need to know that the Web services are gathered in communities [3].

Definition 1.The Web-service Community C can be defined by ( ),C t S= , in which ( , )t id name=  and  { }1,2,...,iS s i m= =  stand for the basic information of the community and Web services of the same functionality separately.

Definition 2.Suppose  { }1 2, , ..., rQ q q q=  stands for  QoS of Web services, and k iq  stands for the kth QoS of  Service is , 1, 2,3...k r= .

Definition 3. { 1, 2,..., }jU u j n= =  stands for the group of users.

In the community of services, users often choose services according to their QoS information. Since different users have different preferences to QoS   DOI 10.1109/CBD.2013.7         properties of services, they would assign distinctive weights to the QoS properties. For instance, users can decide to select the cheaper one, the faster responding one, or the compromise. Therefore, different users have different evaluation about the same service due to their different subjective feelings.

Definition 4.Weights { }1 2, , ...,j j j jrW w w w=  describes users? preferences about QoS properties of services. jcW means the jth users? weight of QoS property in the service community C, and the sum is 1.

Definition 5. { , ,..., }1 2O o o oj j j jm=  describes users? order  of services, and ijo  indicates the order of user j to  service i. Such as jx jyo o<  represents that service x is  better than y for user j, that means jx y? .

In the process of service selection, the preference must be obtained to select an ideal service to meet users? needs. But it is difficult to describe and get users? subjective feelings objectively. And for users who have no special preferences, it is too cumbersome to get preferences to services selection through such a mass of calculation. Thus the overall ranking can be used as services selection reference for them. On the basis of the group evaluation of services, which can be gained from history selection information in a community, the ranking judgment on group will be easy to get. For example, if most users consider Service A is superior to Service B, that means the group evaluation of service A is better than B, and the ranking of service A is superior to B ( A Bo o< ). users who have definite preferences can select ideal services through the utility function, the selection results will be stored into the community; those who have no specific preferences can select services according to the whole ranking of services in the community.

Definition 6. { 1,2,... }iO o i m= =  means the overall order of services in a community. io stands for the position of service i in the community, Such as  x yo o< stands for the overall order of service x is superior to y.



III.  A QOS-AWARE SERVICE EVALUATION METHOD BASED ON GROUP DECISION THEORY  A.  Preliminary of group evaluation method In order to make group evaluation to Web services, the first thing is to obtain each users? evaluation from the history selecting information. Many relevant studies work on the basis of Web-service evaluation.

Considering the diversity of QoS properties, most of these approaches rely on the Simple Additive Weighting method of multi-attribute decision making approach to overcome automatic selection and combination of Web services [9][10]. User service evaluation can be calculated by the user?s preference that are extracted from history selection information. In a community, new  service members are often less used, evaluation can be calculated by existing preference information of other users. Because of the ambiguity of users? preferences and the purpose to express fairness and rationality of service group evaluation method, random weights values are employed to show users? preferences participate in computing user evaluation of services. But the group evaluation method is not restricted to use weight values to collect user evaluations.

For a QoS property, it may be negative or positive. If the higher the value, the lower the quality, this QoS property is negative. Otherwise if the higher the value, the higher the quality, this QoS property is positive. In order to get the evaluation, the QoS property should to be normalized. Concretely speaking, if a QoS property of a candidate service is negative, it would be normalized by (1); and if positive, use (2).

max  max min  j k k k i  k k  q qb q q  ? =  ? (1)   min  max min  k k i k i  k k  q q b  q q ?  = ?  (2)  In above equations, kiq  is the kth QoS property of service is , maxkq  is the maximum value of the kth QoS property in a service community, and minkq  means the minimal value of it.

Formula (3) is used to compute service evaluations of users in a community. For different users have different preferences to multiple non-functional service attributes, the weight values should be set according to preferences. To reflect the randomness of users and the fairness of group evaluation method to QoS properties, random weight is used in this paper to express random user preferences. In (3), [0,1]kilW ? , kib  could be calculated in line with (1) and (2).

The user service evaluation formula is as follows:   r c k k ij il i  k e w b  =  =? (3)  According to (3), the jth user?s evaluation c ije  to the  ith service in Community C can be calculated, and it can be used in the next section to make group evaluation of Web services. We can find the evaluation of services depends on the QoS property and weight value from (3).

So, even the same service may have different evaluation towards different users. If the amount of services is m, each user?s evaluation value is m .If the amount is n, a m?n matrix m nE ?  is composed by evaluation values of services. To arrange each user?s evaluation values in order of size , it can get the service order jO . If the user?s figure is n, the order is n, the matrix of these orders then is marked as nO .

B.  A QoS-aware service group evaluation method In this section, the point of a QoS-aware service         group evaluation method is evaluation. The Group Decision is also known as multi-people decision making, it can formulate correct and conforming decisions by summing up preferences of group members and forming group opinion. To make a fair and reasonable group evaluation and to aggregate the members? preferences as social preference, Social choice function of this theory can be used to make a reasonable group service evaluation. Social choice function is a quantitative index associated with preferences of group members, which can reflect the group?s overall evaluation to candidate services. In some social choice functions, Condorcet function and Borda function have high computational efficiency compared with other choice functions, and they are suitable for  Web services group evaluation.

By means of each user?s evaluation to services in last section, group evaluation can be achieved. Each user?s evaluation will be integrated into group evaluation by Condorcet function and Borda function.

According to Condorcet criteria, if a candidate service surpass others in majority while comparing one by one from multiple candidate services, would be the Condorcet candidate service.

Formula (4) is the Condorcet function. Suppose that there are m similar services in the Community C,  xs and ys  belong to C, and ( )jy jxN o o>  represents the quantity of users considering xs  to be superior to ys .

Condorcet function value  c xf s  is the minimum score of xs  compared with other services one by one.

According to the calculation result  c xf s , the overall order of services can be work out .

{ }\  min ( ) y x  c x jy jxs C s f s N o o  ? = >          (4)  For example, suppose that the amount of users is 50 and services are s1, s2 and s3. The users? orders respectively are: 23 users take for 1 2 3o o o< < , 17 users set 2 3 1o o o< <  2 users is 2 1 3o o o< < , 10 users is  3 1 2o o o< < , and 8 users hold 3 2 1o o o< < .

According to Condorcet function,  1 2( ) 33j jN o o< = ,  1 3( ) 25j jN o o< = , so 1 25cf s = ; 2 1( ) 27j jN o o< = ,  2 3( ) 42j jN o o< = , so 2 27cf s = ; 3 1( ) 35j jN o o< = ,  3 2( ) 18j jN o o< = , so 3 18cf s = . Then the group evaluations comparison of services is 2cf s > 1sfc > 3sfc , and the overall order is 2 1 3o o o< < .

Formula (5) is Borda function. Borda criteria judges the performance of each candidate service by calculating the total score of each of them. First, use the result of last section to work out the service order of each user.

Suppose that there are m candidate services and n users, then assign m-1,m-2,...,1,0  to the first, second, third...till the last candidate service of every user.

Finally, count up each candidate service?s score of users and the highest one will be the best.

{ }\  ( ) ( ) y x  b x jy jx s S s  f s N o o ?  = >?            (5)  Taking the data above for example: according to Borda function,there are three candidate services, to assign 2, 1, 0 as s1, s2, s3 respectively and count up the score of each candidate service. The Borda score of s1 is 2 23 1 (2 10) 58? + ? + = , s2 is 2 (17 2) 1 (23 8) 69? + + ? + = , s3 is 2 (10 8) 1 17 53? + + ? = . So, 2cf s > 1cf s > 3cf s  and the overall order is  312 ooo << .

From above two functions, services group evaluations and the overall order 1 2, , . . . no o o can be obtained. Then new users can choose services in line with the order.

Apparently, an effective group evaluation method accord with the following features: (1) the result is explicit and deterministic; (2) it is impartial for all candidate services; (3) it is impartial for users; (4) when a user brings the position of service x forward and others constant, compared with another candidate services, the relative evaluation of service x will be no worse than the original at least; (5) the result of this must be in accordance with the users? choices.

C. Theoretical analysis of service group evaluation method In this section, the above features of the group evaluation method will be analyzed. Apparently, service group evaluation values calculated by (4) and (5) are specific and unique, so the service order obtained by the group evaluation method is clarity. In addition, ?one man one vote? principle is applied to the group evaluation function, because service evaluation information is taken from different users and the vote could not be double-counted. So this method is provided with anonymity. The following proof is demonstrated the fairness, monotonicity and consistency of Web services overall order mentioned above.

Theorem 1 (fairness): for any services xs and ys , if each user holds  x ys s? , the group evaluation value is  ( ) ( )b x b yf s f s>  or ( ) ( )c x c yf s f s> , and the overall order is  x yo o< ; if each user holds x ys s? , the group evaluation value is ( ) ( )b y b xf s f s>  or ( ) ( )c y c xf s f s> , and the overall order is  y xo o< . The group evaluation function is fair to all candidate services.

Demonstration: ( )jy jxN o o>  is the amount of users who consider that  xs  is superior to ys . Known that users consider  x ys s? , then ( ) ( )jy jx jx jyN o o N o o> > > obviously. For the Borda function, the values are  { }\ ( ) ( )  y x  b x jy jx s S s  f s N o o ?  = >?  and { }\  ( ) ( ) x y  b y jx jy s S s  f s N o o ?  = >? , so  )()( ybxb sfsf >  and yx oo < . If users consider  ( ) ( )jx jy jy jxN o o N o o> > > , then ( ) ( )b y b xf s f s>  and yx oo < . In the         same way, it can prove the fairness of the Condorcet function.

Theorem 2 (monotonicity): Under the condition of invariable user preferences, the group evaluation is  x y zs s s? ? for any services x y zs s s . If a user improves the evaluation to service ys , the position of  ys  may remain the same or be forward compared  with xs and zs . Then the group evaluation function is typical of monotonicity.

Demonstration: if all users consider x y zs s s? ? , the Borda function value would be ( ) ( ) ( )b x b y b zf s f s f s> > .

If a user improves the evaluation to service ys ,  )( yxN j? would be increased and ( ) ( )jy jx jx jyN o o N o o> > > or ( ) ( )jx jy jy jxN o o N o o> > > . That is The overall order of  services can be adjusted as  y x z o o o< <  or remain the same . So the Borda group evaluation function satisfies the requirement of monotonicity. Evidenced by the same token,Condorcet group evaluation function is monotonous as well.

Theorem 3 (consistency): for any services xs and ys ,  if all of users consider yx ss ? ,the function value would be ( ) ( )b x b yf s f s>  or ( ) ( )c x c yf s f s> . Then the group evaluation function satisfies the consistency .

Demonstration: as known by theorem 1 ,all the users consider x ys s? ,apparently, there would be  ( ) ( )jy jx jx jyN o o N o o> > > . That is to say the score of xs exceeds  ys ,so ( ) ( )b x b yf s f s>  or ( ) ( )c x c yf s f s> .



IV.  EXPERIMENTS A series of experiments are designed and performed to illustrate the QoS-aware service group evaluation method. To realize these experiments, a experimental system is established according to the method.

Experiments can be used to verify and prove the validity and rationality of group evaluation by means of comparing the fairness, monotonicity and consistency of the services overall orders of Condorcet function with Borda function.

The experimental data are provided by WSCE: A Crawler Engine for Large-Scale Discovery of Web Services [11]. The experimental environment involves in PC with Windows XP, Corei3 processor and 2G of memory. To pick out 10 quite different services as research objects and 5 QoS properties (responding time, availability, successfulness, reliability, and reputation).

To  provide 50 users with random weights for the 5 QoS properties, then it s fairness to users.

In experiments, 10 service group evaluations and overall orders would be worked out. To compare the results under different conditions, the fairness to  services, monotonicity, and consistency can be testified.

Time complexity of the algorithm is introduced to assess the feasibility of our proposal at last.

A.  Fairness to services The experimental results of ten service evaluations of Condorcet and Borda function under opposite users opinions are shown in Fig. 1. The y-axis shows  service group evaluations that can be calculated by Condorcet and Borda function respectively. The x-axis displays the ten services. In Fig. (a), the results above the x-axis get from gathering 50 users? orders to ten services by Borda function; the results under the x-axis is evaluations from gathering the opposite orders by Borda. The Fig. (b) shows the result of Condorcet function. For example, if the overall order is, while users taking opposite choice the order would be. It can be found that the results above the x-axis are contrary to those under it. The experimental result shows, if users insist the opposite choice, the group evaluation result would be the opposite. It means, the method is fair to all services.

(a) result of Borda function   (b) result of Condorcet function  Figure 1. The fairness of Condorcet and Borda function  B.  Consistency of service group evaluation method To carry out flowing experiments with 20 new users whose preferences are different to the previous. First, evaluate the ten services by new users. Next to get the overall evaluation of each user with adding each service evaluation of new users separately. As a result to get a new order of these ten services according to the overall evaluation. If the order calculated by service group evaluation method is similar to the new order, our method works consistency. For example, there are 3 users (U1, U2, U3) and 3 services (A, B, C). The evaluation of U1 to A, B, C is 11, 12, 13 separately; U2 is 15, 16, 17; U3 is 7, 8, 9. Thus the overall evaluation to A, B, C is 11+15+7=33, 12+16+8=36, 13+17+9=39 separately. So C is superior to B, and B is superior to A.

For new users whose preferences are different, their evaluations to the ten services also may be different.

Each user has 10 evaluation values to the 10 services, and each service has 20 different evaluation values. To add these 20 different evaluation values of each service to get the overall evaluation.

Fig. 2 shows evaluations of Borda function,         Condorcet function and the overall evaluations of new users. The y-axis shows evaluation values and the x-axis displays the ten services. It can be found from the flowing figures that the tendencies of evaluation values of three approaches are the same. So the method we proposed satisfies the consistency and it is effective.

(a) evaluation of Borda function   (b) evaluation of Condorcet function   (c) overall evaluation of new users  Figure 2.  The consistency of Condorcet and Borda function C.  Monotonicity of service group evaluation method For any services, if its QoS property is improved, evaluation to this service may change and so does the order. If the position of this service keeps the same or brings forward, monotonicity of the method would be verified. To study the performance of Borda and Condorcet function when a QoS property of a service improves, all the services have been tested. Take the first service for example, to increase all the QoS values of the first service, the result that evaluation values of the first service increase obviously both in Borda function evaluation and Condorcet function evaluation shows in Fig. 3.

The experimental result manifests the monotonicity of the method we proposed.

(a)evaluation of Borda function   (b)  evaluation of Condorcet function  Figure 3. The monotonicity of Condorcet and Borda function  D.  Time cost for this method Let the service amount be fixed and increase the amount of users by 10 each time. Then, record each response time of our system ordering these services.

With the increase of the amount of users, the computation of users evaluation to services and group evaluation have also increased. The experimental result shows in Fig. 4, with the users? amount increasing, the response time of our system roughly increases by linear function. It means that the service group evaluation  method does not lead to the exponentially growing of respond time, so the method has higher efficiency.

Figure 4. The response time of experimental system

V.  CONCLUSION In this paper, we investigate a novel evaluation method in a community among users with unclear preferences on the basis of the social choice function of Group Decision Theory. We select Condorcet and Borda function to evaluate similar services in a community for providing references for users. We firstly use Simple Additive Weighting method of multi-attribute decision making approach to get each user?s service evaluation; and then integrate these users? evaluations by the social choice function to comprehensively evaluate the candidate Web services. In order to illustrate the properties (clarity, fairness, anonymity, monotonicity, consistency) of our method, theoretical analysis and experimental verification are taken into our paper. These properties reflect the effectiveness of service group evaluation. If there are less-selected new services, they would seldom be influenced by the evaluation of history users? preferences. Although this strategy has been put into practice in services evaluation, more real-life and benchmark applications are still under way in our future research.

[1] T. Yu, K. Lin. Service Selection Algorithms for Composing Complex Services with Multiple QoS Constraints.

Service-Oriented Computing (ICSOC 2005), 2005 [2] B. Jeong, H. Cho, C. Lee. ?On the functional quality of service (FQoS) to discover and compose interoperable web services?. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(3): 5411-5418, 2009.

[3] Jamal Bentahar, Zakaria Maamar, Djamal Benslimane, Philippe Thiran. ?An argumentation framework for communities of Web Services?. IEEE Computer Society, 22(6): 75-83, 2007.

[4] L. Zeng, B. Benatallah, A. H. H. Ngu, M. Dumas, J.

Kalagnanam, and H. Chang. ?Qos-aware middleware for web Engineering, 30(5):311?327, 2004.

[5] V. Deora, J. Shao, W.Gray, N.Fiddian. ?A quality of service management framework based on user expectations.? In: Proc 1st int?l conf service-oriented computing (ICSOC?03), pp 104?114, 2003.

[6] Menasce DA (2002) Qos issues in web services. IEEE Internet Computing 6(6):72?75 [7] G. Wu , J. Wei, X. Qiao, L. Li. ?A bayesian network based Qos assessment model for web services.? In: Proc int?l conf services computing (SCC?07), pp 498?505, 2007.

[8] Qi Yu, Athman Bouguettay. ?Computing service skyline Computing, 3(1):16-29, 2010.

[9] Wanchun Dou, Chao Lv, Xuyun Zhang, Jinjun Chen. ?A Collaborative QoS-Aware Service Evaluation Method Among Multi-Users for a Shared Service?. International Journal of Web Services Research, 9(1):30-50, 2012.

[10] C. L. Hwang, K. Yoon. ?Multiple attribute decision making: Methods and applications.? Berlin, Germany, Springer-Verlag, 1981 [11] E Al-Masri, H Mahmoud Qusay. ?WSCE: A crawler engine for large-scale discovery of Web Services.? IEEE pp.1104-1111,2007.

