A Dynamic Polling Strategy Based on Prediction  Model for Large-scale Network Monitoring

Abstract?The scale of modern networks grows exponentially, challenging our ability of efficiently managing large-scale network systems. Building an efficient monitoring system for such a large-scale network to report problems is difficult because of the scale of the network. Conventional approaches based on a fixed period polling strategy cannot fast adapt to the change of network and fail to discover abnormal nodes quickly. To tackle this problem, this paper proposes a dynamic polling strategy. Our model is based on wavelet packet decomposition and support vector regression. It uses the wavelet packet decomposition techniques to decompose the comprehensive load series into several subseries whose rule is relatively easy to be learned. Next, it uses the support vector regression method to predict these sub-series. It then dynamically adjusts the polling frequency through accurate forecasting of the network state. The proposed approach has been applied in a live, large-scale commercial network consisting of more than six thousand nodes. Experimental results show that this algorithm maintains a high sensitivity of monitoring and greatly improve the accuracy of performance data.

Keywords?dynamic polling; management load; wavelet packet; support vector regression

I. INTRODUCTION With the increase of network applications use, the  number of network node is also highly increased. As one of the major ways of network management system based on the SNMP, polling monitor is frequently used to obtain information of the network operational states[1]. Polling is a process that the administrator obtains the immediate state of the network equipment through sending continuous query signals to the proxy MIB[2]. Therefore, to access to monitoring each host needs to spend some time and load.

When a large-scale network host fails, the ultimate and frequently used solution to the problem is a fixed period polling examination on the hardware, software, network and other devices. Usually after the end of a fixed period polling to monitor, abnormal nodes will be found, which is a waste of time and money.

The large number of network nodes, the distribution, the Heterogeneity, and the random changes, all together lead to the following deficiencies of traditional polling: a fixed period and lack of flexibility. When amplitude variation of the load is high, accuracy of the performance data in the monitoring server is reduced in a fixed polling period. On the contrary, amplitude variation of the load is low. Using a dynamic polling strategy can predict the future state of the network on the basis of a comprehensive monitoring on the network hosts, and shorten the time of polling cycle and quickly recognize and deal with potential failure by early automatic processing[3].

At present, the research for large-scale network management is less, mainly has carried on the framework and system research. Xin Kuang describes a distributed monitoring and protocol analysis system for large and complex sensor networks[4]. Some researchers proposes a wire-speed network monitoring using virtual machines for Large-scale Network[5]. Ramya Raghavendra proposes a framework of network monitoring, and the method of dynamic control data collection, the results show that the framework can significantly save bandwidth and real-time automation management[6]. Other specialized an enterprise networks monitoring solution using open source software as support for virtual project development by virtual teams work[7].

A rapid growing number of network node can increases the complexity of network management and reduce the sensitivity of alerts. Large scale network management techniques have become a research focus. But for the lack of study on the polling strategy for large-scale network monitoring, now fixed polling strategy is still the mainstream technology, the monitoring system is a high load and low efficiency.

Support vector regression function can be acquired from the data of the study, and better than other methods such as neural network, Kinging, which shows better performance[8]. But in a limited amount of measured data samples, it is difficult to use support vector regression constructing accurate model of complex change rule[9- 10].Wavelet packet decomposition can improve the   DOI 10.1109/CBD.2013.3     accuracy of the data feature extraction[11].The best space coefficient of random sequence by wavelet packet decomposition has the lowest characteristics of the level of uncertainty, and wavelet packet transform domain of target information is the most stable state[12-13].By incorporating the classical wavelet packet decomposition and model of support vector regression prediction, this paper proposes a dynamic polling strategy that leads to more accurate performance data as well as higher efficiency in identifying potential danger by automatically shortening the polling interval, when a high amplitude variation of load is detected.



II. DYNAMIC POLLING STRATEGY BASED ON PREDICTION  A. The prediction algorithm of polling In this paper, a typical wavelet packet decomposition and  a support vector machine regression prediction model are adopted to predict the polling value of the next polling point.

If the predictive value changes in an allowable range of error in a linear form, the data can be regarded as ranges gently; if the data fluctuates significantly beyond the scope of the linear change, amplitude of the polling value of the amplitude may exacerbate in a nonlinear form. Prediction model is shown in Fig. 1.

Wavelet packet is a set of interrelated functions including the scaling function and the wavelet generation function [14].

With the wavelet packet decomposition, sub-space formed by scaling function and wavelet function become available[15].

Select layers of decomposition. Wavelet packet decomposition of the process is shown in Fig. 2.

Fig.1. Prediction model  0 3 2 1  1 2  1 3 2 3  0 4  2 3 2 5  1 6  3 3 2 7   U U  U U  U U  U U  U U  U U  U U  U  ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?? ??? ??? ?? ? ?  ? ?? ? ?? ? ?? ?? ??? ??? ???  Fig.2. Graphical representation of wavelet packet decomposition  In Fig. 2, 00U is the original space; n jU is the subspace  from the jth time decomposition. Therefore, the wavelet packet space is decomposed as following:  n 2n 2n 1 j j 1 j 1U U U , j Z,n Z  ? ? ? ?? ?  Assume that j,nd represents the sequence of subspace.

Wavelet packet decomposition algorithm is given as following:  1,2 , 0(2 )  1,2 1 , 1(2 )  j n j n k l k l  l j n j n  k l k l l  d h d  d h d  ?    ? ?    ? ? ? ?  ?? ?  ? ?  After wavelet packet decomposition, the original signal is decomposed into 2? sub-signals. Finally, the 2? sub-signal sequence is obtained through wavelet reconstruction algorithm as following:  ?  ? , 1, 1,2 1  0 2 1 2( ) j n j n j n  lk k kl k l k l  d h d h d? ? ?  ? ?? SVM (support vector machine), first proposed by  Vapnik, is a statistical learning method that has been successfully applied to speech recognition[16], text recognition, time series prediction and other fields in recent years. The easily mastered method has the merits of global optimization and better generalization ability. When the SVM is applied to solve the problem of regression, which is the SVR (support vector Regression),it has been successfully applied in many fields due to its significantly better learning outcomes compared than other regression methods[17-19]. The basic idea of SVR on regression prediction is as following:  For a given sample data, it was expressed as: ?  ?  ? 1 1 2 2{ , , , , } ( ) ,ll lT x y x y x y x y? 	 ??  , , 1, ,ni ix R y R i l	 	 ? ? Through a nonlinear mapping, the sample space is  mapped into a high-dimensional and even infinite dimensional feature space, which turns the regression into finding the optimal hyperplane problem of linear regression [20]. The specific functional form can be expressed as following:  ?  ? ( ) , : ,n nf x x b H R? ? ? ?? ? ? 	? Here, ? is a nonlinear mapping from low-dimension to  high dimension: b is biased value.

To solve the problem, the function can be transformed as  the following one with constraint conditions to solve the optimization problem[21].

? ?  ??? l  ibwbw l C    ,, )(||||  1minmin ???     ? ? ? ? * *  , 1, 2, ,  , 1, 2, ,  , 0, 1, 2, ,  i i  i i  i i  x b y i l  s t y x b i l  i l  ? ? ? ?  ? ? ? ?  ? ?  ? ? ? ? ? ? ?? ? ? ? ?? ? ? ???  ?  ?  ?  (1)  In (1): C represents the penalty coefficient, C is the compromise of complexity in regression model and fitting precision in sample; ? is not sensitive to errors; i? and i? is slack variable. Considering the dual problem in equation (1), we introduce Lagrange multipliers and select the appropriate parameters ?, Penalty coefficient C and the appropriate Mercer kernel function ? , lK x x . Then we construct functions and solve optimization problems.

? ?  ? (*) * * * , 1  1min ,  l  i i j j i jR i j  K x x ?  ? ? ? ? ?  ?  ?  ?  ? * * 1 1  l l  i i i i i i i  y? ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?   ? ?  ? *  * * *  0,  0 , , 1, 2, ,  l  i i i  i i  s t C i l l  ? ?  ? ?  ?  ?  ???  ? ? ? ? ???  ?  ?  Here, we get the optimal solution : * *  1 1( , , , , ) T  l l? ? ? ? ?? ? .

Construct decision function as following:  ?  * ( , ) l  i i i i  f x K x x b? ?? ?? ??? ?? ?  In the function: *  ( , ) l  i i i i j i  b y x y? ? ? ?  ? ??  ??? ?? ? .

Gaussian radial basis functions, which meet the requirement of the Mercer Theorem, are chosen as kernel function ? , lK x x and can be expressed as ?  ? , 2 2, exp || ||lK x x x x ??  .

The whole process of prediction can be summarized as followings. Firstly, after selecting ? that is the number of wavelet packet decomposition layers, decompose and reconstruct the original sequence of wavelet packet to get 2l sub-sequence. Secondly, establish support vector machine regression model for each sub-sequence; combine the 2l predicted values in weighted pattern to get the final prediction.

Suppose the initial sequence as }...,{ 21 nxxxx ? within which ?1 represents the cpu utilization, ?2 the memory utilization, ?3 the disk utilization; ix (i=0, 1, 2, 3,? ) predicting outcomes of the subsequence. Then the final predicting Outcomes are as followings:  0 1 2 0x x x x x? ! " ? ?  ?  ?  ?  ? , 1? ! " ?? ? ? ?? ,  , , ,? ! " ?? represent weighting factor.

B. Dynamic Polling Strategy  Definition 1: Polling is defined as a process to collect  performance data at intervals which is ??. Here, ??  represents polling cycle, ???? polling frequency.

?  0 1 2 0d t x x x x? ! " ??  ?  ?  ?  ? represents the overall load of the host at time t.

Definition 2: the amplitude variation of prediction is  represented by ?  ?  ( )dx t d t df t? , within which d(t) represents the polling value at time t, df(t)the prediction.

Definition 3: constant U is the standard of amplitude.

Changes within the amplitude of constant U are considered  to be linear and without not.

Definition 4: the biggest polling period is presented by  TMAX, the smallest TMIN. The present polling period  is i 1,i i i 1t t t  ? , and the next is , 1 dx( )i i i it t t ?? ? # $ .

(Linear ?+?, nonlinear ? ?) ,?? ??	? ????	?? ????? ??? ???  polling.

C. Description of the polling module algorithm The poller module has a table, the table contains the  polling value d(t), predictive value df(t), predictive  ??????	????????? ?????	??????????	????????  Step1: Initialize the system and set the initial polling period of 5min.

Step2: Get the corresponding polling values (such as cpu utilization, memory utilization, disk utilization, etc.) to generate the initial sequence: }...,{ 21 nxxxx ? .

Step3: Use SVR (x) to generate the Predictive value ?x (?).

Step4: Determine whether it is a linear change based on ?x (?) and constant U. If it is linear, then turn to step5, otherwise to step6.

Step5: Calculate the next polling  period , 1 dx( )i i i it t t ?? ? ? $ . If the period is as  following , 1 MAXTi it ? % , make , 1 MAXTi it ? ? and turn to  step7.

Step6: Calculate the next polling period ?*)(1, iiii tdxtt ? ? . If the period is as     following MINii Tt & ?1, , make MINii Tt ? ?1, , and turn to step7.

step7: Based on polling period, the system use the poller function to get polling value.

step8: Renew the sequence }...,{ 21 nxxxx ? based on the actual value of polling and turn to step3.

Fig.3. The description of algorithm

III. RESULTS The research result of the paper was successfully applied  to the Li?an electronic service network the polling cycle is dynamically adjusted by the accurate forecast of the network state to ensure the stable operation of the network.

Li?an community electronic service network is the first e- commerce service network for the community integrated services in china. The nodes of Li?an service network provide payment ticketing information dissemination and other community services ,which spread all over the streets and community residential areas of many chinese cities. Fig. 4 shows the network topology. The service network has a three-level management architecture, more than 30 branch networks. This network has covered 12 provinces, more than 6000 network node, trading million times a day, the highest single-day turnover of over 356 million yuan. Network Management Center is responsible for the management and protection of 6000 nodes? stable operation. the high frequency and large volume of transactions, it is an important task to ensure stable operation of the whole network at the peak of transactions Li?an Network Monitoring based on dynamic polling strategy has the sensitivity of alerts and the effectivity of  network management, which prevent major failure occurs in advance  Fig.4. Actual deployment diagram  In Li?an network, a monitoring server 10.176.191.10 in provincial-level node is used to monitor all the hosts in the outlets 172.17.0.0-172.17.15.0. Logically monitoring server and the object being monitored are not in the same network segment, which is in line with the conditions of remote monitoring.

With a basic period polling strategy based on 5 minutes, the monitoring system use the dynamic polling algorithm  to optimize the monitoring results. Fig. 5 reflects the cpu utilization of one node with large number of random transactions. The line is the monitoring results based on fixed period polling of 5 minutes. Green block is the results based on the dynamic polling. Practical application results show that the fixed polling point distribution uniformity, but In a fixed period, node load are unable to get the actual change.

Fig. 5 has 25 fixed monitoring periods, the load change reflected by fixed monitoring results in 14 periods of which is inconsistent with machine actual load change. The concrete period is 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 21, 22, 23, 24. Polling point obviously changes along with the node status, when the node declining use, polling point density decreases, when the usage increases, polling point density is bigger. The accuracy of monitoring data is greatly improved, fixed polling accuracy was only 44% of dynamic polling.

Fig.5. Monitoring graph on CPU utilization

IV. CONCLUSIONS The overhead and real-timing are two contrasting aspects  in network management. Therefore, how to find a balance between them is an important research direction. By incorporating the classical wavelet packet decomposition and model of support vector machine regression prediction, this paper puts forward a dynamic polling strategy for large scale networks. Compared with traditional polling, dynamic polling strategy improves the accuracy of monitoring data, and to some extent, reduces system overhead. Accuracy in prediction models can be further studied.

