A Model for Electronic Health Communication in J&K State in India

ABSTRACT - ICT has a large potential to be useful in health care. While hospitals are now often equipped with advanced tools using digitized analysis and embedded technology for operations etc., IT based administrative tools used to coordinate activities and communicate knowledge in the area of health care have not yet been generalized.

The effect of these IT/ICT tools on the life of people world over has been mostly witnessed by the urban populace. The rural population almost world over has been the least beneficiary of such technological developments with the result that the digital divide between the rural and the urban still remains an area of concern. It is in this context that an attempt has been made by the authors to assess the penetration of Information and Communication Technologies in Present Health Care System in the State of Jammu and Kashmir in India. The impact of these technologies in health care system of the state has been studied in terms of various facilities existing in various hospitals established at the village, block, district and provincial level.

The authors have tried to make an extensive study of various infrastructural facilities in these hospitals along with the use of IT/ICT tools to make the best use of these facilities. The study of the existing health care system has been carried from the govt. published available literature as well as by seeking public opinion through questionnaire and personal interviews. The data so obtained from the literature and through the questionnaires has been analyzed. Based on the observations made through the data analysis and by making a thorough investigations of the similar infrastructural facilities in the neighboring states, the authors have proposed an IT/ICT supported Health Care Model for implementation in the state of Jammu and Kashmir with an objective to carry out the benefits of the facilities existing in big hospitals to the village level hospitals as well.

The proposed components/activities have to be implemented in phased manner based on the present availability of infrastructure in the state, the geographical conditions of the state and the budget involved in implementing the model.

KEYWORDS ? ICT, Healthcare Systems, , Ayurvedic, Unani, Hospitals, Dispensaries , Health Centres, Remote Consultation Centres (RCC)

I. INTRODUCTION THE impact of information and communication  technology (ICT) is indirect and depends on redesign of  practices and structures also outside health care as such.

Improvements will only be realized if all parties involved can coordinate their efforts to take advantage of new technology.

A ?package? of changed work practices and structures extending across organizational boundaries needs to be designed and implemented. This is very different from the common conception of introducing some new ICT tools.

Information and communication Technology though lately introduced in the Health Care System due to its variety of uses is proving wonders in the improvement of the system.[1]  E-health and telemedicine services are promising business areas in Europe and now it is spreading in India also.

It is clear that e-health products and services will be sold and ordered from a distance and over national borders in the future.[2] Typical cross-organizational e-health applications are:  ? sharing of patient records among different healthcare professionals;  ? access to distributed Electronic Health Records (EHR)  any place and any time;  ? on-line teleconsultation, telemonitoring and assistance;  ? patient?doctor consultation services; ? patients access to their own EHRs.

Healthcare providers have been providing assessments, procedures, and therapies for patient care. There are several administrative processes that need to be coordinated, which result in delays in providing patient care. Healthcare providers have realized the importance of automating these administrative processes to provide appropriate care to patients in time. To automate these administrative processes, several systems have been procured from external vendors or built in-house. This automation has led to the process of capturing information related to patient care and storing them electronically. The electronic clinical record of patients helps clinicians to treat patients more effectively by providing the required information at the required time. However, these  _____________________________    systems catered to specialist departments and are usually best-in-class systems for the specific department, but not across an enterprise. This created a huge Challenge in presenting the data in these disparate systems as a single unit.

The introduction of the Integrated Healthcare Delivery Networks and moving beyond the single episode of care in a single enterprise to the entire continuum of care in multiple enterprises generated the need for availability of information as a single entity. Economies world-wide have also started to realize the burgeoning costs of providing healthcare to its population. Several studies support the fact that the availability of correct data at the point of care reduces the patient's costs to a large extent. Real-time messaging between clinical systems did solve the problem of data being available at the right time to some extent but it did not solve the problem of presenting data available in disparate systems as a single unit.[3]

II. PRESENT HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IN THE J&K STATE  The J&K State is having population more than one crore and covers an area of approximately 2,22,236 sq. Kms.

districts for administration and carrying out developmental programmes. Maximum part of the state is hilly and topography of the state comes in the way of developing adequate infrastructure and is further compounded by terrorism and militancy.

J&K State has two capital cities namely Jammu and Srinagar and having population more than one crore and covers an area of approximately 2,22,236 sq. Kms. The state is divided into three regions namely, Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh and further subdivided into 22 districts with 3.48% population below poverty line of the state. The total number of villages in the state is 7257 and blocks is 135. Most of the area of the state is hilly and not connected with the rail network. Topography of the State comes in the way of developing adequate infrastructure and is further compounded by terrorism and militancy, which have taken a heavy toll of life and public property besides throwing normal life out of gear. In some districts like Kargil and Leh, the roads remain closed for almost six months of the winter season. Other districts like Doda, Kishtwar, Poonch of Jammu division and almost all the districts of Kashmir Division get heavy snow fall and roads remain closed on a number of occasions and situation always remains concerned for health care system of the state for handling patients under these circumstances. All the main hospitals are located at Jammu or Srinagar cities being capital cities of the State.

The details of main Health institutions in brief are given below: Medical colleges 4 District Hospitals 14 Ayurvedic Hospitals 2 Ayurvedic Dispensaries 265 Unani Hospitals 3 Unani Dispensaries 235 Sub Centres(SCs) 1888 Primary Health Centres 374  Community Health Centres 80  Following table shows the total population, Crude Birth Rate, Crude Death Rate, Total Fertility Rate, Infant Mortality Rate, below represents female literacy rate and population Below Poverty Line in the state v/s India[4]  In the present system, not even a single hospital in the state is equipped with proper ICT facilities. The state is facing the basic problem to bring all these main hospitals under one umbrella. People in the system don?t seem to know much about the utilization of ICT in health care and there is no concept of resource sharing at present. All the health centres from main state level hospitals to sub centres are functioning as single units.[5]

III.  DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS Data has been collected from different sources through  observation method, personal interviews and through questionnaire. A questionnaire was prepared and distributed in different areas of the state. The graphs below show the opinion of the people about various aspects of the Health Care system in the state. The following observations were made:  A Availability of Health Care Centre: As per the observations, most of the people in the state  are dependent upon the SCs and PHCs for treatment and very few enjoy the facilities of main stream hospitals. Only 5.4% and 2.7% people from the state undergo treatment in the Ayurvedic and Unani hospitals and dispensaries.

Treatment (%)Type of center  Tr ea  tm en  t %  Medical colleges  State level Hospital  District level Hospital  Sub District level hospital Ayurvedic Hospitals  Ayurvedic Dispensary  Unani Hospital  PHC  CHC  Sub Centre  B Satisfaction of people about working hours, punctuality of staf and , trained manpower:  75% people were found satisfied with working hours of the Doctors and Nurses and 22.6% about the punctuality.

Only 19% were satisfied about both working hours and punctuality of the staff. 44.7% people agreed that there is trained manpower available in the state, whereas 55.2% of the people are of the opinion that trained manpower is not available in the state  Satisfaction Level of people undergoing treatment  0%  20%  40%  60%  80%  100%  Satisfied 75% 22.60% 19% 44.76%  Not satisfied 25% 77.40% 81% 55.24%  Working hours Punctuality Both Trained  manpower  C Treatment outside the state: 27 % of the middle income group prefers treatment  outside the state for major disease and 6% of the group prefers treatment outside for minor disease. On the other hand 43% of High income group prefer treatment outside the state and 23% in case of minor disease.

People Undergoing Treatment Outside The State      Middle income group (% age)  27 6  High income group (% age)  43 23  Major disease Minor disease  D ICT and Health Care: 23% below the age group of 15 years know about the role  of ICT in Health Care and 15% above the age group of 50 years. However, 34% of the people in age group of 15-50 years know about ICT and its usage in Health Care. This shows many people are still not aware about the benefits of using ICT in health sector.

Knowledge of ICT     Below15 15-50 Above 50

IV. PROPOSED HEALTH CARE SYSTEM DESIGN Healthcare services are usually provided in collaboration  between hospitals and primary healthcare. There are, in addition to these two main actors, a number of other organizations that need to collaborate: municipal or private home care operators; providers of housing and daily services, including relatives; and, when new ICT is introduced, technology suppliers and perhaps support functions such as help-desks. Traditionally, many knowledge transactions take place informally, when the health care personnel talk or leave messages on paper to one another. With increasing number of collaborators, the difficulties inherent in the informality of this are likely to increase, as people continually need to keep in communication to update them selves. A major disadvantage of these local systems is that the communication channels often are only partially documented.

They are thus not available to all individuals who need the knowledge and not in the situations where they are needed.

This gives rise to both symmetry of knowledge and an insufficient inter organizational integration [6].

A  Planning and implementation The aim of the project is the study of Health care system  in J&K State and possible improvement in system by using ICT and ICT tools, particularly Govt Health Institutions which covers the major areas of the State and provide medical support almost free of cost. The proposed electronic health communication model is like the waterfall model in which the next phase will not be initiated unless the previous phase gets fully completed. Overall networking is the key features of the model.

B Phase I a) Creating Remote Consultation Centres.

Since the maximum population is residing in remote villages connected by improper roads, Telemedicine method of operation can serve as a strong bone to the Health Care System. Patients particularly living in rural areas need medical advice for proper medical treatment and they don?t find an equipped health centre very nearby, fail to take any decision in crucial moments. A patient rushed to nearest primary health centre can be taken care of even by an RMP by making a simple consultation with experts sitting in the network if these primary health centres are equipped with ICT facilities. As internet has approached to every remote area of the country, proper infrastructure can be set to make some of the primary health centres ICT enabled and to call them as Remote Consultation Centre (RCC). These RCCs are intended to serve the maximum population residing in remote villages connected by improper roads by providing consultation which in turn will help them in decision making for right kind of treatment. In its primary stage it doesn?t involve lot of efforts, manpower and budget and the stations could be established with minimum efforts and very few hurdles.

RCCs in State should be connected to District health level centres or district hospitals which contains a group consisting of one to two experts with other staff available for expert opinion to the queries received from their subsequent RCCs.

These experts from district level centres/ hospitals will also  have links with different experts of the system as per schedule for any kind of assistance as and when required.

They can seek a opinion from a specialist from any other hospital in the network if needed.

b) Managing Patient and Doctors  Data  A medical portal in the form of Electronic Health Record (EHR) has to be developed which will record the patient data completely from the admission to till being relieved. The system will be initially stand alone at all levels. The system will be effective later on when the phase of Networking will be carried out. At the admission of the patient, the software will take care of patient data. A unique Patient?s Identification Number (PIN) will be allotted to each patient in Out Patient Department (OPD) or in emergency as the case may be, which will also indicate to identity of the health centre where received.

In the similar way the Doctors database will also be made the part of the portal.

C Phase II a) Making all govt. health centers ICT enabled and  networking of RCCs and health centers Through online communication, the patient related  opinion can be obtained, resources can be shared and above all the burden on lower level hospitals can be eased. At this stage it is presumed that RCC are completely functional now.

A Doctor from a sub district hospital can send all the parameters available to an expert for special opinion. The query can be posed through one RCC to the other RCC up to district level. The district level RCC can forward the query to concerned specialist and collect the feed back. The query can be directly replied by the doctor or through RCC. Video conferencing can be used to watch the patient on the digital monitors and have discussion with each other and decide the treatment.

D Phase III a) Networking of all important Private Hospitals, Charitable  Health Centres, Private Blood Banks, Pathology and Radio diagnostic Labs  However, to begin with only the well known health centers and institutions which are functioning under Govt license should be covered in the proposal. Requests as and  Phase III Networking of all important Private Hospitals, Charitable Health Centres, Private Blood Banks,  Pathology and Radio diagnostic Labs  Making all govt. health centers ICT enabled and networking of RCCs and health centers  Managing Patient and Doctors Data Creating Remote Consultation Centres  Phase II  Phase I    when necessary will be made within the terms and conditions of MOU. E.g the private hospitals may seek opinions from the senior doctors of the hospital through RCC unit. On the other hand Govt Hospitals would like to send the blood samples of a patient for cross examination and confirmation of results. Similarly a private agency can arrange blood for the Govt Hospital and provide ambulance and other manpower support as and when required.

The development of this proposed system can be made effective with the help of one central agency which will prepare a common data Bank of all the health institutions, Nursing Homes, Private clinics etc out of which some can serve as service centre for RCC and will be online with different Hospitals and will have access to their reception/registration counters. Similarly, the private clinic doctors who desire to be in the net should also be linked.

Different HPBs will be established at various places in the state.



V. FUTURE SCOPE The proposed system has touched almost all the issues  pertaining to ICT in Health Care System. All the issues pointed out have a scope of detailed study and can serve as a model for any other state and system. More data can be collected on similar lines and analyzed to get a clearer picture.

The proposal is designed in such a way that different teams can be involved and given separate jobs which will be almost independent of each other.



VI.   CONCLUSION Jammu and Kashmir State is making progress in the  health sector very slowly. The remote areas which remain cutoff during the winter session needs to be addressed. The people of the state have limited knowledge of the use of IT/ICT in the Health Care System. Even the Doctors and paramedical staff engaged for saving the precious lives are ignorant about the technology and its role in improving Health Care System. There is a great need of improvement in the existing Health Care Structure of the state particularly in relation to the use of ICT in the system. The new techniques in the field of Health system due to introduction of ICT like e-health, telemedicine and other ways of resource sharing would be highly beneficial for the people of these areas.

A new system has been proposed which recommends the implementation of the system in phases. It is always desirable  to carry out the projects in phases, the proposed system has been divided into five different phases. Main emphasis has been given on the establishment of Remote Consultation Centres (RCC) which are mainly targeted for rural areas of the state. Networking of all the health institutions has been proposed upto the Sub Centre level and to the process has been split into different phases keeping in view the present position of Health sector in the state and the requirement of finance, manpower, technology and time.

The proposed system has touched almost all the issues pertaining to ICT in Health Care System. All the issues pointed out have a scope of detailed study and can serve as a model for any other state and system. More data can be collected on similar lines and analyzed to get a clearer picture.

The proposal is designed in such a way that different teams can be involved and given separate jobs which will be almost independent of each other.



VII. REFERENCES  [1]   Nils-Goran Olve & Vivian Vimarlund - Linkoping University ?Elderly Healthcare, Collaboration and ICT - enabling the Benefits of an enabling Technology? VINNOVA Report VR 2006:05  [2]   S.Bedi, Senior Director Head, Med.Electronics &Telemedicine Department of Information Technology, Government of India; ?National initiatives in Health Care using ICT?;  [3] Metin Akay, Andy Marsh, Information Technologies in Medicine, Volume I: Medical Simulation and Education, Copyright ( 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

