An Extension of ?SEQ-NV-RANSAC? Approach To  Avoid Bad-segmentation Cases From Unstructured

Abstract? Recently many applications require an automatic processing of massive unstructured 3D point clouds in order to extract planar surfaces of man-made objects. While segmentation is the essential step in feature extracting process, but bad- segmentation results (i.e. Under and Over-segmentation) are still standing as a big obstacle to extract planar surfaces with best fit reality. In this paper, we propose an extension of ?SEQ-NV- RANSAC? approach to avoid the bad-segmentation problems using topology information and intuitive threshold value. First, in order to avoid the under-segmentation problem, we check each one group which resulted from original ?SEQ-NV-RANSAC? approach to get all neighbours points which have Euclidean distance less than the threshold value as a one surface group.

This process will be repeated until no more points can be adding to that surface group. Then a new surface group will be created to check the remaining points. Second, in order to solve the over- segmentation, we propose three checks; the similarity of normal vectors (NV), the perpendicular distance and the intersection zone using bounding box test.

Keywords-component; TLS; unstructured; 3D point clouds; planar surface; RANSAC; under-segmentation;  over-segmentation

I. INTRODUCTION Terrestrial Laser Scanner (TLS) data are provided in  massive unstructured 3D point clouds (randomly distributed), since  the spatial point distribution and the point density cannot be assumed as fixed [1]. Also in the case of 2.5D range images once two or more such images are registered; the resulting data loses its 2.5D character and has to be represented as an unstructured 3D point cloud [2]. Many applications, such as 3D modelling, documentation, reconstruction, restoration and as- built surveys, require automatic processing to extract planar surfaces of the recorded man-made objects. The goal is creating a precise and proper realistic 3D model that best fits reality [3] to show the situation and condition of object.

The segmentation is the most important step in the feature extracting process, since the extraction of features of the different building elements basically depends on the accuracy of the segmentation step [4]. Usually segmentation for massive unstructured 3D point clouds leads to bad- segmentation results that consists of; (1) Under-segmentation: several features segmented to one segment; and (2) Over- segmentation: one feature segmented to several segments.

Therefore, the bad-segmentation results are still standing as a big obstacle to extract even planar surfaces with best fit reality.

In this paper, we propose an extension of ?SEQ-NV- RANSAC? approach [5] to avoid the bad-segmentation cases for planar surfaces from massive unstructured 3D point clouds, as respect to a common acquisition data.



II. RELATED WORK The segmentation process is defined generally as a  grouping of elements such as points into one region, which shares similar spatial properties. Many algorithms have been designed to segment planar surfaces from point clouds using one of three distinct methods; region growing [6], clustering of features [1] and  model fitting [7, 8]. While the last one is based on fitting geometric primitive shapes, the first two are based on geometric criteria for grouping homogeneous regions.

The region growing method, by [9], identifies homogeneous elements in data that is restricted to one seed element. It does suffer from main difficult disadvantage of having to define the correct seed element, since if the definition is wrong, the error will grows and all processes will fail.

Therefore, it can be considered as a sensitive method for noisy data. Also, when it is utilized for segmentation of unstructured point clouds, it leads to bad-segmentation results [6].

The method based on clustering features offers a flexible way to identify homogeneous elements in the data based on attributes, without being restricted to one specific element. But computationally clustering multidimensional features for large data volumes is very expensive. Also it is sensitive to the noisy data, since it is influenced by the quality of the computed attributes [1], then it can be leads to bad-segmentation results.

The model fitting method is based on fitting geometric primitive shapes, and then the points are conformed by the mathematical representation that would be grouped as one segment. Two widely known algorithms in line with model fitting methods are the RANSAC (Random Sample Consensus) algorithm [10] and the Hough-transform algorithm [11]. While these two algorithms were used before for processing point clouds with major aim of constructing 3D building models, an important comparison has been made between them in terms of     processing time and sensitivity to cloud characteristics using Airborne Laser Scanner (ALS) data in [12], the authors show that; the RANSAC algorithm is more efficient than the Hough- transform algorithm, since the difference in processing time is negligible between them even when data size is very large and Hough-transform is also very sensitive to the segmentation parameters values.

Several variation for RANSAC algorithm, to segment planar surfaces, have been suggested such as the adaptive RANSAC algorithm [13], Normal Driven RANSAC algorithm (ND-RANSAC) [7] and sequential application of RANSAC [8].

The RANSAC algorithm has the great advantage of being robust, even with the existence of much noise. On the other hand, it has suffered from spurious results of parallel-gradual planar surfaces. In order to avoid the spurious planar surfaces, we proposed in [5] an approach called Seq-NV-RANSAC using additional normal vector (NV) check between each point and the hypothesis RANSAC plane, which is created based on three random points. Huge point clouds of LIESMARS fa?ade are used, as shown in Fig. 1, as a clear example of massive unstructured 3D point clouds obtained of a complex fa?ade.

While all main planar surfaces of the complex fa?ade, which have many different levels, orientations and includes parallel-gradual planar surfaces, are segmented successfully to groups in sequence (Seq) and automatically using ?Seq-NV- RANSAC? without any spurious results as shown in Fig. 2, but there still are some groups having bad-segmentation cases.

Figure 1. Full point clouds  of LIESMARS fa?ade (2,663,333), as  examble for a complex object  Figure 2. Eighty-two groups of planar surfaces are segmened by  ?Seq-NV-RANSAC?.

Fig. 3 shows some examples for under-segmentation cases, for example, while the yellow colour shows those points are grouped to one group, but in reality it includes many different beams. Also Fig. 4 shows examples for over-segmentation; while the red and blue colours are grouped to two groups, but in reality the two groups are belong to only one surface.

Figure 3. Examples of some groups having under-segmentation problem, shown by one colour for each group.

Figure 4. Examples of over- segmentation problem shows by different colours for one surface  In this paper, we propose an extension of ?SEQ-NV- RANSAC? approach to avoid bad-segmentation problems using topology information under an intuitive threshold value.



III. METHODOLOGY  A. Under-segmentation  Under-segmentation problem defines as a several features  are segmented as a one group (see Fig. 3). It arises when encountering special cases such as two or more planar surfaces having the same NV and being at the same level. That problem can be solved by using the topology properties for point clouds and surfaces since all surfaces which are in one group should have a space area between them, due to features which were segmented to other groups. Therefore, in one group which is including more than one surface, all point clouds which are involving to the same surface should become neighbours under a restricted threshold value for Euclidean distance  thUE . Which is choosing practically based on smaller space distance between different adjacent planar surfaces.

The methodology is used for modifying ?SEQ-NV- RANSAC? approach, to avoid under-segmentation problem, is based on choosing a random point from that group under study and acquire the neighbours for that point under threshold value  thUE , which is based on fixed distance neighbours method (FDN) and the metric distance used is the Euclidean distance  }...,,.........,,{ 321 niiiii EEEEE ? . Then choose second point from accepted neighbours? points. This process will be repeated automatically until no more point clouds can be added to that surface group. If there still are some points not accepted yet in the input group, then a new surface group will be created in the output file to check these remaining points.

B. Over-segmentation Over-segmentation defines as one feature is segmented to  several groups (see Fig. 4). It arises due to the influence of the noisy points on the calculation of initial NV, which leads to a big difference between the calculated NV of that point and the hypothesis RANSAC plane. The choice of the tolerance (Tol) threshold value, in original ?SEQ-NV-RANSAC?, may be leads to the same results. Also over-segmentation problem can be solved by using the topology properties? for point clouds and surfaces since these groups which are involves to one surface should be shares in three parameters; (1) the similarity of NV, (2) small perpendicular distance PD , as in (1), between each point that located in one group and plane equation of another group under study, and (3) the intersection zone between these two groups.

)()()(  zyx  zyx  nnn  dZnYnXn PD  ++  +?+?+? =                          (1)  Methodology to solve over-segmentation is based on three steps; firstly; clustering whole groups according to NV under threshold value  thn? . Since NV direction is based on the sequence for choosing the three random points by RANSAC, therefore our check considers the opposite NV direction.

Secondly; grouped every cluster group again based on the average summation of perpendicular distances (AveSumDis), as in (2), between one group and total points (PointNo) which located in another group using threshold value for minimum summation of perpendicular distances (MinSumDis).

iNoPo  PDAveSumDis )int(  )( 2?=                          (2)    Thirdly; check groups, which have the same NV and (MinSumDis), using threshold value for minimum number of points (MinPointNo) into intersection zone by calculating the bounding box for every group. Then groups are achieving the three conditions together, should be involves to one surface.



IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS  A. Under-segmentation As shown in Fig. 3, the yellow colour shows a clear  example for under-segmentation case. Therefore a restricted threshold value  thUE  is added to solve that problem based on the smaller space distance between different adjacent two planar surfaces using Octree to speed up this step. The threshold value  thUE must be a balance between the space distance for adjacent planar surfaces, shown in Fig. 5?case 2, and the space distance inside one planar surface, shown in Fig.

5?case 1. The space distance inside one surface is due to holes and\or shadow in the data acquisition.

The importance for choosing the value of threshold thUE  carefully is due to that; it is should be selecting practically. For example; if  thUE is setting bigger than the smaller distance between adjacent two planar surfaces, then although under- segmentation problem can be solved successfully for one element such as the red beams in Fig. 5, but over-segmentation problem will be arisen again in other elements such as the stairs and \ or ground, since they will be divided to several groups.

Figure 5. Examples of space distance, (Case 1) is inside one planar surface and (Case 2) is between different adjacent two planar surfaces.

Fig. 6 shows the under-segmentation problem is solved successfully for beams without any bad effect on the other surfaces, stairs and ground data by setting  thUE = 100.

Finally, while Fig. 2 shows Eighty-two groups of planar groups were segmented by ?Seq-NV-RANSAC?, Fig. 7 shows three hundred and sixty-three groups of planar surfaces are segmented successfully and automatically after solving the under-segmentation problem using threshold value  thUE = 100.

Figure 6. Under-segmentation problem is solved successfully for beams data without any bad  effect on the other surfaces.

Figure 7. Three hundred and sixty- three groups of planar surfaces are segmented by the modification of  ?Seq-NV-RANSAC? problem.

B. Over-segmentation According to Fig. 7, while the under-segmentation problem  is solved successfully, but obviously the over-segmentation problem is displayed for many different surfaces. Fig. 8-b and Fig. 9-b show the most common two cases as examples of over-segmentation problem by different colours for each group.

Figure 8.  Figure 9.

Different two examples of over-segmentation cases. (a) Original surfaces.

(b) The  results are displayed by different colours for each one group  The methodology for solving over-segmentation problem is based on using three threshold values to select and merge groups; (1)  thn? : the similarity of NV with considering opposite NV direction, (2) MinSumDis: minimum summation of perpendicular distances, and (3) MinPointNo: minimum numbers of points are existing in the intersection zone.

By analysis the three hundred and sixty-three groups of planar surfaces, shown in Fig. 7, we conclude that; no ideal and constant values for the three threshold values to achieve all surfaces by one trial. For example, while a lot of groups which have over-segmentation problem can be selected and merged by using threshold values (  thn? = 5, MinSumDis = 20 and MinPointNo = 50), there are other groups can?t be segmented yet. This problem still exists until remove these surfaces which were merged successfully. Then repeat the previous process again for remaining groups using a new threshold values.

Therefore, this process are classified as a semi-automatic process, since the main steps to select and merge groups will be done automatically and then the user will selects the accepted surfaces and remove it and then decide to stop or continue to the next trial. Fig.10 shows two hundred and eighty-one groups of LIESMARS fa?ade are segmented automatically using the initial three threshold values as a first trial.

Figure 10. Two hundred and eighty-one groups of planar surfaces are segmented automatically from the first  trial.

Fig. 11 shows one hundred final surfaces are accepted by user after first trial and Fig. 12 shows one hundred and eighty- one groups are remained from first trial.

Figure 11. One hundred planar surfaces are accepted finally by  user after first trial.

Figure 12. One hundred and eighty-one groups are remained  after first trial.

Since many trials were needed to segment all planar surfaces successfully, Table I shows the inputs and the results  for each trial respectively.

TABLE I. THE INPUTS AND THE RESULTS FOR EACH TRIAL RESPECTIVELY  Trial No.

Total No.

of input groups  Threshold Values Total No. of output groups from over- segmentation step  By User  thn? MinSumDis MinPointNo Accepted surfaces remaining groups 1 363 5 20 50 281 100 181 2 181 5 30 50 114 60 54 3 54 5 51 50 50 11 39 4 39 20 51 50 33 19 14   Finally, By comparing the final results are obtaind by modified ?Seq-NV-RANSAC? shown in Fig. 13, the original point clouds shown in Fig. 1 and the results are obtained by original ?Seq-NV-RANSAC? shown in Fig. 2, obviously all main planar surfaces (one hundred and ninety surfaces) such as the stairs, walls, ground, windows and beams are segmented successfully without any bad-segmentation results using the modified ?Seq-NV-RANSAC? approach.

Figure 13. One hundred and ninety planar surfaces are segmented successfully as final surfaces by the modification of ?Seq-NV-RANSAC?.



V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK This paper presents an extension of ?Seq-NV-RANSAC?  Approach to avoid bad-segmentation results (i.e. under and over-segmentation) from unstructured 3D point clouds using the topology information and an intuitive threshold values.

While under-segmentation process is considered as an automatic process, the over-segmentation process is considered as a semi-automatic process.

Finally, modified ?Seq-NV-RANSAC? approach has potential results since the main stated objectives of this paper are achieved successfully, brings an improvement in quality of the final results and increases the degree of automation of surface extraction. Consequently, it encourages the automatic creation of 3D models directly from 3D point clouds. Also it should be worked well based on any segmentation results even if these point clouds are acquired by different acquisition data source such as ALS or through image matching, Since usually the acquisition data sources acquire unstructured 3D point clouds and our proposed approach needs only the coordinates of point clouds (X, Y, and Z) and the initial groups for the planar surface.

Future work will focus on determination of threshold parameters adaptively and edges extraction.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This paper is supported by National Basic Research  Program of China (973 Program, No. 2010CB731800),  National Natural Science Foundation of China (40871212 and 40721001) and the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (2008AA121600).

