Sudan

ABSTRACT. The excessive use of the communication networks, rising of Internet of Things leads to increases the vulnerability to the important and secret information.

advance attacking techniques and number of attackers  are increasing radically. Intrusion is one of the main threats to the internet. Hence security issues had been big problem, so that various techniques and approaches have been presented to address the limitations of intrusion detection system such as low accuracy, high false alarm rate, and time consuming.

This paper proposes a hybrid machine learning technique for network intrusion detection based on combination of K- means clustering and Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) classification. It introduces hybrid approach that able to reduce the rate of false positive alarm, false negative alarm rate, to improve the detection rate and detect zero-day attackers. The NSL-KDD dataset has been used in the proposed technique.. The classification has been performed by using Sequential Minimal Optimization. After training and testing the proposed hybrid machine learning technique, the results have shown that the proposed technique (K-mean + SMO) has achieved a positive detection rate of (94.48%) and reduce the false alarm rate to (1.2%) and achieved accuracy of (97.3695%).

Key words: Intrusion detection, hybrid algorithm, SMO, K- mean, NLS KDD.



I. INTRODUCTION The acceleration and development of computer network technology and Internet has brought huge convenience to people. However sensitive data and information stored on systems must be protected. The need for protecting data in computer systems became very necessary with the advent of shared systems; this need became more severe for systems being accessed over a public network, the Internet.

Internet does not protect the information completely as the Internet is open system for general public Information transmitting over network system must be protected from  unauthorized release and changes. The connection itself must be securely established and maintained [1].

Due to recent development and advances in network technology, computer systems have become more vulnerable to attacks. Novel attacks are appearing endlessly. In recent years, there are many statistics have shown that number of reported intrusions in the Symantec Global Internet Security Threat Report is growing [2]. On the other hand, protection techniques of such systems do not kept up with the increasing threat. Existing defense mechanisms such as user authentication, data encryption, and firewalls are used as the first line of defense against attacks.

Till date no combination of technology can protect the system completely because systems face novel attacks every other day. Therefore, researchers are now attempting to find better and safer approach to minimize and overcome some limitation of existing prevention techniques, tools such as Firewall, Anti Virus, Intrusion Detection, Prevention, and Response Systems have introduced. [3] In this paper  an approach to combine data mining techniques for clustering and classification ( k-mean clustering and sequential minimal optimization) is introduced to enhance the performance of intrusion detection system parameters, discover and accurately identify new attacks by reducing the rate of false positive alarm, false negative alarm rate, detecting the intrusion in real time and making use of known attacks pattern in the train phase to increase the detection ratio.



II. INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM Intrusion detection system (IDS) is a process or device that monitors events occurring on a network and analyzing it to detect any kind of activity that threat computer security policies. The IDS device can be hardware, software or a combination of both that monitors the computer network against any unauthorized access [4]. The main motive of the    IDS is to catch the attackers before cause any serious damage to computer network systems.

The main purpose of IDS is to monitor the network system for any type of attacks, an attack might be signaled by something as simple as a program that could modify the user name or could be a complex attack that involves sequence of events spanning multiple systems. IDS can be categorized as shown in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. IDS categories

III. ORGANIZATION OF A GENERALIZED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM  Figure 2 illustrates the overall architecture of IDS. It has been placed centrally to capture all the incoming packets that are transmitted over the network. Data are collected and send for pre-processing to remove the noise; irrelevant and missing attributes are replaced. Then the preprocessed data are analyzed and classified according to their severity measures. If the record is normal, then it does not require any more change or else it send for report generation to raise alarms. Based on the state of the data, alarms are raised to make the administrator to handle the situation in advance. The attack is modeled so as to enable the classification of network data. All the above process continues as soon as the transmission starts [5].

Fig. 2. general antechoir of IDS [5]

IV. RELATED WORK: A tool set known as production based expert system tool set (P-BEST) is introduced in [6]. This tool set works for misuse detection and developed a new signature corresponding to the attacks; P-BEST provides a better mechanism and performance to detect intrusion in real time environment. This was integrated with the c-programming which make it easy to use, powerful and flexible. But this tool was some limitation. This was less capable of detecting attacks or intrusion where data were incomplete, inaccurate and uncertain.

Audit Data Analysis and Mining (ADAM) is discussed in [7], it describe a real-time anomaly detection system that uses data mining techniques to detect intrusions. ADAM uses a combination of association rules mining and classification to discover attacks in a TCP dump. ADAM performs anomalies detection in two phases: the training phase, and the testing phase. In the training phase, it uses a data stream for which we know the types of the attack. The attack-free parts of the stream are fed into a module that performs off-line association rules discovery. The output of this module is a profile of rules that we call ?normal?. The profile along with the training data set is also fed into a module that uses a combination of a dynamic, on-line algorithm for association rules, whose output consists of frequent item sets that characterize attacks to the system.

This whole phase takes place off-line before using the system to detect intrusions. In the testing phase, the actual detection of intrusions is implemented.

Hybrid approach based on both misuse and anomaly detection was implemented on the NIDS [8]. The main objective of this paper was to reduce the limitation of both detection techniques by combining with each other. In this paper for detecting the intrusion random forest data mining techniques were implemented. Firstly random forest implemented for misuse detection in real time. After that it was implemented on the anomaly detection for detecting unknown attacks in an off-line mode. So by combining the two approaches the false alarm ratio and overall performance has been improved.

Semi-supervised learning technique was used in [9]. Firstly unsupervised learning using K-means clustering. In which part of training instances, was trained using the Euclidean distance method. After that supervised learning performed using C4.5 algorithm algorithm. By applying the clustering the boundary was refined, it helps the C4.5 algorithm to detect anomalies with more accuracy. This semi-supervised learning technique performs better than unsupervised or supervised learning technique. But limitation was that it takes more time than simple classification or clustering. It was a disadvantage while detecting the real time traffic.

A a new clustering technique known as DGSOT (Dynamically Growing Self-Organizing Tree) with SVM was used to reduce the complexity while training phase in SVM [10]. . By using this approach it remove the limitation of the traditional hierarchical clustering method. In DGSOT help to find the most qualified data points come as a boundary point while train SVM. This approach was classified dataset into two classes normal or abnormal on the basis of clustering algorithm.



V. ANOMALY DETECTOR SYSTEM DESIGN In this section, the new anomaly detector approach is proposed based on k-means clustering algorithm and Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) to detect online network anomaly detection, the proposed approach aims to generate a suitable number of detectors with high detection    accuracy. The main idea is based on using feature selection in preprocessing phase to reduce the number of features in dataset, The ConsistencySebsetEvel and Genetic search algorithms have been applied to select specific features from the dataset and remove those features which are irrelevant before clustering and classification phases, after attribute selection k-means clustering algorithm selected to reduced training dataset in order to decrease time and processing complexity. In classification phase supervised algorithm Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) selected to improve the quality of detection. The main stages are shown in Figure 3.

Fig. 3. Model block diagram  A) Pre-processing: Pre-processing of original NSL-KDD intrusion data set is an important phase to make it as an appropriate input for classification phase. The main objective of preprocessing phase is to reduce ambiguity and provide accurate information to detection engine. The preprocessing phase cleans the network data by grouping, labeling and it handles the missing or incomplete dataset. The dataset pre- processing is achieved by applying the following stages sequentially.

B) Features Selection: Features selection is the most critical stage in building a hybrid intrusion detection models and is equally important to improve the efficiency of data mining algorithms. In general, the input data to classifiers is in a high dimension feature space but not all of the features are relevant to the classes to be classified. Some of the data includes irrelevant, redundant or noisy features. In this case, irrelevant and redundant features can introduce noisy data that distract the learning algorithm. It decreases the number of attributes, eliminates irrelevant, noisy or redundant features and brings about effects on applications such as speeding up a data mining algorithm, improving learning accuracy and leading to better model comprehensibility.

During this step, the set of attributes or features deemed to be the most effective attributes which are extracted in order to construct suitable detection system.

The goal of features selection increases the detection rate and decreases the false alarm rate in network intrusion detection. WEKA 3.6 which is a machine learning tool has been used to compute the features selection subsets for hybrid approach (K-mean +SMO) to test the classification performance on each of these feature sets.

The ConsistencySebsetEvel and Genetic search algorithms have been applied to select specific features from the dataset and remove those features which are irrelevant before clustering and classification phases, the result shown in Figure 4:    Fig. 4. Selected attributes:  3,5,7,8,9,10,11,13,22,23,24,27,28,29,31,32,33,34,37,38,39,40 : 22  C) Clustering phase: The clustering phase done by applying the K-means clustering algorithm,   two clusters were specified and created. As the algorithm iterates through the training data, each cluster?s architecture transferred to another. The updating of clusters causes the values of the centroids to modify. This change is a reflection of the current cluster elements. When there are no changes to any cluster, the clustering of the K-Means algorithm becomes complete.

D) Classification phase: Last phase is classification in this phase supervised algorithm Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) was used to classify dataset to normal or anomaly.



VI. EXPERIMENT IMPLEMENTATION AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION  The experiment done by using WEKA(WAIKATO ENVIRONMENT FOR KNOWLEDGE ANALYSIS).

WEKA is a Tool for Data Mining and Machine Learning which was implemented at the University of Waikato, in New Zealand in the year 1997. WEKA is a set of Machine Learning and Data Mining algorithms. This WEKA software is programmed in JAVA language and it has a GUI Interface to interact with data Files. With 49 data pre- processing tools WEKA tool contains 76 classification algorithms, 15 attribute evaluators and ten search algorithms for feature selection. There are three algorithms to find association rules. It also has three Graphical User    Interfaces: "The Explorer", "The Experimenter" and "The Knowledge Flow." The file format to store data in WEKA is ARFF. Meaning of ARFF is Attribute Relation File Format. It also includes tools for visualization. It has a several panels that can be used to perform precise tasks.

WEKA has the ability to expand and contain the new algorithms for Machine Learning in it. These expanded algorithms can directly be applied to dataset [11].

A) Dataset Description: Various drawbacks of KDD CUP 99 which was the main cause to decrease in the performance of various IDS led to the invention of NSL KDD dataset. NSL KDD is the refined version and also called the successor of KDD CUP dataset. It consists of all the needed attributes from KDD CUP dataset. It is an open source data and can be downloaded easily. The advantage of using this dataset is redundant record is removed and sufficient number of records is present for train and test data. It consists of 41 attributes which is classified under Nominal, Binary and Numeric [12].

Table 1: NSL KDD dataset features Type  Feature  Nominal protocol_type, service, flag  Binary  land, logged_in, root_shell, su_atempted, Is_host_login, is_guest_login  Numerica duration, src_bytes, dst_bytes, wrong_fragment, urgent, hot, num_failed_login, num_compromised, num_root, num_file_creations, num_shells, num_access_files, num_outbound_cmds, count, srv_count, serror_rate, srv_serror_rate, rerror_rate, srv_rerror_rate, same_srv_rate, diff_srv_rate,  srv_diff_host_rate, dst_host_count, dst_host_srv_count, dst_host_diff_src_rate, dst_host_same_src_port_rate, dst_host_srv_diff_host_rate, dst_host_serror_rate, dst_host_srv_serror_rate, dst_host_rerror_rate, dst_host_srv_rerror_rate   One attribute is added as class which is 42nd attribute. There are two types of class called Normal and Anomaly. Anomaly class can be further divided into DOS, PROBE, R2L and U2R as shown in table 2. For experiment purpose only two classes is considered: Normal and Anomaly.

Table 2: Anomaly types that include in NSL KDD dataset DOS  PROBE R2L U2R Back, Land, Neptune, Pod, Smurf, Teardrop, Apache2, Udpstorm, Processtable, Worm    Satan, Ipsweep, Nmap, Portsweep, Mscan, Saint    Guess_passwd, Ftp_write, Imap, Phf, Multihop, Warezmaster, Warezclient, Spy, Xlock, Xsnoop, Snmpguess, Snmpgetattack, Httptunnel, Sendmail, named  Buffer_Overflow, Loadmodule, Rootkit, Perl, Sqlattack, Xterm,  Ps.

Accuracy Measure of individual algorithms (SMO and K-mean): Detection of attack can be measured by following metrics: 1. False positive (FP): Or false alarm, Corresponds to the number of detected attacks but it is in fact normal.

2. False negative (FN): Corresponds to the number of detected normal instances but it is actually attack, in other words these attacks are the target of intrusion detection systems.

3. True positive (TP): Corresponds to the number of detected attacks and it is infact attack.

4. True negative (TN): Corresponds to the number of detected normal instances and it is actually normal [13].

Here we can use three parameters of measurement.

In order to perform data analysis and prediction of algorithms that used to build our model, firstly apply SMO algorithm for NLS- Kdd dataset with 22 attributes (with feature selection) using WEKA, the result shown below   Table 3: Details of accuracy parameters for SMO   Correctly Classified Instances      16643 = 73.8245% Incorrectly Classified Instances    5901    = 26.1755% Confusion Matrix :   Table 4: Confusion Matrix for SMO Classified as b a  a= normal 946FP = TN =  8765 B= anomaly TP = 7878 FN = 4955   Now calculate the measurement parameters for SMO:   Table 5: Measurement parameters for SMO       Fig. 5.Measurement parameters of SMO  Secondly:  apply K-mean algorithm for NLS-Kdd dataset with 22 attributes (with feature selection) using WEKA, the result shown below: K-mean clustering result using dataset with 22 attributes Correctly Classified Instances       = 72.1877% Incorrectly Classified Instances     = 27.8123%   Table 6: Confusion Matrix for K-mean Classified as 1 0 0= normal FP= 272 9439 TN=  1= anomaly 6835TP 5998FN=   Table 7: Measurement parameters for K-mean AC FPR DTR algorithm  72.188 2.8 53.26 K-mean    Fig. 6. Measurement parameters of (K-mean)   Thirdly:  apply hybrid approach (K-mean + SMO) for NLS- Kdd dataset with 22 attributes (with feature selection) using WEKA, the result shown below:   Table 8: demonstrate details of accuracy for K-mean+SMO   Correctly Classified Instances      21951= 97.3696% Incorrectly Classified Instances    593    = 2.6304% Confusion Matrix :  Table 9: Confusion Matrix for( K-mean+SMO) Classified as b a  a= normal FP = 176 TN =14286 B= anomaly TP = 7665 FN = 417      Table 10: Measurement parameters for (K-mean+SMO) AC FPR DTR algorithm  97.3695 1.2 94.48 K-mean +SMO    Fig. 7. measurement parameters of (K-mean+SMO)  Comparison between (SOM , K-meam, hybrid (K-mean + SMO))    Table 11: Comparison of measurement parameters for (SMO, K- mean, K-mean+SMO)  AC FPR DTR algorithm 73.82 9.7 61.39 SMO 72.188 2.8 53.26 K-mean  97.3695 1.2 94.48 K-mean + SMO      Fig. 8.  Comparison of measurement parameters for (SMO, K- mean, K-mean+SMO)

VII. CONCLUSION  In recent years, by spread of using the Internet, need of information security has been felt more than ever to prevent  personal and confidential information from unauthorized  intrusion. The different approaches introduce for intrusion  detection.In this paper presents a hybrid approach to  anomaly detection using of K-means clustering and  Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) classification. The  solution specifically addresses issues that arise in the  context of large scale datasets. It uses feature selection in  preprocessing phase to reduce the number of dataset, The  Consistency SebsetEvel and Genetic search algorithms have  been applied to select specific features from the NLS-KDD  dataset and remove those features which are irrelevant  before clustering and classification phases, and also it used  k-means clustering to reduce the size of the training dataset  while maintaining. After that in classification phase  supervised algorithm called Sequential Minimal  Optimization (SMO) selected to improve the quality of  detection. A comparison between the proposed approach  (K-mean + SMO) and individual algorithm K-mean  clustering and Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO)  classification was done, and the results show that our  approach outperforms other by a positive detection rate  (94.48%) and reduce the false alarm rate (1.2%) and high  accuracy (97.3695%).



VII. REFERENCES [1] Kaur, P., 2013. Adaptive Intrusion Detection Based on K-SVMeans Algorithm (Doctoral dissertation, THAPAR UNIVERSITY PATIALA).

[2] Leu, F.Y., Tsai, K.L., Hsiao, Y.T. and Yang, C.T., 2015. An Internal Intrusion Detection and Protection System by using Data Mining and Forensic Techniques.

[3]  M?nz, G., Li, S. and Carle, G., 2007, September. Traffic anomaly detection using k-      means clustering. In GI/ITG Workshop MMBnet.

[4] Mishra, B.K., Rath, A., Nayak, N.R. and Swain, S., 2012, August. Far efficient k-means clustering algorithm. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics (pp. 106-110). ACM.

[5] Richa and Saurabh Mittal. 2014, Data Mining Approach IDS K-Mean using Weka Environment, I   JARCSSE, Volume 4.

[6]  Modi, M.U. and Jain, A., A survey of IDS classification using KDD CUP 99 dataset in WEKA.

[7] Lindqvist, U. and Porras, P.A., 1999. Detecting computer and network misuse through the production-based expert system toolset (P-BEST). In Security and Privacy, 1999. Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE Symposium on (pp. 146-161). IEEE.

[8] Minegishi, T., Ise, M., Niimi, A. and Konishi, O., 2009. Extension of Decision Tree Algorithm for Stream Data Mining Using Real Data.

Journal of IEEE SMC Hiroshima Chapter, pp.208-212.

[9] Zhang, J. and Zulkernine, M., 2006, April. A hybrid network intrusion on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES'06) (pp. 8-pp). IEEE.

[10] Muniyandi, A.P., Rajeswari, R. and Rajaram, R., 2012. Network anomaly detection by cascading k-Means clustering and C4. 5 decision tree algorithm. Procedia Engineering, 30, pp.174-182.

[11] Modi, M.U. and Jain, A. 2016, A survey of IDS classification using KDD CUP 99 dataset in WEKA.

[12] Muniyandi, A.P., Rajeswari, R. and Rajaram, R., 2012. Network anomaly detection by cascading k-Means clustering and C4. 5 decision tree algorithm. Procedia Engineering, 30, pp.174-182.

