<html><head></head><body><pre style="word-wrap: break-word; white-space: pre-wrap;">Proceedings

Abstract: Web Usage Mining is the application of data mining techniques to large Web log databases in order to extract usage patterns. However, most of the previous studies on usage patterns discovery just focus on mining intra -transaction associations, i.e., the associations among items within the same user transaction. A . cross-transaction association rule describes the association relationships among different user transactions. In this paper, the closure property of frequent itemsets is used to mining cross-transaction association rules from web log databases. An approach and algorithmic framework beads on it is designed and analyzed.

? Keywords: cross-transaction; frequent closed pageviews sets; Web usage mining; usage patterns; association rules; 1. Introduction The ease and speed with which business transaction can be carried out over the Web has been a key driving force in the rapid growth of electronic commerce. As the number of online users grows, so does the volume of transaction data collected at the Web servers. Web usage mining is the process of applying data mining techniques to the discovery of usage patterns from Web data. Web usage mining techniques, which rely on offline pattern discovery from users? transactions, can capture more fine-grained information of users? browsing behaviors. One interesting information type is the Web association pattern, which describes the potential association rules between the items or pages in the same users? transactions. However, there is an important form of association rule, which is useful but could not be discovered by existing association rule mining algorithm. Let us take Web users? transactions database as an example. By specifying the value of minsupp (minimum support) and minconf (minimum confidence), traditional association rule mining may find the rules like: 0 RI: 55.6% of the user who accessed page A and page B also accessed page C.

While RI reflects some relationship among the pages in the same user transaction, its scope of prediction is limited; and people may be more interested in the following type of rules: 0 R2: If the first user accesses page A and page B, then at 72.6% of probability, the next fourth user will view page C.

Anthony K.H. Tung[?? proposed the concept of inter- transaction association rules which like R2 first. While classical association rule like RI expresses the associations among items within the same user transaction, Rule Rz represents some association relationship among the field values from different user transaction records. It is obvious that the description scope of the latter is deep and wide than the former.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: we start  by giving the problem description and the related definitions of Web cross-transaction association pattern in Section 2. Next, Section 3 presents an approach and algorithmic framework for mining cross-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets. In Section 4, an experimental example is presented to illustrate each phase    experimental example is presented to illustrate each phase in details. Finally, we draw a conclusion in Section 5.

2. Problem Statement 2.1. Basic Description of Web Association Patterns A complete statement of Web user transactions database includes a set of n pageviews, P = { pI , p z ,  ..., p ,  } , and a set of m user transactions, T = {t ,  ,t2 ,..., t,,, } , where each ti E T (with a unique identifier TID) is a subset of P.

Pageviews are semantically meaningful entities to which mining tasks are applied (such as pages or items) and User Transactions is semantically meaningful groupings of pageviews in each user session. Conceptually, we view each transaction t as an 1-length sequence of ordered pairs: 0-78o3g4o3-2/o4/$20.00 (92004 IEEE 26-29 August 2004 t =&lt; ( p ~ , ~ ( p ~ ) ) , (  p ~ , w ( p ~ ) ) , . . . , ( p ~ , ~ ( p ~ ) )  &gt; where each p: = pi for somejE ( I ,  ..., n ] ,  andw(pl!) is the weight associated with pageview pf in the transaction t. The weights can be determined in a number of ways. In this paper, since our focus is on association rule mining, we only use binary weights to represent existence or non-existence of pageviews access in the user transactions.

Thus, a transaction can be viewed as a set of pageviews s, = { pl! I1 I i I I A w(pf ) = 1) . Association rules capture the relationships among pageviews based on the navigational patterns of users. Given a transaction set T, We call a group of pageviews as frequent pageviews sets if all of these pageviews are occumng frequently together in many transactions (i.e., satisfying minsiupp threshold). Let a set F ={f,,f,, ..., f,} be a frequent pageviews sets over T.

The support of a pageviews set A E F is defined as: An association rule is an implication expression of the formX + Y ,  whereX G F  , Y  G F ,  X n Y  ~ 0 ,  and the confidence a = a ( X  U Y)/O( X ) is higher than minconf.

O ( A )  4 { t ?  TI A. Cl) I/IT I .

2.2. Defdtions and ProperW of Clross-transaction For mining cross-transaction association rules, related definitions and notions will be giving as following: Defdtion 1 (sliding window): A sliding window W in a transactions database T is a block of o continuous intervals, which starting from intend dl such that T contains a transaction at interval d,. H[ere o is called the span of window. Each interval dj in W is called a sub-window of W denoted as W,, where u=d,-dl, 1 5 ~ 3 .

The definition of sliding window breaks the barrier of transaction and extends the scope of association rules from traditional intra-transaction to cross-transaction. The target of mining is to find out the rules which span less than or equal to o intervals.

Definition 2 (extended pageview): Given the above P and W, extended pageview is defined as pi (U)? W, , w h e r e p , E P , l I i I m , l l u I w .  Then the extended pageviews set can be expressed as: EP = {PI (I),..., p ]  (0) ,... , p ,  (I),..., p ,  (0)) Defintion 3 (extended transaction): When sliding window W starts from kth transaction, an extended transaction will be generated.

et, = {pi(u) I pi E ti A wc(pi) = 1) , where1 I i 5 I ,1 I u I 0  , I  I k I n  -0 ,k I j I k + 0 .

Definition 4 (extended user transactions database): ED =(etk I1 I k I n - a}.

Definition 5 (cross-transaction closed pageviews set): A pageviews set CCP c_ EP is a cross-transaction closed pageviews set if there exists no another pageviews set C c EP , such that (1) C? is a proper superset of CCP, and (2) Every user transaction containing CCP also contains C?.

C?.

A closed pageviews sets is frequent if its support is higher than minsupp.

Property 1: If CCP is a cross-transaction closed pageviews set, and then in any sub-window W, over CCP, C?={pi  I p i ( u ) ~  C C P , l I i I m J  is an intra- transaction closed pageviews set.

Proof: We will prove this property by contradiction.

Given the above conditions, if there exists a sub-window W, such that C? is not an intra-transaction closed pageviews set. From the definition of closed pageviews set, there exists another pageviews set L? which make the following statements true: ? C ? c  L?? and ?L? is a closed pageviews set? and ?o(C?)=a(L?)??. Let ZE L?- C? , then its extended form z(u)P CCP . But each user transaction which contains C? also contains z, so each extended transaction which contains CCP also contains t(u). Let us construct L = CCP +{z(u)} , we have: ? CCP c L ? and ?o(C?)=o(L?)??. This conclusion contradicts to the fact that ?CCP is a cross-transaction closed pageviews set.

Property 2: The support of a frequent cross-transaction frequent pageviews set is equal to the support of its cross-transaction closure.

Definition 6 (Web cross-tiansaction association pattern): Given the above ED and EP, a Web cross- transaction association pattern is an implication expression of the form X + Y , which satisfies: n X E E P , Y  ~ E P , x n Y 5 0 , 3itemi (1) E X ,1 S i m, 3itemj(u)E Y , l I j I m , u f l a = a ( X  u Y ) l a ( X ) &gt; m i n c o n f A Framework for Mining Web Cross-transaction Assodation Patterns Generally speaking, Web cross-transaction association patterns mining involve 3 phases: data preparation, cross-transaction frequent pageviews sets discovery and 26-29 August 2004 pattew generation.

3.1. Data Preparation The starting and critical for our successful target based on Web is data preparation. Data cleaning is the task of removing log entries that are not necessary for the mining process, including eliminating irrelevant and unreasonable items and removing all log entries with filename suffixes representing images and sounds. In addition, common scripts as ?*.cgi? can also be removed. User transaction identification is the task of identifying semantically meaningful groupings of pageviews in each user session.

There are three divide transaction identification approaches in common use. The first two, reference length and maximal forward reference, make an attempt to identify semantically meaningful transactions. The third, time window, is not based on any browsing mode, and is mainly used as a benchmark to compare with the other two algorithms. The final step of preparation is formatting the data necessary for the specific data mining algorithm ta be usedr2].

3.2. Mining Cross-transaction Frequent Closed Pageviews Sets This phase is the bottleneck of the whole mining process. Because the boundary of transactions is broken, the number of potential association rules becomes extremely large. We provide a new efficient algorithm to mining cross-transaction frequent pageviews set by using its closure property. In Section 2, Property 1 shows that a pageviews set must be closed in intra- transaction if its extended form is closed in cross- transaction. It provides a different view of mining process. Instead of mining the    different view of mining process. Instead of mining the cross-transaction patterns from extended user transactions database directly, we decompose the whole phase two into three steps: ( 1 )  Find all intra-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets and store them and their related TidSet.

(2) Extend each TidSet by projecting related frequent closed pageviews sets into sub-window W, when sliding window W moves dymaticly.

(3) Mining all cross-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets by calculating the frequency of the intersection of each two pageviews sets in different window.

.Step 1: Many traditional frequent closed itemsets mining algorithms can be utilized in this step, such as C L O S ~ ,  A-CLOSE, MAFIA, etc.  CHARM[^] enumerates closed sets using a dual itemset-tidset search tree, using an efficient hybrid search that skips many levels and using a fast hash-based approach to remove any ?non-closed? sets found during computation. Experiments on a number of real and synthetic databases show that CHARM significantly outperforms previous methods. So we take CHARM to mining intra-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets. All intra-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets and their related TidSet will be stored properly.

Step 2: With the continuous moving of the sliding window W, the old simple TidSet can not reflect the status information of intra-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets in cross-transaction. If some set of transaction nl appears in uth sub-window, in this time, sliding window W must start from transaction n,-u+l. This situation is shown as following: Frequent Closed ......

nl- u+l ...... I Figure 1 .  W which start from Transaction nl-u+l takes FCPS as FCPS(u) Then, we will extend TidSet(FCPS(u)) to record the place of W starting from while FCPS appears in sub-window W,.

Definition 7 (extended transaction ID set): TidSet (FCPS(U))={TIDIFCPS(U)E W, A W,E W A W start from tTID1 For any FCPS in the results of step 1, suppose its TidSet is TidSet(FCPS)=(nl,n2, ... nk). When it appears in sub-window W,, its extended TidSet will be TidSet(FCPS(u))={nl-u+l,n2-u+l,. . .nk-u+l). We take four efficient strategies to prune illegal TIDs from each new  TidSet: ( 1 )  If this TID less than 1 or beyond the max transaction (2) If this TID make sliding window W starting from a And two judgments are used to remove the whole unreasonable TidSets: (3) If the length of the whole new TidSet is shorter than nxminsupp, then it cannot satisfy the support threshold.

(4) Since we just have an interest in closed pageviews sets, number n; null transaction; 26-29 August 2004 if FCPSl c FCPS2 and TidSet(FCPSl(u))= TidSet(FCPS2(u)), then only FCPS2(u) and its TidSet will be stored.

Algorithm 1 : Extent-TidSet w: FT(FCPS, TidSet): intra-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets and their related TidSets W. an array recorded every transaction ID where sliding window W starts from    sliding window W starts from Output: CFT(FCPS(sub-Win),TidSet): an array of FCPS(u) and its related extended TidSets Method: CFT=@ for u=l to o /*extend each FCPS and its TidSet in FT*/ for each (X,TidSet)~ FT for each TidE TidSet new-Tid= Tid-u+ I add new-Tid to new-TidSet end for add (X(u), new-TidSet) to CFT end for /*prune unreasonable TIDs and TidSlets*/ for (X(u), new-EdSet)E CFT for each TIDE new-EdSet /* strategy (1) and (2) */ iflnew-Tidel and new-Tid@ W) end if end for /* strategy (3)*/ if hew-TidSetl &lt;nxminsupp end if I* strategy (4)*/ if 3 Y(u)E CFTand delete TID from new-TidSet delete new-TidSetfrom CIT

IX.new-TidSetl = I Enew-TidSetl delete new-TidSetfrom CFT end i f end for end for Step 3: After Step 2, all TIDs in TidSets have unique meanings.

Definition 8 (cross-transaction frequent closed pageviews set): For each two extended intra-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets, TidSet(FCPSl( 1))={ ml, m2,. . .,mk) and TidSet(FCPS2(i))={nl,n2,. . .,n1}(2410), if the total elements number of their TidSet intersection III= ITidSet(FCPS1( 1))nTidSet(FCPS2(i))Ilnxminsupp, we call CFpS=FCPSI( l)FCPS*(i) is frequent. If CIVS also satisfies the definition 5,  it is a cross-transaction frequent closed pageviews set.

According the above definition, we have the following algorithm to mining cross-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets.

Algorithm 2: Mining-CFCPS m: CFT(FCPS(sub-Win), TidSet):which describes as above OutDut: CFCPS(CFPS, TidSet): a queue of cross-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets Method: CFCPS=@ /*each FCPS always appears in the first sub-window*/ for each (FcPS(l),TidSet)~ CFT CFPS = (FCPS(I),TidSet) add CFPS to CFCPS .......................................................................

end for /*find CFPS sub-window by sub-window */ for u=2 to w for each CFPSE CFCPS for each (X(u), TidSet) E CFT I = CFPS.TidSet rl X(u).TidSet i f  IIlLnxminsupp end if add CFPS U X(u) to the tail of CFCPS end for end for end for /*remove that original FCPS(1) in CFCPS*/ for each CFPSE CFCPS    ifall items? CFPS are in the same sub-window end i f remove CFPS from CFCPS end for 3.3. Patterns Generation To generate patterns, for every CFCPS in the results of Step 3 above, we find all non empty subsets of CFCPS. For every such subset SE CFCPS, we output a rule of the form s * (CFCPS-s), if a=o(CFCPS)/o(s)&gt;minconJ AgrawalL4] shows that if s*(CFCPS-s) does not hold, neither does s 3 (CFCPS- S ) for any T c s .  We use the algorithm in reference [4] to complete this phase.

- 4. Experimental Example In Section 3, we give the framework to mining cross-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets. In the three phases of this framework, Phase 1 and Phase 3 are traditional matured Web mining techniques. Now, we 26-29 August 2004 present an experimental example to illustrate the main idea and processes of Phase 2. Suppose the minimum support minsupp threshold is specified as 0.4 and minco$is 0.6. Let us take the user transactions database segment given in Figure 2 as an example. 1 T; I Pageviews I Sliding Winsow W I I I T ,  I 1- I .I '; iI I I J --e Figure 2. The transactions database with sliding window The above user transactions database includes 5 useful transactions (we take the transaction which don't contain the items studies as null) and a sliding window with b=4.

W must start from a transaction which contains at least one pageview. t3=(c,d,e) is W2 when W starts its moving and becomes W1 along with the next movement of W. To utilize  the algorithm CHARM successfully, we change the format of transaction data from horizontal to vertical. CHARM results in the following intra-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets: Table 1. The results of Step 1 I support Table 2. The results of Step 2 By calculate the length of the intersection of two FCPS in different sub-window, which described in Algorithm 2, we can find cross-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets. To illustrate the process of it, we keep our eyes on the changing of the elements in the queue of CFCPS.

@ a wl Add thenew CFPS to the tail of queue a I c ( l )  I 4l)l e(l)l ml)I bfl)e(2)( c(lMW3) 1 a ii;i 1 ~ ~ ( 2 ) l  c ( l ) m 3 )  I ~ ( 1 ~ 4 )  I remove the original FCPS(1) in the queue bf(lM2) dl)&amp;-M3) b f l M 4 ) Figure 3. The process of Step 3 Thus, we got the final cross-transaction frequent closed pageviews sets bf(I)e(2), bf(l)a(rlf and c(l)bfh(3).

Web association patterns bf(1) e(2), c(1) bfh(3) and bRl) 4 4 )  have 66.7%, 100% and 66.7% respectively.

We apply Algorithm 1 to the data above, all TidSets of the intra- transaction frequent closed pageviews sets are extended. Each unreasonable and irrelevant TID has been eliminated: 5. Conclusions As the number of Web users grows, Web usage patkerns which describe the hidden association information    patkerns which describe the hidden association information of users' browsing interest has attracted more and more attention of researchers. Knowledge derived from the Web association patterns can be used to improve the 26-29 August 2004 organization of Web sites, efficient personality and References recommendation systems, and collecting business intelligence about the behavior of Web users, etc. In this paper, we provide a new view of Web association pattems by extending the scope of it. The related definitions of properties are given and an efficient mining approach for this new form association rules is present in detail.

Acknowledgements [l] This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (60205007) , Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (001264,03 1558), Research Foundation of Science and Technology Plan Project in Guangdong Province (2003C50118) and Research Foundation of State Key Laboratory for L41 . Novel Software Technology at Nanjing University.

Anthony K.H. Tung, Hongjun Lu, Jiawei Hq, and Ling Feng, ?Efficient Mining of Intertransaction and Data Engineering, Vol. 15, No.1, JanuaryFebruary 2003, pp. 43-56.

R.. Cooley, B. Mobasher, and J. Srivastava. ?Data preparation for mining world wide web browsing pattems.? Joumal of Knowledge and Information Systems, Vol. 1, No.

l., February 1999. pp 5-32  Zaki,MJ, Hsiao CJ. ?CHARM: An efficient algorithm for closed itemset mining.? In: Grossman R, et al. eds.

Proc. of the 2nd SIAM Int?l. Conf. on Data Mining.

Arlington: SIAM, 2002. pp 12-28.

Agrawal R, Srikant R. ?Fast algorithms for mining association rules.? In: Beeri C, et al, eds. Roc. of the 20th Int?l. Conf. on Very Large Databases. Santiago: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1994. pp 487-499.

