<html><head></head><body><pre style="word-wrap: break-word; white-space: pre-wrap;">2004 IEEE  lntemational Conference on Systems, Man and Cybemetics

Abstract - Rapid growth of Zntemet access from mobile users put much emphasis on location specific informatian.

Some of researchers fried to provide prampt information through the tour guide access lag, However, evaluating ubiquitous computing systems and their impact on a target population is d@cuIt and costly because it requires analyzing real users in a real context. In this paper, we propose a guide system that combines the positioning technique and location-awareness service to provide the surrounding information far users. The guide system not only accepts the user?s search query to find the target but also receives the informatian from other users who took notes during the tour guide. That is, users can donnload the related notes as references that were previously recorded hy other users. Under such a design concept the cantents of our guide system will keep on improving such that an interactive leaming environment will be gradually established. Our purpose is thus to develop a Museum ?s service tour guide system and test its effectiveness in a real-world scenario, at reasonable cosis, using available fechnologv. The experimental results show ihat our proposed model is not only particularly suitable to scenic introductions in the museums, hut also can he easily extended to outdoor teaching for students.

Keywords: Guide System, Location-aware, Tablet PC, Data Mining, Context-aware.

I Introduction One of the fundamental attributes of location-aware systems [I], [2] is that they react not only to the users? input but also contextual events from the users? environments. For instance, the location-aware system utilizes location in order to tailor the information presented to the user [3]. The designers need to carefully balance the way in which the guide system reacts to environmental triggers. The location-aware visitor guides have two key altemative approaches that could be adopted when the user change his or her location, which are the passive mode and the active mode. The passive mode would have to wait for the user to pull the location-aware content. The implication with this approach is that the system would leave the currently displayed content unchanged despite the fact that the content may have Wei-Po Chuang Department of Computer Science and Engineering Tatung University Taipei, Taiwan 10451 R.O.C.

webber@fuzzy.cse.ttu.edu.tw become inconsistent with the user?s current location. On the contrary, the active mode is able to push the location- aware content to the user in order to reflect his or her new location.

In the traditional guide systems, users usually rely on narrators to learn the related information. However, sometimes users do not know the correct name or only remember part of the characteristics of the object.

Therefore, relying on narrators or the traditional guide mode is not suitable for today?s information guide systems.

Some visitors may find it difficult to understand what the narrator has explained about the contents of an exhibit because they cannot stand close enough to look at the exhibit. Furthermore, if a visitor wants to know more information about certain exhibits, how and where to fmd    information about certain exhibits, how and where to fmd the information in the museum is also a big question.

Therefore, how to design a simple, flexible, and easy to use system for museum?s guide is the target of our research.

In this paper, we utilize the association rules mining to form the infrastructure of our guide system. The guide system will record all the tour behaviors of users in the system log files such that the back-end system can use these log files to analyze the popular exhibits in the museum. Based on the mining results, the guide system can thus show related exhibits immediately via using the active model and location-aware service while users are touring in the museum.

2 The Purpose of the Proposed System The original guide system only considered one approach for managing the presentation of context-aware information. More specifically, this approach was ostensibly based on information pull whereby the onus would be on the user to request the presentation of context-aware information by, for instance, tapping on the floor and area in the museum [4]. The push-based approach was adopted for two of reasons. First, we cannot use GPS to position the users? current location in the indoor environments. Secondly, this approach seems to match the kind of interaction that takes place when using a guidebook for the task of exploring and learning about a museum.

0-7803-8566-7/04/$20.00 Q 2004 IEEE 2646 The overall architecture of the proposed system is shown in Fig. 1. The back-end guide mechanism of the Tablet PC is the intelligent retrieval model. By this mechanism, users can select either the active mode or the passive mode to retrieve information through the Tablet PC. The Tablet PC has a large memory and a big display screen. It differs from the general handheld devices like PDAs or Smart Phones. Therefore, we can store all kinds of information about the museum in the Tablet PC and the server such that end users can query information in a short period of time. Administrators can also maintain or add information in the server side easily. When the guide system is started by users, it will automatically check the database consistency between the client and the server and then download the new information through the wireless network to the Tablet PC. Since our back-end database can store the notes that a user recorded during the tour in the museum, the guide system provides an upload function to transmit the notes to the remote server so that other users can share them. Afterward the system administrator can judge the correctness of uploaded data and decide whether to update the database or not. Such that, our system provides the mutual interaction that allows users to download the interesting images from the remote server as well as to upload information to the remote server to improve the contents of database. Performing such interactive leaming function is another important issue of OUT system.

Fig. 1. The guide system architecture.

3 System Functionalities The guide system provides an electronic handheld  guide that visitors to Taipei Fine Arts Museum can use to access information about the exhibition, create tailored tours of the museum, and access interactive services. The system is run on a Tablet PC equipped with 802.11 wireless networking capabilities.

We performed association rule mining and location- service through the tour guide access log. The association rule is one of the commonly considered techniques in data mining and is usually used in the basket data [SI. In order to provide the users personalized services at the back-end system, we use the data mining algorithm to fmd the large    system, we use the data mining algorithm to fmd the large itemset. From the large itemset we can fmd the association rules to recommend the exhibits [6].  The guide end-user system provides several capabilities: J J J J Que, information. Users can use the guide system to retrieve information and get their current location.

Recommendafion. The guide system adopted association rule mining on the relative exhibits? data so that users can easily to find the exhibit that they would l i e  to know.

Notes Anyfime. We provided the learning and information exchange function that users can write down their current environments, or the interesthg exhibits.

Informotion Shoring. With this function, the guide system can upload the user?s notes or download others? notes during the tour.

3.1 Information model The guide system relies on a geographic model that includes the geographic data such as museum?s infrastructure and an associated set of exhibition information about the museum. Users are required to select the floor and the area to be visited in the museum while using the guide system. The users can compare the area map of the guide system and the physical locations that can explicitly be realized from where they are. The area map also provides the locations of the infrastructure in this floor so that users can fmd the elevator, public telephone, emergency exit or toilet easily. In fact, we only allow users guided via a pull-based approach in the museum because we cannot use GPS to position the users? current locations in the indoor environments. And that is the reason why the tour guide system cannot provide the location information automatically and immediately.

3.2 User Interface The guide?s main task is to assist the users exploring the museum space and push the related information. Using pull-based approach, users have to select the floor and the area in the museum and then the system will display the detailed map of the items they choose, which is shown as Fig. 2. When the users click the exhibit?s reduced picture, the system will switch to the user guide screen and present the information about the selected exhibit.

Fig. 2.  The guide system of exhibition?s topic The information may include the exhibit?s image, the introduction of the author, the recommended exhibits, etc.

The functions of the guide for exhihits are on the left hand side of the screen as shown in Fig. 3. On the center of the screen, there are the innoductions of the exhibit and the author?s information described in text. Users can get the detailed description of the exhibit and view the image by pressing the button ?Exhibit Information?. The right hand side of the screen shows three exhibits? pictures related to the main exhibit that the user has selected. Those recommended exhibits are found by using the association rule mining technology. Moreover, the system will display the relationship and the support value under each recommended exhibit?s picture. The user can also click the recommended exhibit?s picture to further explore the contents.

Fig. 3. The guide system of exhibition?s information 3.3 Notes Anytime In addition to the basic functions mentioned above, our guide system also provides the learning and information exchange function as shown in Fig. 4. When the users have special ideas or impressions for any exhibit, they can    have special ideas or impressions for any exhibit, they can use the designed notes function and draw the ideas or comments on the canvas. This function is different from the traditional handheld devices. Users need not to input the text through keyboard. Instead, a writing panel of the Tablet PC can help record or draw down all the messages easily. Besides, we can press the button ?Load Exhibit? to download the exhibit?s picture into the canvas and use the buttons ?Label,? ?Copy,? and ?Paste? to assist the users to reserve part of the picture. The notes can he saved as a picture in the P E G  format. When a user fmishes hisher guiding, he/she can send the notes through wireless network using the e-mail function that embedded in the system.

Fig. 4. The reduced picture of exhibition 3.4 Information Sharing The guide system also provides the upload and the download functions to handle notes as shown in Fig. 5. If a user wants to share hisher plentiful notes with other users, heishe can upload the notes through wireless network to the back-end server. Admiiistratorsiexperts will check the notes that have been uploaded from the users. If the contents are valuable for leaming during the guide, administratorsiexperts can decide to accept them and save them into the database. The stored notes will in turn be used for other users during the next guiding. And the system will then display those notes with the closest relevancy and therefore he able to facilitate the navigating activities. The displays will be listed based on the frequency of past viewing records. By this way, we can ensure the users to view their favorite exhibits in the time as shortest as possible. The scenario of the favorite function is shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 5.  The functions of notes module.

Fig. 6. The favorite function of the guide system 3.5 Data Mining In the transaction database of a large retail organization, for example, association rule mining may find an association rule like: If a customer buys A and B then there is a 90% chance that be/she buys C as well. The value 90% is called the confidence of the rule. Another important parameter is the support of an itemset, such as {A,B,C) here, which is defined as the percentage of all the transactions that contain this itemset.

Take the exhibition area 1A of the first floor for example. We can see the contents of database on the left hand side of the screen as shown in Fig. 7. The browsing data are listed as a column of itemset, which are recorded by the users while browsing the tour guide. The browsing  number represents the number of exhibits being browsed in the database. The column displays the process for each large itemset of the mining task. Then we can set the thresholds of the min i?  support and the minimum confidence to create the association rules through data mining. Finally, the system can use the mining results to recommend the related exhibits on the front-end interface of the tour guide system.

Fig. 7. The maintenance function of data mining 4 Evaluation and Analysis In general, observing the users? behaviors could be of great help in designing a well-defined guide system. The followings are often to be considered J Free exploration of the whole space. Users may wander in the areas of exhibits, pictures, descriptions, and so on.

Reflection. The system will reflect on the activities that users performed.

4.1 Questionnaires We used questionnaires to perform a qualitative analysis for the degrees of user acceptance and satisfaction in    for the degrees of user acceptance and satisfaction in authentic use of the system. To evaluate the user interface, two kinds of questionnaires were used a complete version with 15 questions and a short version with 5 questions.

We also held an interview to investigate the users? reactions with the guide system. After recording the users? comments, we encourage them to ?think and loud.? The main goal here is to qualitatively analyze the users? acceptance in the authentic use, verify the system framework, and then gather information for hture design.

Both the complete version and the short version of questionnaires contain multiple choices, fill-in answers, and a free comment section. At the end of exhibition, we ask users to fill ant the questionnaires when they retun the tour guide systems. Users can choose either the complete questionnaires, which typically take 5 minutes each, or the short ones if they have less time. We analyze the questionnaires from 60 respondents (30 short ones and 30 complete ones).

J 4.2 User feedback Results of short version. The short version of questionnaires focuses on the investigation of pleasure and usability. The survey results show that the following characteristics are keys to the users with favorable assessments: 1. Usefulness - 86 percentage of users report the guide system is usable, and Enjoyability - 84 percentage of users enjoy in using it.

Both - For 70% of users, the guide system was both enjoyable and useful.

The enjoyment was related to the user?s age. The user with age between 18 and 24 enjoyed the tool most.

We also found no correlation between enjoyment and occupation. The free comment section offers an interesting insight into the system, revealing what users perceived as the system?s shortcomings: 30% of respondents said that they would prefer a more informative guide system. This highlights the need for layering the available information based on user preferences and needs. What most users caring about all the usability problems were due to the fact that the Tablet PC is too heavy to carry all the time and some users  worried that the battery would lose power before the end of exhibition.

Results of complete version. As shown in Table 1, the complete version of questionnaires covered the sense of ease to use, enjoyment, general usefulness, and value.

2.

3.

Table 1. The comolete version auestionnaires ~ 1, 2.

3.

What was your motivation for using the guide?

How easy is this guide system to use?

Could you operate the system by yourself?

4.

5 .

6.

IHow long did you use the guide?

Illow enjoyable is the guide to USC?

11s this system useful for leaming in the exhibition?!

17. lDid the guide distract your visit?

~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~ ~ ~~ ~~~ ~~ 8.

9.

]Did you get bored using the guide?

]Did you get bored using the guide?

11s the recommendation function useful in guiding?

Among the answers to the sense of easy to use, 6% said that the system was very simple to use, 67% said that it was simple, 24% said that it can not be employed immediately, and 3% said that it was difficult to use. In practical observation, most users can use the guide system without any help. For enjoyment, 17% said that it was high, 33% said that it was sufficient, 40% said that it was average, and 10% of respondents found no enjoyment at all. Most respondents (74%) found the guide system useful, while 26% did not.

People might be afraid that users are easy to be distracted while using such tools for guiding in the museum or exhibition. However, in our shldy this was true for only 21% of users. Moreover, 7% of users even suggested that the guide?s image contents should be magnified and more video and audio informatian should be added to the system. Our analysis also found some interesting relationships between some of the survey?s items in the complete version. For example, enjoyment is strongly correlated with usefulness, highlighting the users? interests to a visit with both education and entertainment.

Enjoyment is also related to the quality of contents and technology. This suggests the importance of conveying knowledge with taste and an understanding of human psychology when developing the mobile guide system.

Besides, we provided the interesting functions in our tour guide system. For the recommendation function, 67% said it was useful in guiding. For the notes function, 60% said it was helpful for learning during the guiding. And 70% users said the package function was useful because they can keep their notes without any difficulty. In our study, most users explore the contents based on their own interests. Therefore, they would enjoy all these functions even when they use the guide system for the first time.

4.3 The experiment of acquisition One of the goals in our analysis was to evaluate how the use of such a guide system impacts the users? behaviors.

We found the following interesting facts:  (I)  Audio and video information is less invasive, so users enjoy using them more than images and texts.

(2) In general, few users read texts on the stationary panel, and those who try to read them only fmish in part.

(3) Some users are lazy to input the information of current location. They recommend adding the indoor positioning technology in the guide system.

All of the observations and experiences here can be of great help for extending the guide system to the museums and exhibitions. Our system might, of course, provide more contents and the interaction modalities, along with intelligent decision support and location-aware services in the future.

5 Conclusion The tour guide system with location-based service will trigger the push of information and therefore raise some interesting issues. Because users can soon get the information pushed from the system automatically they will find many attractive characteristics in the system.

Our system provides unique insight into the challenges faced by the developers of location-based applications. Focusing our research on a tour guide system has helped us gain practical experience in how to constmct the location-based applications. The iterative information construction can motivate users to construct the information that they are interested in and record the information for future reuse. Besides, since there are many interesting and useful functions in our teaming and guide system, users can download the extra information from the back-end database and thus learn something from the information easily.

information easily.

We try to design a unified application interface for the need of different kinds of application platforms.

Moreover, by integrating the cellular location-awareness techniques, the system will be more attractive than the traditional one with only fixed position support. We will also build our system on the PDAs in the next version.

Though the PDAs do not have big screen, large memory and storage, and powerful computing ability, most users still like the guide system rnnning on them because they are light and handy. On the other hand, we will look for other domains to further employ our learning and guide system for indoor or outdoor teaching.

