<html><head></head><body><pre style="word-wrap: break-word; white-space: pre-wrap;">Proceedings  of 2005 International Symposium on Electrical Insulating

ABSTRACT Nano-interfacial polarization on drain and source electrodes directly influences on the FET performance, because carrier injection from electrodes rules the camer transport of organic FETs. To clarify the details, the effect of Wiozone treatment of source and drain electrodes was examined. Significant change of the FET threshold voltage was confirmed in association with the channel formation process that can be explained assuming the carrier injection from electrodes. Finally Maxwell -Wagner model is used to explain the FET characteristics.

1. Introduction Organic FET has attracted much interest in electronics since the discovery of high-mobility organic materials. Pentacene is one of the most possible candidates that can be employed in organic FETs, and mobilities exceeding 1 cmZNs have been reported [l]. However the complexities at the metal-organic materials and ambiguities of organic semiconductor physics lead us to a difficulty in understanding the FET device operation, though carrier transport process and carrier injection process are two main factors. By adjusting effective work-function of electrodes to so-called Fermi level of organic films, the camer injection and contact reistance will be controlled [2]. Thus, it is important to understand the electrostatic phenomena at the interface between metallorganic materials in association with the carrier injection process. And this will be he lp l l  for a f d l  understanding of the FET device operation mechanism, including channel formation process, etc.

The study of electrostatic interfacial phenomena has been a continuous research topic since the discovery of contact electrification [3,4]. Applying the contact-charge exchange experiments to thick polymer films, it has been revealed that excess charges are injected from a metal into a film, and a space charge layer of p m  thichess is formed at the interface. On the other hand, with Kelvin probe surface potential measurement, we have focused our research on the space charge problem at the nanometer-thick organic fildmetal interfaces such as polyimide (PI)/metal, polyethylene (FE)/metal, phthalocyanine (Pc)/metal, etc.[5,6,7]. As a r e d ,  it has been reveated that excess electrons or holes are injected from metal electrode into insulating PI and PE films within the region of several nanometers from the metal-film interface.

Similarly, the injection of excess electrons within the region of 20 nm from the fildmetal interface has been confirmed for semiconductor Pc films. Interestingly, the charge injection was found to be a result of the alignment between Fermi-level of metal and the surface Fermi-level of organic material.

In our previous study [8,9], we revealed that the work function of the Au surface changes by the Wiozone treatment of the Au surface. Taking into  account this, the effect of UViozone treatment of source and drain electrodes onto our pentacene FET characteristics has been investigated with relevance to the carrier injection from electrodes.

2. Experiment Pentacene was purchased from Wako pure chemical    Pentacene was purchased from Wako pure chemical CoLtd., and used as received. The pentacene was vacuum deposited at a process pressure less than 2 X Torr onto pre-patterned bottom contact FET substrate with interdigited Au electrodes that was fabricated on a 500 nm thickness silicon dioxide (SOz) layer of highly-doped Si substrate. The deposition rate was about 3 d m i n ,  and the thickness of the pentacene layer was 100 nm. Prior to the evaporation of pentacene, some FET substrates were exposed to Uvlozone for 30 min. The work-function of Au was 5.2 eV with ozone treatment, whereas it was 4.6 eV without ozone-treatment [8,9]. Channel length and width of the prepared FET were 50 ,um and 11 cm, respectively.

FET characteristics were examined in-situ during the deposition of pentacene in a vacuum chamber without breaking vacuum. For the C-V measurement, source and drain electrode was connected, and then capacitance between source-drain and gate was measured using an LCR meter. External bias was applied to the source-drain electrode with reference to the gate electrode.

3. Results and Discussion Figure 1 shows the typical Id-Vd characteristics of a pentacene FET using untreated substrate with a thickness of pentacene layer was about 100 nm. This FET shows p-channel enhancement-type behavior, but no field-effect at low gate voltage region less than -30

V. On the other hand, significant drain current was observed at zero gate bias for the FET using UViozone treated substrate, where positive gate bias actually works to suppress drain current in a manner like a - 665 - depletion-type FET (not shown here).

I I t *h8 -4l) -3) 61 (&amp;&amp;&amp;Is: i'$ I i') Figure 1. The Id-Vd characteristics of a pentacene FET using untreated substrate.

Figure 2 shows the JId-Vg characteristics of these FETs, where threshold voltage, Vth, decreases with UV/ozone treatment. That is, threshold voltages for the UViozone-treated and untreated sample were about 41 V and -22 V, respectively. The mobilities of ozone-treated and untreated FETs were calculated to 2 X l o 3  and 2 X lo-' cm2Ns, respectively. The mobilities were small in comparison with typical values reported by other researchers. This is mainly due to the FET structure and the morphology of deposited pentacene. From microscopic observation, our samples were found to be composed of a rich of small grains with a grain size less than 0.5 ,LL m, leading to lower mobility. Of course, we suppose there are other factors resulting the lower mobilities, such as impurity, contact, etc.

vp ivj Figure 2. The transfer characteristics-( a d  - Vg ) of these FETs.

According to the Kelvin probe surface potential measurement, +340 mV and -260 mV of the surface potential was observed for the 60-nm thickness pentacene deposited on ozone-treated and the untreated Au surfaces, respectively. In the same way, the establishment of such surface potential was observed for pentacene with a thickness over 60 nm. The surface potential comes from the energy difference between the work function of the metal and the "surface Fermi level" of the organic materials. Thus, the surface potential difference in pentacene films deposited on the surface of UV-treated and untreated Au surfaces is in good agreement with the result    Au surfaces is in good agreement with the result estimated from photoelectron spectroscopy measurement. The surface potential monotonously increases up to a film thickness of about 60 nm and then saturates, in a similar manner as observed for phthalocyanine, etc. This implies that the exchange of charges between organic materials and metal is confined within the nanometer interfacial region.

Solving the Poisson equation concerning interface space charge, we estimate that the amount of charges transferred fromito metal were about of 4.5 N O 3  C/m3 and -3.0 X lo3 C/m3 for pentacene deposited on UViozone-treated and untreated Au, respectively. This indicates that the holes are accumulated around the source and drain electrodes of WViozone treated substrate, whereas not around the electrodes of untreated ones. Since the carrier of pentacene FET is hole, holes accumulated around the source-drain electrode can easily contribute to the formation of channel. Thus, the threshold voltage decreases with a UViozone treatment.

m Figure 3: The C-V characteristics of a pentacene FET using (a) ozone-treated and (b) untreated substrate.

Figure 3 shows the C-V characteristics of a pentacene FET using ozone-treated (MI-square) and untreated substrate (open-square). Measurement frequency of the ozone-treated and untreated samples were 43 Hz and 1 kHz, respectively. Here the capacitance between source-drain and gate electrode - 666 - was measured The C-V characteristics of the substrate with no pentacene layer (blank substrate) were also measured before the deposition. There was no dependence on the bias voltage in the C-V characteristics. The geometrical capacitance of this electrode configuration was estimated as 5.7 nF, whereas the measured capacitance of the blank substrate was about 5.2 nF. Taking into account this difference, the estimated capacitance formed between channel area and gate electrode is calculated as about 1.43 nF. As shown in Fig. 3, capacitance increased with the negative bias voltage. In this measurement, source and drain electrodes were shorted and gate bias Vg was applied with reference to the source voltage Vs (=Vd).  For the top-contact FET, the C-V characteristics can be discussed based on a model of metal-insulator -semiconductor (MIS) capacitor. On the other hand, according to our results, it is reasonable to consider that the channel area contributes to the capacitance increase for bottom-contact FET structure. Taking into account the p-type behavior of pentacene FETs, holes are injected from source and drain electrode into channel region under the condition of Vg &lt;. 0.

Interestingly, only a small change was observed for untreated FET, whereas drastic change was observed for UV/ozone treated FET. These behaviors qualitatively coincide with the FET characteristics, i.e., no field-effect at low gate voltage region less than -30 V, because the capacitance increase corresponds to the accumulation of carriers at the interfacial region of pentacene. According to the experimental limitation of our system, i.e., bias voltage for the C-V measurement can be changed between -40 V and 40 V, only a small change was observed for untreated FET. To understand the increase of the capacitance and the formation of channel due to bias voltage, Maxwell-Wagner model can be employed coupling with the equivalent circuit model, where we need to consider the presence of contact resistance, besides the accumulated charges based on a Maxwell-Wagner model f9]. The equivalent circuit model tells us that the cut-off frequency is    circuit model tells us that the cut-off frequency is mainly dependent on the time constants defined as CliG1 and Cl/CO, where G1 and GO is the channel bulk conductance and interfacial electrode conductance, and C1 is the capacitance between source-drain electrode and channel. Taking into these time constants, we could reasonably explain the frequency dependence of the C-V characteristics, together with the FET device operation [9].  The detailed analysis proceeds and will be reported in near future.

4. Conclusion The FET characteristics of the bottom contact pentacene FET are discussed based OR a camer accumulation around the electrode in the context o f  the UViozone treatment of the substrate. In addition, to investigate the channel formation process of this FET, capacitance-voltage (C-V) characteristics of this FET was investigated. Significant change of the threshold voltage, i.e., the decrease of the Vth, by a UV/ozone treatment was observed and can be reasonably assigned to accumulated charges around source-drain electrode. Finally, it was suggested that these I-V characteristics were successfully explained based on a model by Maxwell-Wagner, taking into account the contact resistance related to injection and accumulated charge.

