<html><head></head><body><pre style="word-wrap: break-word; white-space: pre-wrap;">2004 3"

Abstract: Tracking initiation and data association are key techniques of multi-tag&amp; passive tracking by single observa. A new adaptive passive tracking initiatim algorithm based on information fusion is proposed in this papa. First, according to mutliple fours of the trtrgeL mullidimensional dynamicalty variable tracking gate is built for adaptive dcttaicm. Further. the , Sequential Probability Ratio Test (SPRT) rule is used to confirm the track. And also a new data association algorithm based on i d m a t i o n  fusion is proposed.

Based on the informaticn fusion of muIlipIc featurcs of a single valid obsavation the decision of rynlhetic data association of all the tag&amp; is made.

With the help of c o m p u ~ r  simulations, the tracking initiation algorithm is proven to bc c m c t  and d d v e ,  and the data association algorithm is provm to be supaior to h e  NN method.

Key words: Passive tracking Information fusion. Tracking initiation. Data association 1 Introduction Effobrts have been put on passive location for fixed targets by single moving observer and for manewe@ ones by multi-observer. However, passive location for maneuvering targets by single k e d  observer have been rarely studied. Since passive location doesn't radiate signals, and location by single observer needs no data communication, passive location for manewering brgets by single fixed observer is more concealed, more flexible and more effective than active location and passive location by muIti-observer. Obviously, it is significant of location anti tracking maneuvering targets by single fixed observer.

Tracking initiation is a decision-making method for registerkg records of new targets. It mainly consists of the forming of assumed hacks, the initiation of tracks and the confirmation of tracks. Generally, the observation sets, which are irrelative with known tracks, are used to form new assumed tracks, and then the assumed backs are to be initiated When new assumed tracks are formed., the real target tracks should be separated tiom false alarms by track confirmation logic. Usually, the track% initiation methods, including Sequential Probability Ratio Test (SPRT) method and the Bayes rule tracks cofirination method, are used in active location system. The common features of these methods are that the tracking initiation is based on the state information of targets, such as the position, velocity, etc. But for passive location system of single observer, the position and velocity cannot be obtained with only one observation during the trackmg initiation process. So the above-mentioned methods cannot be mechanically applied A new adaptwe passive tacking initiation algorilhm based on information is proposed in this paper. First, accordmg to multiple features of the target such as DOA, RF, the Pulse Width (PW) and the Interpulse Character (LC), multidimensional dynamically variable tracking gate is built.

According to the difference of backing initiation time and measurement data, the size and form of the multidimensional backing gate is changed for adaptive detection Further, the SPRT rule is used to conhm the tracks.

Data fusion is the process to compare measurement data with known target tracks, and then determine the correct pmership of measurements and tracks, or build new tracks. The general data association methods, includmg Nearest Neighbor (NN) method and Probabilistic Data Association (PDA) method, only use the data that is directly correlative with the target state such as DOA and TOA in fact, sensors can obtain more information of target featmes that is often ignored in conventional data association  methods. A new data association algorithm, which is based on fuzzy information fusion of multi-feature and multi-target, is proposed in t h ~ s  paper. In h s  algorithm, measurement data of multi-feature of multi-target is fully used. First of all, based on the proposed models of association factors, the fuzzy association degree of all the valid observations within a single tracking gate    degree of all the valid observations within a single tracking gate is calculated with f k z y  information fmion Further, the fuzzy association degree of all the targets is calculated with fuzzy synthetic informahon fusion At last, the decision of data association is ma&amp;.

2 Adaptive Passive Tracking Initiation Adaptive passive tracking initiation algorithm has followkg two steps, tracking initiation detection and track confirmation 2.1 Detection with mulhdimensional adaptive backing gate The key techruques of backing initiation detection consist of dynamical design of multidimensional variable tracking gats and adaptive tracking initiation detection. The principle is described as :bllou.s.

(1) R-piitration oisssumsd tracks Th? nieasureInsnt, which is got In the first observation or is not correladre with all the k n o w  tracks, will be registered as an asjumzd track, if h c  features of the measurement satisfy the reslncdons.

(2) Initiation of assmsd track Initiation of a new assumed track is to record the first measuring s ta t ,  including parameters related to target space state (azimuth U ,  elevation p )  and other features (RF, PW, IC).

~ , [ a ( i ) . ~ ( i ) . f ( i ) , ~ ~ ( i ) , 1 ~ ( 1 ) 1  &amp;notes the first point ofthe track.

(3) Design for the multidimensional tracking gate T h e  is only a single mcasmement, so the position and velocity of the assumed target, the types and changing law of the features c m o t  be determined. Then we build multidmensional tracking gate based on the most pessimistic rule.

For example, the ru le  of the DOA rrackig gate is designed its [a - a(l)]? +- [p-  p(1)]? I V-7? /R,, (1) wher:! v-is the largest possible velocity of targets, T is the pried of samples, Rmn is the smallest location distance.

Since the type of RF cannot be determined, whch may be fiequcncy fixed (FIX), eequency &amp;verity (FD), and frequency agle [FA), so the hquency tracking gate rule is designed as i f - fO&gt; I5 k, f ( l )  (2) where k, is the threshold coefficient.

We set IC=] if there is interpulse character, or else IC+.

Generally, the existence of interpulse character is continuous, so the interpulse character aacking gate d e  is designed as IC XOR IC(1) = 0 (3) (4) Update the tracking gate adaptively The character oftarget movements, the types and changing law of the features can be roughly judged based on cumulative observations. Then the next predicted track point P ( k  + ~ i k ) , including &amp; @ + i l k )  , b ( k + l / k )  , j ( k + l / k )  Can be calculated. And the prediction is set as the center of next tmcking gate, and the multidimensional traclang gate is updated adaptively based on cumulative feature information.

Here, the elliptical kacking gate of the DOA is used, the rule is [CZ- - (k+ l lk )32+[p -B(k+I lk ) ] ,  l y  (4) where y is the radius of tracking gate.

X s  for frequency, if the difference of the measurement data is very small, the type of W might be frequency fixed, and then the tracking gate rule is l f -? (k+1~k l l I  f, (5) wh:re f, is the frequency resolution If the type of RF is FA, the Racking gate rule is  I .f - % 15 k , f ,  (6) Generally, k2 is about 5 4  5%,&amp; is the central frequency.

Ifthe type of RF is FD, (for example, the frequencies arefi and &amp; of 2 dwersiry), then the ftequency tracking gate rule is I f  - f, 1s f, OR I f  - f2 Is f, (7) As for PW, the type may be PW fixed (PWFIX) and PW selectable (PWSEL). The PW trackmg gate rules are similar to the frequency ones.

The IC tracking gate rule is still expressed as (3).

(5)  Detection Talang prediction point &amp;k + 1 / k )  as the center, signal    Talang prediction point &amp;k + 1 / k )  as the center, signal detection is made according to the adaptive multidimensional tracking gate rule. During the X+ I th sampling, if there is only one valid observation in the trackmg gate, it will be regarded as  the next point &amp;k + 1) of assumed track. If there are multiple valid observations in the tracking gate, F(k + 1) will be determined with NN method If there is no valid observation, taking &amp;k+ I l k )  as the center, &amp;k+ 1) will be determined by extrapolation.

After multi-detection, track confirmation or track deletion will be done with SPRT rules.

2.2 SPRT track confirmation Suppose that there are valid observations in the tracking gates m times of the past k times samphg ( k 2 m ) .  The SPRT track confirmation d e  is described as below.

Firstly, we make two assumptions H,(observation is fiom false a l a r m  or clutters) and H, (observation is kom target).

Pit, are calculated as Secondly, the likelihood functions of each assumption, P, and H, : Po, = PF(1 - P,)?-? H ,  : qk = PD? (1 - PJ-? (8) where Po is probability of detection andP, is prohbgity of false alarm.

The likelihood ratio function is defined as U, = P,, / Pok .

Constant C, and Clare two different thresholds. At last, the decision is made according to the following SPRT rule.

U, 5 c, 1 C, &lt; U, &lt; C, , H ,  accepted go on detecting U, 2 c,, HI accepted (9) 3 Data Association 3.1 MultCfeature information fusion Similar to the basic probalnlity assignment function of D-S evidence theory, we put forward the conception ofthe association degree, which refers to the association extent between the target and the valid observation inside the tracking gate based on the features of the target. The information fusion of multiple features is to decide the association extent between the target and the valid observation according to the association degree of multiple features.

(1) The association degree based on the state measurements Suppose that the state measurement is Z(k) of the kth sampling, the statistical distance between the valid state measurement and the prediction of all the valid observations is expressed as Dl(k), D,(k), and D&amp;). The statistical distance of the state measurement ofthe ith valid observation is D:(k) = vf(k)S,-] (k)v, (k) (1 0) where v , ( &amp; )  = Z,(k) - f ( k f k  - 1) is the innovation vector, SXk) is the covariance matrix of the innovation vector.

The association degee based on the target sbte measurement is written as m,, which expresses the inhence of the statistical distance of the state measurement on the association extent, and is &amp;fined as  where D, is the abbreviation of Dkk). Obviously, m, (i) E (Ql] .

The smaller R, is, the bigger m,( i )  is, and the higher the association extent is.

(2) The association degree based on the frequency Suppose that the 6equency corresponding to all the valid observation isfi(k),h(k), U--&amp;@) of the Mh samplmg, flk- 1) is the eequency of the target in the current tmcking gate of the k-lth sampling. The observation frequency difference is The association degree based on the frequency is written as m I wluch expresses the influence of the frequency observation difference on the association extent. The hfimtion of the frequency association factor is hfferent is different while the target RF type is different A ! @ &gt;  = Lf;(k) - f ( k  - 91 ? If the target is frequency ked ,  the m,- of the ith .valid observation is dehed  as    observation is dehed  as If the target is the eequency agle, the mfoF the ith valid observation is defined as where&amp; is the frequency agile range. Obviously, m,(i)  E (0,1], the bigger nz,(i) is, the hgher the association extent is (3) The association degree based onPW The association degree based on PW is written a5 mpru. which expresses the influence of NV observation difference on the association extent. for the target is of different PFY type , the definition of mpwk different. And mplp ( i )  E (O,l], the bigger mp,(i) is, the higher the association extent is, (4) The association degree based onPR1 Although PRI cannot be measured directly, it is an important feature of the emitter. Suppose that the PRI corresponding to all the valid observation is T,,@), T&amp;, .a+, Tr(k)  of the Mh sampling, TAk-1) is the PRI of the target in the current backing gate of the k-lth sampling. The PRI observation &amp;fference is The association extent based on PRI is written a5 mw which expresses the inhence of PRI observation difference on the association extent. as for the target is of different PRI type, the d e h t i o n  of mpr is different.

The correctness of data asscclabon is drectly relative to the weight of all the features. The weight of the state measurements, the frequency, the PW and the PRI is q, a2, n3 and aa separately, and they sat isfy the standadzation condhon, i.e.

a, + a,  + U ,  + u4 = 1 . As for the 5th valid observation in the j th baclang gate, the asociation extent can be calcdated as foIlows accordmg to mdti-feature infomation fusion.

m,(i,) = aps(i,j+o,m,(i,)+ a p A , ( i , ) i  u,ms(i,) In the course of multi-target tracking, the optimum association of one trackmg gate is settle4 does not mean the whole optimum association of all the bachng gates. So it needs to do the synthetic data association of multi-mget, and then to make the decision of association (14) 3.2 Synthetic data association of multi-target Because the threaten grads of the target in every tracking gate i s  different, the weight of every backing gate is different accordngly. I f  the threaten grade of the backed target is di\ided into No 1 ,No 2 and WO 3, and the weight is same of the Same thrcaren grade target, bl ,  b2, b3 is the weight of No i ,  No 2, No 3 threaten grade target. Became the oacking effsct of  eve^ target infiunce directly on ths whole trachng efftct when we do the Tracking initiation time Table 2: Smne featme data d targets Target 1 FWF I X  PRI FX Target 2 False probability of  tracking initiation 4.2 Result and ccmclusiom Definition 1: Thc process from &amp;e rtgirhtion to t h e confi'mtion of thc assumed track i s  called the coursc of hacking initiation h the c o m e  of tacking initiation, thc total t imcs of samplings is called trackiug initiation time.

Definition 2: In the course of tr.ncking initiation, the ratio of t h e times o f  fdse detection to the total times of samplings is callcd false probability oftracking initiation.

According to the above simulation environment, we apply two methods to track the t q e t s ,  method 1 is tho tracking initiation and data nssociation algorithm proposcd in this paper, and mcthad 2 is thc traclung initiation algorithm of simple SPRT based on the targets state information and thc tradition$ NN data Method t associntion algorithm With the Montc-Carfo cxpaimmts, h e tracking results arc shown as fig. 1 md Iig.2 separatdy, the tracking initiation result i s  shown in table 3.

Method 2 Mclbod I M c h d  2 11 a 06 0.33    11 a 06 0.33 x d m ) Target 1 0 v a W d  y o b W  Vdm/s) 250 2 0  30 The simulation result shows that, as for the tsrgets o f  ncm parallcl and o f  little angic cross, the bsclang initiation t i m c  of method 1 is much shorter thaa that of method 2, and thc tracking initiation fdse probability ofmcthod 1 is  much lower than that of mcd-iod 2. In the course of tracking, t b a e  is many timer o f  fdse cross (A, 6, C shown in fig. 2) by the traditional NN approach, while there is no false wos5 by the proposed method. Method I ody usts t h e  inf-tion that is directly relative to the targtt date vector, while the proposed method uscs more fcaturts based on information Fusion. So the proposed methodhas a much better performance ofhacking initiation and dataassociation.

Reference D.J Tonieri. Staa'tdcd Theory o f  Pensive Loc;tim Systmr[J1. IEEE TEIIP. O n m ,  VOL. 2q 1984.~83-i98 K. Beckcr. Paprivt Location of  Frequency-Agile Radsrr from Angle and Frcqucncy Mtasusmmtr [J]. IEEETrans Cb AES, VOL. 35. No.4.

1999. lI29.1144 L . 0  Taff Tqct Locdiration from Bcariags-Cdy Obruvdions[Jl.

IEEET&amp;.O~AES.VOL. 33,  i9p7 2-10 Zhou Hmg-reng Trading of manewekg tagds[M]. Beijing : n d m d  defence indmtrypress. 3991:219.236 J.Llinai, EWalrr. MuItirtnror Dka Fusion[M]. Artcch HOUCZ N o m o d .  M a s ~ ~ u r e D s , I 9 9 0 . 1 1 5 - 1 4 3 Li Hong-Xing Ehginccnng hzry inah gpraacb md appl iaacc[q.

