<html><head></head><body><pre style="word-wrap: break-word; white-space: pre-wrap;">A Report of  Web Intelligence Research at the WIC Beijing Center

Abstract This paper presents some Web Intelligence related sys- tems developed at the WIC Beijing Research Center, such as Web-Based Intelligent Tutoring System, Recommended Sys- tem in e-Business and Web-Text Mining System. In addition, we also introduce our other related work including Con- straint Inductive Logic Programming (CILP), Genetic In- ductive Logic Programming (GILP), association rules min- ing and Bayesian network learning.

1 Introduction The Web Intelligence Consortium (WIC) Beijing Re- search Center was established in February 2003, at Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Intelligent Software Technology in Beijing University of Technology, with Prof. Chunnian Liu as director. This report overviews some Web Intelligence (WI) related systems developed at the WIC Beijing Center. The following sections will fo- cus on novel aspects of the systems. More information can be obtained from the website of WIC Beijing Center at http://www.bjut.edu.cn/sci/multimedia/ai/WIC/index.html 2 Web-Based Intelligent Tutoring System Our Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) system can help students to do homework for high-school mathematics after attending their classroom sessions [2]. The novel aspects in this system are: ? Using Constraint Logic Programming (CLP) as the do- main knowledge representation and automatic reason- ing mechanism. To our best knowledge, the system is the first ITS system using CLP technology.

? A method for probability propagation in Bayesian net- works to achieve two adversary requirements: exact probability computation and real-time response. As far as we know, the system is the first ITS systems using Bayesian networks which can achieve both of the two requirements.

? The design of the Web-based version of the system, al- lowing intelligent and enjoyable student interactions, providing supplemental problem solving tools, and en- suring quick response.

3 Recommendation System in e-Business There are two kinds of recommendation systems in e- Business that have been developed. One is based on Bayesian networks which can recommend customers what they want to get in real time [1], the other is a targeted marketing system based on market value functions which can select certain potential customers to promote for mar- keters [5].

The recommendation system based on Bayesian net- works uses a multilevel customer model which consists of Customer Shopping Model (CSM), Customer Preference Model (CPM), and Customer Consumption Model (CCM).

This system constructs the CSM by learning Bayesian net- works from customer shopping transactions, finds the CPM according to customer shopping history, and formalizes cus- tomer purchasing power as the CCM by a linear model.

Using these models, this system generates individual rec- ommendation set of commodities. The system can ana-  lyze customers? shopping demands, preference characters and purchasing power. Bayesian network learning is one of the key technologies in the system. We propose a modified method called EI-B&amp;B-MDL for Bayestian network learn- ing. Our algorithm reduces the number of independence tests and database passes and then accelerates search pro-    tests and database passes and then accelerates search pro- cess.

0-7695-2100-2/04 $ 20.00 IEEE We cooperate with the WIC Japan Center and the WIC Canada Center in developing the targeted marketing system based on market value functions. The targeted marketing system assumes that each object is represented by values of a finite set of attributes. A market value function is a linear combination of utility functions on attribute values, which depends on two parts: utility function and attribute weight. The market value function model has some advan- tages: firstly, it can rank individuals according to their mar- ket value instead of classifying; secondly, the market value function is interpretable; thirdly, the system can perform without expertise [8].

4 Web Text Mining System In the field, we are mainly interested in Web text classi- fying and Web log mining.

We developed two Web text classifying systems: e-mail classifying system and Web text classifying system [3]. The former is based on Naive-bayes method and can be plugged in a commercial e-mail tool such as Outlook. On the other hand, the latter integrates many text classifying approaches (e.g. Naive Bayes, VSM, etc) into a Web mining platform.

Our Web log mining system is based on our associa- tion rule mining algorithms. Association rule mining is its basic mechanism. We proposed three algorithms for association rule mining, namely, ISS-DM, TISS-DM, and PISS-DM [4]. The ISS-DM algorithm can mine association rules with one pass to the database and doesn?t generate and store large candidates; the TISS-DM algorithm makes use of temporal constrains to improve data quality and reduce data capability; and the PISS-DM alogrithm employs data partitioning technique to reduce the number of passes over databases (I/O cost) and memory usage.

5 ILP Technology The applications of Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) in Web Intelligence have attracted the attention of WI and ILP communities. We proposed a new approach to Constraint Inductive Logic Programming (CILP) to handle numbers in ILP, and apply genetic algorithm to ILP, namely, Genetic Inductive Logic Programming (GILP), to handle the local maximum problem in ILP.

5.1 Constraint Inductive Logic Programming In our CILP system [7], methods from pattern recogni- tion and multivariate data analysis, such as Fisher?s linear discriminant, dynamic clustering and principal component analysis, are introduced into CILP. Thus, we can generate various forms of polynomial constraints of multiple dimen- sions, without additional background knowledge.

5.2 Genetic Inductive Logic Programming In GILP [6], we discover that the population will degen- erate if the length penalty of individual?s fitness is added from the initial population. Therefore, we propose penalty strategy based on evolution period to avoid population de- generation and restrain effectively the individual?s code growth at the same time. Furthermore, by using the con- cept of binding and information theory, we proposed a new fitness function based on information gain.

Acknowledgements The above works are partially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (69883001), Beijing Munici- pal Natural Science Foundation (4022003) and Multimedia and Intelligent Software Technology Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory Open Foundation.

