<html><head></head><body><pre style="word-wrap: break-word; white-space: pre-wrap;">Fuzzy  Predicting New Association Rules From

Abstract - Paradoxically, the explosion of scientific information has resulted in diminishing awareness. In the face of an ever growing body of literature, disciplines are becoming increasingly specialized, while individuals and groups are becoming ever more insular. The availability of scieutific bibliographies in online databases is a rich source of scientific information for scientists to support their research. In this paper, we propose a new method to predict new association rules of concepts by mining current scientific literature. In contrast to previous related research, our method's novelties are as follows: extend the antecedent and consequent of an association rule from a concept to a set of concepts; measure the relationship between two concepts not only by their co-occurrence in scientific literature, hut also by their inherent relationship in knowledge bases; describe the appropriate degree of replacing a concept with its sibling; propose some indicators to distinguish various valid changes of existing association rules. The predicted new association rules can sene  researchers as major repositories of candidates for new research themes, as impetus for inspiration impetus, or as hypotheses to he tested in future.



I. INTRODUCTION Paradoxically, the explosion of scientific information has resulted in diminishing awareness. In the face of an ever growing body of literature, disciplines are becoming increasingly specialized, while individuals and groups are becoming ever more insular. The availability of scientific bibliographies in onlme databases is a rich source of scientific information for scientists to support their research. Although the text processing community has created tools that search for relevant scientific literature (information retrieval) and identify facts (information extraction), these are not sufficient to find specific facts and relationships. Thus, there is ever increasing interest in the process of efficiently discovering knowledge from the huge collection of scientific literature (text mining). Numerous researchers have focused on Y. Nakamori School of Knowledge Science Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 1-1, Asahidai, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan na!amori@jaist.ac.jp N.V. Huynh School of Knowledge Science Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 1-1. Asahidai, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan huynh@jaist.ac.jp leveraging the information in scientific literature to generate hypotheses and propose experiments that only become apparent when knowledge is combined from multiple disparate fields [51, [6], [121-[211, [231, [241.

Most of the researchers made their literature-based discoveries in biomedicine, many using the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) created, maintained, provided by  the US.  National Library of Medicine as knowledge base [7]- [I 11, [22]-[25]. In biomedicine, we are able to not only access enormous literature databases l i e  Medline, but also make use of excellent knowledge base systems like UMLS. This may be the reason why more literature-based discoveries have been made in biomedicine rather than other disciplines.

made in biomedicine rather than other disciplines.

In previous research, two concepts are assumed to be related, if they CO-occur in scientific literatures. Other measures of two concepts' relationship are seldom considered.

In fact, the relationship of two concepts can also be measured by their inherent relations in a hierarchical structure of concepts.

Association rules are used to identify relationships among a set of items in a database [I]-[3], [26]. These relationships are not based on the inherent properties of the data(as with functional dependencies), but rather are based on co- occurrence of the data items. Association rules were originally developed for the purpose of market-basket analysis, where it is of interest to find patterns of the form A-B, for example, beer -f peanuts, with the intuitive meaning "baskets that contain A tend to contain B". Marketers use this information to position items, and control customers' routes in stores. In addition to the above marketing application, the same sort of question has the following use: In text mining, association rules are used to indicate co- occurring keywords or topics in a text collection [4]. We can apply existing association rule minmg algorithms to a body of Baskets=literature; itemswords.

This work is partially supported by the Zlst cenhlly COE program ca1led"Scientific Knowledge Creation Based on Knowledge Science", Ministry of Education, Cultwe, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.

0-7803-8376-1/04/$20.00 Copyright 2004 IEEE.

scientific literature and get association rules of concepts. Then we can replace some concepts in the existing association d e s and propose new association rules. Such new association rules can serve researchers as major repositories of candidates for new research themes, as impetus for inspiration impetus, or as hypotheses to be tested in future.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe how to calculate the appropriate degrees of replacing one concept with another. Section 3 talks about mining association rules of concepts from a given body of scientific literature. Section 4 describes bow to produce new association rules by replacing concepts in existing association rules. Section 5 gives an example of predicting new association rules from biomedical literature. Some conclusions are present in Section 6.

11. APPROPRIATE DEGREES OF CONCEPTS REPLACEMENT A. Concept's Parent U = {ci} is a set of all concepts in a hierarchical structure of concepts. We define a binary relation %/ on U as follows: (1) ciX,.cj a c j  directlyderives from ci In other words, ci is a parent of c j .

Further, t/ci, cj E U , we define their parent set as follows: F(ci,cj) = {c, Ick e U , c k % ~ c i  and ck%/cj} (2) Ohviously,F(ci,cj) = F(cj,ci). IF(ci,cj)I is defmed as the number of the parents from which ci and c j  directly derive.

B. Concept's Sibling We define a binary relation % on U as follows: ciiRbcj a 3 c k  E U , C , % ~ C ~  and ckXfcj  (3) In other words, ci is a sibling of cj.

Relation % has the following two properties: CiYIbCi (4) C i X b C j  o c j % b c i  ( 5 ) Relation %* is not transitive. In other words, even if ci%,cj and cjSbct, then ci!Rbck does not necessarily hold. Because c j  may directly derive from two different concepts ci and c,, while ci%/ci and c,,,%~c,.

Further, Vci E U ,  we defme its sibling set as follows: B(ci)={cj E U }  (6) According to the two properties of relation Sb ,a sibling set has the following two properties: ci EB(Ci) (7)    ci EB(Ci) (7) ci E B(Cj) o cj E B(Ci) ( 8 ) C. A Fuqv Set We want to replace some concepts in the existing association rules and propose new association rules. The different concepts replacements should be distinguished. For example, both cj and c, are siblings of ci , i.e.

c j  eB(ci) and C, eB(ci). However, ci and cj have more parents in common, i.e.  IF(^^, cj)I &gt; I F ( C ~ ,  ck 11.

Then we can say that it is more appropriate to replace ci with c j  than to replace ci with ck . However, we cannot say that it is more appropriate to replace ci with c j  than to replace c j  with ci, because we do not h o w  the siblings distributions of ci and cj  now. If the siblings distribution of Ci  differ from that of c j  , the appropriate degree of replacing concept ci with cj may he different from that of replacing concept c j  with ci. Similarly, only from the above information, we also cannot compare the appropriate degree of replacing cj  with ci and that of replacing C, with ci. To sum up, the appropriate degree of replacing concept ci with c should depend not only on IF(ci, cj  )I , but also on the siblings distribution of ci .

appropriate degrees of According to the above analysis, in order to compare the 1) replacing concept c with c 2) replacing concept cj  with ck 3) replacing concept c j  with ci 4) replacing concept c, with ci we have the following defmition.

T(ci) is a fuzzy set with elements that can replace concept ci . Its member function is defined as follows: 1 if ci =c i 45 1 Membership function pT(ci ) (c j )  can measure the appropriate degrees of replacing concept ci with C j .  Its definition completely satisfies the requirement to distinguish the appropriate degrees of above four replacements.

111. MINE EXISTING ASSOClATION RULES OF CONCEPTS FROM A GIVEN SET OF SClENTIFlC LITERATURE If some concepts CO-occur in a scientific document, we suppose a transaction happens containing those concepts that co-occur in the document. We can apply existing association rule d i g  algorithms to a set of scientific literature D , and find all existing association rules of concepts with at least minimum support (called minsup) and minimum confidence (called minconf), where minsup and minconf are threshold values specified by the user.

R, is the pth existing association rule of concepts as follows: R , :  A , - + B p where A, and B,  are antecedent and consequent of R, , respectively. Both A ,  and B,  are sets of concepts. Support S, and confidence C, of the association rule R ,  are calculated as follows: where the function g(x) counts the amount of scientific literature which contain all the concepts in the set X ; ID1 is the amount of scientific literature in the set D .

Iv. PRODUCE NEW ASSOCIATION RULES BY REPLACING CONCEPTS IN EXISTING ASSOCIATION RULES In this paper, we assume that the concepts in an existing association rule are not siblings to each other. The extreme cases will be considered in our future research. We replace some concepts in an existing association rule with their siblings. If the result of the change is not the same as any existing association rule, we call it a valid change. The jth valid change of existing association rule R ,  is as follows: RL: A: + B j  P (13) where A; and B j  are antecedent and consequent of, respectively.

An existing association rule may have more than one valid change. The reasons are as follows: 1) A concept may have more than one sibling in a    1) A concept may have more than one sibling in a hierarchical structure of concepts.

2) In an existing association rule, more than one concept can he replaced with its siblings.

The solution to the combinatorial problem depends on the user?s research interest and background knowledge. For example, the user can specify a sibling, limit number of replaced concepts, or just replace some concepts in antecedents or consequents. We also propose the following indicators to distinguish the various valid changes of existing association rules.

A. Change Degree The more concepts in an existing association rules are replaced, the more changes take place. Hence, we define the change degree of RL as follows: N j  =1- n PT(&lt;J (4 ) (14) e .~A,uB, ,c{  = B ( e i ) where concept ci E A, U B ,  in the existing association rule R ,  is replaced with its sibling C/ .

B. Realized Possibiiify Two questions arise, when we replace some concepts in an existing association rule with their siblings. Is a valid change meaningful? Will it become true in the future? In order to answer these two questions, we propose an indictor called realized possibility. We suppose that the realized possibility of a valid change of an existing association rule is related to the following factors: 1) Support of an existing association rule 2) Confidence of an existing association rule 3) Conversely related to change degree of the valid change Hence, we define the realized possibility of R: as follows: r; = S , C p ( l - N ; )  (15) where s, and c, are support and confidence of the existing association rule R, , respectively.

C. Support Support S, is the occurring fiequency of concepts in the existing association rule R ,  . It represents the hot degree of concepts in R ,  . We borrow the word ?support? to reflect the future hot degree of concepts in a valid change of an existing association rule. We suppose that support of a valid change of an existing association rule is related to the following factors: 1) Support of an existing association rule 2) Conversely related to change degree of the valid change Hence, we defme support of R; as follows: S i  =S,(l-Nj) (16) D. Confidence Confidence C, represents implication strength of the existing association rule R,  [26]. We also borrow the word  ?confidence? to reflect the future implication strength of a valid change of an existing association rule. Similarly, the confidence of a valid change of an existing association rule is related to the following factors: 1) Confidence of an existing association rule 2) Conversely related to change degree of the valid Hence, we defme confidence of R i  as follows: change c; =C,(l-Nj) (17) E. Incorporate Valid Changes If two valid changes have the same antecedent and consequent, they are regarded as the same and should be incorporated. For example, R,k is the kth valid change of existing association rule R,  as follows: R,k: A: +B,k k If A i  =A;  and B i  = B: , we incorporate Ri  and R, Stepl: Replace S i ,  C i ,  N j  , ri of R i  with S i  + S : , in the following way: ? k  C i  + C: , min( N i  , N: ), m a (  r,? , r, ), respectively.

Step2 Remove R: .

The above procedure continues until the remaining valid    The above procedure continues until the remaining valid changes are different kom each other. The incorporation results are called new association rules.

v. ANEXAMPLE In general, the procedure for fuzzy predicting new association rules of concepts from current scientific literature is as follows: Stepl: Find existing association rules of concepts from a given set of scientific literature.

Step2 Replace some concepts of existing association rules with their siblings to produce valid changes.

Step3: Incorporate valid changes to produce new association rules.

In order to clearly show the method?s usage, we give an example of predicting new association rules from biomedical literature.

A. Find Existing Association Rules of ConceptsjPom Medline Citations Medline is the premier source for bibliographic coverage of biomedical literature produced by the U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM). An example of a Medline citation is as follows: PMID- 855081 1 ...

MH - Alleles MH - Base Sequence MH - Gene Expression MH -Genotype MH - HLA-D Antigendgenetics MH -Haplotypes MH -Human PMID is a unique identification number, and MH refers to the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) of each Medline citation. MeSH is a controlled vocabulary created, maintained and provided by the US. National Library of Medicine. Each citation is associated with a set of MeSH that describe its content. Indexers always choose the most specific MeSH available to describe a citation?s subject content. Medline can be searched by using MeSH, which provides a consistent way to retrieve information that may use different terminology for the same concepts.

We regard the MeSH associated with each citation as important concepts co-occurriOg in a transaction. The current algorithms for association rule mining can be applied to a given set of M e d h e  citations; then we get a set of existing  association rules of concepts. For example, we assume an existing association rule on diseases is as follows: ...

R ,  : (Parkinson Disease; Multiple Sclerosis} -.

{Temporal Arteritis; Melanoma} (19) Its support and confidence are 0.3 and 0.6, respectively.

B. Calculate Appropriate Degrees of Replacing A Concept with Its Sibling MeSH are organized in 15 categories. Each category is M e r  divided into subcategories. Within each subcategory, MeSH are arrayed hierarchically from most general to most specific in up to eleven hierarchical levels. The hierarchical structure is referred to as a ?tree?. Each MeSH is followed by its tree number, which show its location in the tree. Each MeSH appears in at least one place in the tree, and may appear in as many additional places as may be logically appropriate; then it may have more than one tree number. For example, ?Parkinson Disease? appears in two places as follows: 1) Parkinsonian Disorders [C10.228.140.079.862] Lewy Body Disease [C10.228.140.079.862.400] Parkinson Disease [C10.228.140.079.862.500] Parkinson Disease, Secondary [Cl0.228.140.079.862.800] 2) Neurodegenerative Diseases [C10.574] Heredodegenerative Disorders, Nervous System Lewy Body Disease [C10.574.53 I]    Lewy Body Disease [C10.574.53 I] Motor Neuron Disease [C10.574.562] Multiple System Atrophy [C10.574.625] Olivopontocerebellar Atrophies [C10.574.750] Paraneoplastic Syndromes, Nervous System Parkinson Disease [C10.574.812] [C10.574.500] [C10.574.781] Postpoliomyelitis Syndrome [C10.574.827] Prion Diseases [C10.574.843] Shy-Drager Syndrome [C 10.574.8751 Tauopathies [C10.574.945] Using the tree number associated with each MeSH, we can easily find its parent and sibling in the tree. In the fmt  place of the above example, Lewy Body Disease is a sibling of Parkinson Disease; Parkinsonian Disorders is a parent of Parkinson Disease.

According to the hierarchical structure, we can easily calculate appropriate degree of replacing one concept in an existing association rule with its sibling. For example, let c =Parkinson Disease, c j  = L e v  Body Disease, then we get (c j )  = f , which is the appropriate degree of replacing Parkinson Disease with Lewy Body Disease C. Produce New Association Rules We continue with the example RI in subsection A. For simplicity, we assume the 1st valid change of RI is replacing Parkinson Disease with Lewy Body Disease, while retaining other concepts as follows: R: : { Lewy Body Disease; Multiple Sclerosis} - {Temporal Arteritis; Melanoma) (20) Its support, confidence, change degree, realized possibility are 7o , :5 , , 3:o , respectively. Perhaps, replacing some concepts in another existing association rule may produce the same valid change. For example, Rk is the 1st valid change of R,. R; is the same as R:. We assume support, I confidence, change degree, realized possibility of R,  are %, 9 1  9 I I 7o , , 700, respectively. We incorporate RI and R,, then  the new support, confidence, change degree, realized possibility are 6 , &amp; , $ , &amp;j , respectively.



VI. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we propose a new method to predict new possible association rules of concepts by mining current scientific literature. It is very necessary to incorporate domain experts to evaluate the utility of predicted association rules. In contrast to previous related research our methods novelties are as follows: 1) Extend the antecedent and consequent of an association rule tiom a concept to a set of concepts.

2) Measure the relationship between two concepts not only hy their co-occurrence in scientific literature, but also by their inherent relationship in a hierarchical structure of concepts.

3) Describe the appropriate degree of replacing a concept with its sibling.

4) Propose some indicators to distinguish various valid changes of existing association rules.

The method can help researchers explore new research directions from huge body of currently reported scientific and technical developments. Based on their research interest and background knowledge, researchers can select some of new association rules to indicate future research directions according to the indicators support, confidence, change degree, realized possibility.

