<html><head></head><body><pre style="word-wrap: break-word; white-space: pre-wrap;">SICE Annual  Conference in Sapporo, August 4-6,2004

Abstract: This paper proposes a method to detect abnormal event in solitary elder?s daily life by mining the related data gained by sensors. It is analyzed that the relationship between elder?s activity time distribution and the activity, and then the association rules of elder?s actions is obtained. It can help to detection abnormal activity and provide timely and appropriate services to the solitary elder.

Keywords: solitacy elder, data mining, association rules, time cluster, Apriori 1. Introduction Our country has stepped into the aging time at the beginning of 21st century. The increasing number of aged population in Chinese will bring a lot of social problems, such as big state budget and so on. With this proliferation of the elderly population, the need for the old group, including assisted living facilities, must be enhanced.

However, most of the elderly desire to live in their private residences as long as possible, some safe and economy methods are needed to meet their request.

2. Gathering of solitary elder?s life data At present, to detect the accident occurrence of the elder in the remote room, we usually monitor the room by taking pictures that will be sent to the monitor center through network. The guardianship can master the situation of the elder from the pictures. There are several problems in using this method. Firstly, it will infringe the individual privacy; Secondly, a mass of data will aggravate the burden of the network; Thirdly, the proportion of abnormal infomation in the elder?s daily information is very small. The guardianships often lose the exceptional information, because it lack of data mining and analyzing; the last one but not the Ieast one, it?s hard to deliver unusual information to different departments, so that the corresponding guardianships could take appropriate action.

The thesis proposes a method to detect remote abnormal event by d e  educed from daily activities data gained by infixed sensor. On one hand, the way to get the daily information by infrared sensor can protect the elder?s privacy; on the other hand, it can also analyze the elder?s activity through disposing the informatjon gathered by sensor with computer. A5 shown in the Fig.1, the sensor is installed in each room. Among the daily data, the unusual data is very important. It i s  necessary to find the inside relation of the solitary elder?s daily data, the connotative and possibIe to be unusual information from the daily data characteristic by data mining techniques.

Fig. 1. Elder?s house and sensor?s position Fig.1 illustrates how simple sensors might be installed ubiquitously in the home. Locations where a sensor could be placed to provide useful information. Ideally, the sensors are unintrusive and removable without damage to the cabinets or furniture, and all rooms of the home may have such measurement devices. The sensors are ?tape on and forget?? devices that can be quickly and ubiquitously installed in home environments. One of the goals of this  work is to present an activity recognition system that would use such sensors to recognize activities of daily living. The proposed sensors require no major modifications to existing homes and can be easily retrofitted in real home environments.

When sensors were installed, each data collection board    When sensors were installed, each data collection board (which has a unique ID} was marked on a plan-view of the environment so that when the sensor data was collected, the Iocation (e,g kitchen) and type (e.g refrigeratory) of each sensor was known.

-837- PR0002/04/oooO-0837 W O O  0 2004 SICE 3. Method of data mining To create algorithms that detect activities, computational models that capture the structure of activities must be developed. The behavior of an individual can be characterized by the temporal distribution of elder?s activities such as patterns in timing, duration, Bequency, sequential order, and other factors such as location, culhral habits, and age. Human behavior attributes that present challenges for recognition are as follows: 1)multitasking; 2)periodic variations; 3)time scale; 4)sequential order complexity; 5)fdse starts.

We emplo the association rules finding algorithm with time cluster to analysis the elder?s activity. Basically, roposed method consists of the following two procedures Time clustering for each item in itemsets I to generate 8, new itmesets I* with time-scale.

Mining association rules among the I* itemsets.

Fig. 2 illustrates the outline of the method.

History data of Real-time data of I ,I elder activiiy The da I with t Time Association Real-time cluster 1 rule mining s monitoring Fig.2. Flow chart Firstly, we cluster each item of elder activity with time.

For example, Fig3 describe the distribution of sleep time o f elder. Each item represent points on a two-dimensional coordinate grid. the x-axis can be used for time in hours and the y-axis for frequency. We extract the significative time scale with the horizontal line Le, which associated with the mini-support. If the Le value equal to 2, we think the point which is less than 2 should be removed. In this method, we should choose appropriate time granularity. Tf the granularity is half time, the event occuring in 8:OO is same as the one in 899.

The item d is described as d*={d(Dli),d(D12)] after time clustering. We mine association rules among new itemsets I* generated from original itemsets I by time clustering .

assuming the elder activity original itemsets I={ a,b,c,d} (a: getting up; b:toilet;c:dining;d:sleep) The new itemsets I* should be: I*= Ia@i i),a@iz),b@2 I ) ,~ (Dzz) ,~ (Dz~) ,~@z~)~)~C(D~ drc@ (Dm: time scale) We can get the distribution of elder?s activity from new itemsets I* for elder abnormal behavior detection. Then we analysis the relation of items by association rules mining method. In this paper, we choose the Apriori algorithm by R.Agrawa1.

Secondly, Association rule mining is a two-step process?. The first step is to find all frequent itemset. By  definition, each of these itemsets will occur at least as Frequently as a pre-determined minimum support count.

The second step is to generate strong association rules from the frequent itemsets. By definition, these rules must satisfy minimum support and minimum confidence. The overall performance of mining association rules is determined by the first step. Generation of candidate itemsets and frequent itemsets is shown in the Fig.4: 32),c(D33),d@41),d@42)~ A f A    f A Fig.3. Time cluster To discover the set of frequent 2-itemsets L, the algorithm uses Ll X LI to generate a candidate set of 2-itemsets Cz. the transactions in D are scaned again and the support count of each candidate itemset in Cz is accumulated. The set of frequent 2-itemsets C, is determined. Consisting of those candidate 2-itemsets in Cz having minimum support. And so on, until no more frequent k-itemsets can be found. if the subset of Ck can?t be find in Lk.,,we remove them from C3 based on the Apriori algorithm property that all subsets of a frequent itemset must also be frequent.

-838- Scan D for count of  each candidate suppot?

. . I Compare candidate support with minimum support count support ...

Fig.4. Generation of candidate itemsets and frequent itemset In the Apriari algorithm, the item has not time scale, but in the itemsets I* for elder, every item has time scale. So we should update the join process which is used to produce the candidate itemset Ck from the k-1-itemsets Lk-l. The new join process is described by sql language as follow: lNSERT into ck SELECTCp.iteml,p.item2,. . .,p.itemk.l,q.itemk.I) FROM p(inte-tim%) CLk-# ,q(inte-timeJ WHERE p.iteml=q.iteml,. . .,p.itemk.2=q.itemk-~,p.item~-~&lt;q,~temL.~ and s(inte-time,)&lt;e(inte-time,) be-time: time scale of itemset p S(inte-tim%):the beginning of itemset p?s time scale E(inte-time,):the end of itemset q?time scale For example: LI= (a(5:30,6:30),a( 12:30,13:30),b(6:00,7:00),b(13:00,14 The result produced by join process: :00),b(lS:00,19:00). . .) C2= {a(~:00,6:30)Ub(6:00,7:00),a(5:30,6:3OUb( 13:00,14: 40),a(5:30,6:30)Ub( I 8:0O, 19:00),a( 12:3O, 13:30)Ub( 13:00,1 3:30),a( 12:30,13:30)ub( IX :OO,19:OO) .  . .) Once the frequent itemsets f? transactions in a database D have been found, association rules can be generated as follow.

1) For each frequent itemset 1, generate all non-empty subsets of 1.

2) For every non-empty subset s, out the rule ?s-&gt;(l-s)? if supprt(l)/supprot(s) %in-cod, where min-con? is the minimum confidence threshold.

For example, for 2-itemsets C2={a(S:00,6:30)Ub(6:00,7:00),. .}, if the number of transactions containing a(5:00,6:00) Ub(6:00,7:00) is 20 and the number of transactions containing a(5:00,6:00) is 25 (in 30 days),c=Z0125=800/,~=20/30=67%.if the minimum confidence and support threshold both be 20%.

This rule a(5:00,6:00)-&gt;b(6:00,7:00) is a strong rule.

4. Discussion This work is a first step towards showing that everyday routines in the home are sufficiently structured so that activities can be detected in readings from ubiquitous    activities can be detected in readings from ubiquitous sensors via supervised learning algorithms.

Some of the activities detected in this work include activities important ?or medical applications such as toiIeting, bathing, and grooming with detection accuracies ranging from 25% to 89% depending on the evaluation criteria used. Therefore, systems like the one developed in this work may enable IT and health researchers to study behavior in the home, to recognize a significant number of the activities of interest to medical professionals, and ultimately to detect specific changes in behavior automatically.

From the data mining of the solitary elder?s daily life, this research analyzes the relationship between elder?s activity time distribution and the activity, and then gets the association rules of elder?s actions. But the Life made of the elder is not invariable, as the elder?s age growing, it is sure that they will have some difference from the little younger stage, so we need to do a series work: Sample -* Explore 3 Modify 3 Model 3 Assess 4 the Sample ....

circulation and the recursion process. The process of this research sampling automatically carries on by the infrared sensor that instatled in each room of the elder. Every recursion process will firstly do advance revision for the model, only until the guardianship side obtains the confirmation, it will execute the revision on the model.

The elder?s life model that founded by the method can reflect the individual character and the dynamic variability as the age increasing. It also has the advantage in automatically possess sampling and model revision online.

Because of the space limited, the correlative research reports on this subject will be discussed in the following thesis.

-839- 5. ConcIusions References This article discusses the discovery of the unusual event in the aging society through data mining technology. Based on the personality, the continuity, the regularity and the dynamic variability ofthe activities of the solitary elders, it analyzes the relationship between the activities and the time as well as the relation between the events that based on time-scale. Through the association formula based on time cluster, the algorithm is created to analyze activities rules of the elder, so as to deduce the association formula of the elder activity ruk. It illustrates the inside relation of the daily data attributes of the solitary elder?s life, and the connotative and possible to be the unusual information. So with the application of data mining technology on the aging society, it can provide timely and appropriate services to the solitary elder and the disabled people.

