THE APPLICATION OF OPERATION OPTIMIZATION DECISION SUPPORT  SYSTEM BASED ON DATA MINING IN POWER PLANT

Abstract: The research and application of the operation  optimization are very active now, but there are still some problems in this field, for example, the accurate process model is hard to establish for current complex industry process. So they can not instruct operation optimization very well. As more and more real-time data are sent and stored into database, abundantly valuable knowledge exists in the history data. This paper proposed the operation optimization decision support system based on data warehouse and data mining.

The synthetic structure of the operation optimization DSS and the design scheme of its sub-systems are put forward and explicated, at the same time, the fuzzy association rule  is introduced in this paper to mine the optimal operation value of a 300WM unit from large amount of history data in power plant. The optimal values are provided to the operators to guide the operation online and great success has been achieved in the industry process.

Keywords: Operation optimization; data warehouse; data mining;  decision support system  1. Introduction  The further reformation of power stimulated a dramatic rise in the competition between power enterprises.

To maintain profitability, enterprises must try to reduce the cost of generating electricity and improve benefit. So operation optimization system in power plant is more and more important as a main instrument to instruct power plant operation. Generally speaking, power plant operation optimization is a process based on the following steps. First, study and analyze power plant equipments off-line. Then measure and analyze operation parameters on-line. At last, evaluate unit operation state by performance index and make decision by it to instruct unit adjustment [1].

At the same time, with the development of information technology in power enterprises, more and more operation data were saved in real-time database by DAS and DCS  systems. It will be a great help to power plant operation optimization if power enterprise can deal with these data further and find knowledge or method from it for system operation. To satisfy this need, this paper proposed a new decision support system (DSS) based on data warehouse (DW) and data mining (DM). The new system is good because it introduces DW and DM into DSS.

2. Overall structure of DSS based on DW and DM  Decision support system (DSS) can provide data, information and background datum for decision-maker by computer simulation technique or information technology to make sure decision-making goal. At the same time, it can set up basic decision model and provide evaluation program to support correct decision [2]. After decades? development, many successes have been achieved in the study of decision support system. But with the dramatic rise in competition and the development of the information society, enterprises hope to analyze changed enterprise environment. By analyzing the information, they hope to find instantaneous change of the market and its history or trend [3]. The appearance of data warehouse satisfied enterprise?s need well. So the paper proposed decision support system based on data warehouse. Data warehouse is a set of data that is integrated, last and faced to subject. It is a kind of management technique and is good for decision support.

Because SIS real-time database is mainly used to support real-time application, so it is unsuitable for mining operation data and supporting decision directly. So we introduced data warehouse into information system in power plant. Power plant data warehouse integrated primal data and exported data that were significative for analysis from SIS and MIS, and provided support for the mining of operation data and management data.

Data mining algorithm is chosen according to the characteristic of the industrial processing data. Then the data model that is easy analyzing is established and the      potentially useful knowledge is acquired. Large archived history data exist in the thermodynamic process in power plant that is the base for the application of data mining. The data mining on these data conduces to learning about the non-linear, large inertia and time- variation characteristic of the equipment in power plant. The optimal control and operation guidance are provided based on the data mining results. From the point of data mining, the industrial process data in electric production manifest stronger orderliness than the commercial process because the industrial process is less affected by uncertain factors [4].

So we can design the artificial intelligence assistant system based on the results of data mining and make optimal option and decision by computer.

This paper introduces the data mining (DM), the model base (MB) and the knowledge base (KB) into the information system in power plant. The MB and KB system can assistant the operator to make decision based on the data mining results. The results of data mining can be put into the MB and KB system to perfect the operation optimization decision support system and guide the operator later. The logic structure of the operation optimization DSS based on data mining and data warehouse is shown in Figure 1.The architecture of data warehouse in power plant includes three sub-parts: data warehouse, model base and knowledge base. The data warehouse is base for data mining and decision-making and it collects data from MIS and SIS database. The MB and KB system store the algorithm and knowledge for advanced application that is found out by data mining. They have the self-study and self-organizing ability and works harmoniously. The operator and manager can add or modify the model and knowledge to extend and perfect the function for all kinds of advanced application.

Electric  industrial  process  SIS database  MIS database  Model database  Knowledge database  Data warehouse  Data mining  Data mining  Share and transfer  Logic structrue of the operation  optimization DSS   Figure 1. The logic structure of the operation optimization DSS based on data mining and data warehouse  3.  The application of operation optimization decision support system base on data mining and data warehouse  With the development of the industrial technology and the pressure of energy and environment pollution, electric utility industry is faced with great challenge in improving the efficiency and decreasing the pollution. It is meaning and worthy of researching very much to find the knowledge and method from the archived data to improve the performance in industrial process. This paper aiming at the operation optimization problem and with actual data in power plant, proposes the new method to improve the system performance which combines with the decision support system and data mining technology.

3.1. Overall structure of operation optimization DSS based on data mining and data warehouse  To keep the optimized operating status in electric industrial process, it is important to decide optimization target value. But till now the question of optimization target value has not been solved satisfactorily [5]. A novel operation optimization system scheme call operation optimization DSS base on the data mining and data warehouse can resolve this problem satisfactory.

The mainly consideration of adopting the data mining technology to deciding the optimal operating parameters is as follows. The quantitative association rules are achieved by analyzing the historical data. For example, load ( ), some operating parameters ( ), operating parameters ( T ) efficiency ( ). In a given characteristic load range, the parameters related to high efficiency among the association rules are chosen to optimal the electric industrial process. The parameters can be chosen to be the middle value or the weighted average of intervals. So the rules to decide the optimal parameters values are gotten:  1... nL L  1... nP P  nE1... mT ? 1...E  1 1( ... ) ( ... ), ( ... ).n n 1 nLoad L L Some Parameter P P Parameter T T? By this method the optimal operation parameters is decided according to the load and the other related condition.

The synthetic structure of operation optimization DSS is based on the real-time industrial database and data warehouse. The object running area is represented by several running model by preprocessing, characteristic pick-up and clustering analysis. A set of different dynamic model is established according to each model and the reasoning rules are formed too. The real-time data are collected, preprocessing and condition identification.

According to the results of the condition identification and utilizing the knowledge and rules from data mining, The      optimal model sets is attained. The optimal model is chosen by maximizing the performance index J.

3.2.  Fuzzy association rule data mining algorithm  This paper proposed fuzzy association rule algorithm to find rules from quantitative data. The fuzzy concept is better than the partition method because fuzzy sets provide a smooth transition between member and non-member. The proposed fuzzy mining algorithm first transforms each quantitative value into a fuzzy set with linguistic terms using membership functions. The algorithm then calculates the scalar cardinality of each linguistic term on all the transaction data using the temporary set fC . The linguistic term with the maximum cardinality was used in later mining processes only, thus keeping the number of items the same as that of the original attributes. The mining process based on fuzzy counts is then performed to find fuzzy association rules.

3.2.1.  Corresponding concept of fuzzy association rule  Let is a transaction database,  where is attribute sets of .

},....,,{ 21 ntttT = },...,,{ 21 miiiI = T  To each quantitative attribute in ki I , there is a corresponding fuzzy set . The fuzzy quantitative association rule that user want to find is described as  },...,{ 2i kk fF = ,  iik f likf  BYAX ,, ?                   (1)  where ,Y  IxxxX p ?= },...,{ 21 Iyyy p ?= },...,,{ 21 and            ?=YX ? .

1 2 1 2 { , ,..., }, { , ,..., }  px x x y y yq A f f f B f f f= =  is corresponding fuzzy attribute sets to  where .

YX ,  iiii yyxx FfFf ?? , AX , means the attribute in X  takes the corresponding value in . According toA AX , ,  a fuzzy set AR defined on  can be got.  U The support of fuzzy association rule is  ( ) sup( ) / sup( )conf A B A B A B? = ? ?       (2) The confidence of fuzzy association rule is  ( ) sup( ) / sup( )conf A B A B A B? = ? ?       (3)  If sup , min_ support X A ? ? then ,X A is called frequent set. If , , ,X A Y B  are both frequent sets and  confBYAXconfidence min_),,( ??      (4)  then BYAX ,, ?  is called strong rule.

3.2.2.  Fuzzy association mining algorithm  Input: A body of n transaction data, each with m attribute values, a set of membership functions, a predefined minimum support value and a predefined confidence value. The p-th attribute in the j-th (j=1, 2, ?n) transaction can be described by k membership functions  ,  is fuzzy set. ( )( 1,2,...,j pp sR s k? = ) ( 1, 2,..., ) p sR s k=  Output: A set of fuzzy association rules.

Step 1: Transform the quantitative value  of each transaction  in D into a fuzzy set  ( 1, 2,..., )jpt p m=  ( 1, 2,..., )jT j n= j  pf .

j pt  is described by fuzzy sets as:  1 2 1 2  ( ) ( ) ( ) ...

j p j p j p p p pj  p p p k  R R R f  R R R ? ? ?  = + + + kp       (5)  Setp 2: Build a temporary set  including all the pairs  ( 1C  s pR , ( )  j p p sR? ) of each data, where p=1, 2, ?m, s=1, 2, ?k.

For each region spR  stored in  calculate it scalar cardinality for all transactions:  1C  ,  ( ) n  j j p p s p  j  weight R? =  =? s               (6)  Step 3: Find max ,1max( ) k  j p p ss  weight weight =  =  we  , for p=1 to m,  where k is the number of fuzzy regions.  will be used to represent this attribute in later mining processing.

max pight  Step 4: If the  of each  is larger than or equal to the predefined minimum support, put it into the set of large 1-itemsets ( ).

max pweight  max ( 1,2,...,pR p m= )  q  1L Step 5: Generate the candidate set  from .   1rC + rL Step 6: Construct the association rules for all large q-itemset  1 1 1... ... , 1, 2,...,k k q kt t t t t k? +? ? ? ? ? ? = Calculate the confidence values of all association rules using:  1 1 1   ( ... ... ) k k q  n j j j j  t t t j  n j  t j  ?  t? ? ? ?  ?  ? + =  =  ? ? ? ? ??  ? (7)  Step7:Output the rules with confidence value larger than or equal to the predefined minimum confidence.

The rules constructed can act as meta-knowledge for      the given transaction. It is expressed based on reasoning and is easy to be understood and applied to guide the operator.

3.3. Application of fuzzy association algorithm in operation optimization  Based on the history data of a 300MW power plant unit whose type is N300-16.7/537/537-3, the typical parameters that are related to electric product process are analyzed. According to the method mentioned above, by utilizing the fuzzy association mining to mine the important parameters at typical load of 100%, 90% and 75%, etc, a set of optimization values is obtained. The model related to the optimal states can be obtained by regression analysis of those optimization values. The optimal models are put into the model base to guide the operation in real-time process.

The reference value and the optimization target value that is attained by data mining are shown in Table 1.

Table 1. Optimization value analysis result of 300MW power unit  Load 300MW 270MW 225MW  Reference/ OptimalParameters  Main steam temperature  ? Reheat  temperature ?  Flue gas temperature  ?  Excessive air coefficient %    138.4 137.1  1.352 1.345    135.2 133.6  1.432 1.432    129.8 129.4  1.480 1.484  538.2 538.1 537.4  538.1 537.4 535.4  Reference/ Optimal  Reference/ Optimal   With a compare of them we can conclude that the  optimal value and the reference value is close in trend relation and can provide operator with guidance. The decision support system is open and the operator can add new model and knowledge to meet the needs of multi-subject. The newly founded model and knowledge can be added to model base to guide the industry process.

The operation optimization is an effective method to improve the efficiency in power plant. With the powerful knowledge discovery and deduction ability of data mining, the operation optimization DSS can optimize the thermo- -dynamic process very well.

Take excessive air coefficient for example, its optimal value and reference value are shown in figure2. Excessive air coefficient has great effect on economic combustion.

When the value is too high, flue gas loss will increase. On the contrary, chemical and physical combustion loss will increase. So there should be an optimal value for each operation state. With the reduction of excessive air coefficient at the load of 300MW, unburned coal increased, boiler efficiency should decrease while in fact it increased because of the following factors. when excessive air coefficient is higher than 1.346, with the decrease of its value, the loss of unburned combustion is far lower than the loss of flue gas. At the same time, electricity used by fan decreased. So, excessive air coefficient should be about 1.346 at the load of 300MW.  At 150WM, in order to get steady combustion and higher efficiency, the optimal excessive air coefficient should be about 1.58.

Ex ce  ss iv  e ai  r c oe  ff ic  ie nt  (% )  100 150 200 250  1.3  1.4  1.5  1.6  Load  (MW)  optimal value  reference value    Figure 2. The compare curves of optimal value and reference value of the excessive air coefficient  Figure 2 shows that the mining results accord with the history data accord with the actuality. The optimal models can be put into the model base to guide the operation in real-time process.

4. Conclusion  This paper proposes the operation optimization decision support system based on data mining and fuzzy data mining algorithm is adopted here to find the optimization target value. The synthetic structure of operation optimization DSS and the design scheme of its sub-systems such as MB system, DB system and DM system are put forward and explicated. The optimal values achieved from data mining from history data are provided to the operators online to guide the operation and the excellent performance is achieved in the power plant.

Experimental results show that operation optimization DSS based on fuzzy data mining performs very well and can be used to guide the operating process to achieve a good performance.

