<html><head></head><body><pre style="word-wrap: break-word; white-space: pre-wrap;">Proceedings

Abstract: Association rules, classification rules and clustering rules are three main classes of useful rules in the fields of data mining. We often use different algorithms to mine them. In the past few years, the technology, frequent closed itemsets mining, is introduced. It will generate a small set of rules compared with the traditional frequent itemset mining without infomation loss. In this paper, based on the theory of Galois Connection, we introduce a new unified structure to mine the three different kinds of rules. The strncture is called Frequent Closed Itemsets Lattiw. We only need to add additional simple function to the algorithm that builds the structure to carry out the process of mining. We find the new structure is very nsePul and promising.

Keywords: Frequent closed itemsetv lattice 1. Introduction Association rule; Classification rule; Clustering Rule; Data mining is to efficiently discover interesting rules from large collections of data. The problems of mining association rules [1,2,3], classification rules [4,5] and clustering rules have been the subjects of numerous studies.

Association rules mining finds the useful rules existing in the databases that satisfy the preseting minimum support and minimum confidence constraints.

Classification rules mining aims to discover a small set of rules in the databases to form an efficient classifier. We want to cluster the transaction in the databases into different classes when we mine the clustering rules. When mining the Association rules and clustering rules, we don't know the target in advance. However, we know the target before we begin to mine classification rules. Just because association rules, classification rules and clustering rules are all very useful in the pragmatic application, it is significant if we can build a unified structure to mine the three kinds of rules.

Frequent itemset mining must be an important process in the structure. However, it will generate too many frequent itemsets. In the past few years, a new technology, frequent closed itermsets mining, is introduced [6,7,8,9]. It extracts a particular subset of the frequent itemsets that can regenerate the whole without information loss. In this paper, we introduce a new structure called Frequent Closed Itemsets Lattice. It makes full use of the Galois Connection theory. We can mine the three kinds of rules through adding a new simple function to the algorithm that builds the lattice. So, this method is useful and promising.

In Section 2, we present the theory foundation of the new structure. In Section 3, we introduce the FCIL algorithm to build the new structure-Frequent closed itemsets lattice. In section 4, we discuss how to mine association rules under this structure. Using the structure, we mine classification rules in section 5 and clustering rules in section 6. Section 7 is a brief conclusion.

2. Theoretical Foundation In this section, we define the data mining context, Galois connection, Galois closure operator, closed itemsets and frequent closed itemsets lattice.

Definition 1 (Data mining context). A data mining context is a triple D=( r ,Z ,R). The rows are transactions r and the columns are the itemsets Z . RG r X Z is a relation between the transactions and itemsets.

Definition 2 (Galois Connection). Let D=( r , Z  ,R) be data mining context. For T c r and I c Z , we define:    mining context. For T c r and I c Z , we define: pv):  2r --f 2' p(T)={i? Z I v tE T,(t,i)E R) q(1): 2' -+ 2r q(I)={tE TIViE I,(t,i)E R) Because 2r and 2' are power set of I- and 2 , forms a Galois connection. The connection has the (p,q) following property.

(1) I1GE + q ( W a q c n , (2) T1 rn --f P W ) ~ P ( W (3) TGq(1) -+ ICp(T) Definition 3 (Galois closure operator). Given the Galois connection, if we choose h=p(q(I)), g=q@(T)), I,Il,I2 G Z ,T,Tl,T2 G , we have the following properties: 0-7803-8403-2/04/$20.00 @ZOO4 IEEE 26-29 August 2004 Extension: I c MI) T G g(T) Idempotency: h(h(I))=h(I) g(g(T))=g(T) Monotonicity: I1 GI2 + h(I1)G h(I2) T l G n  -+ s ( T l ) G g ( n ) Definition 4 (Closed itemsets and Frequent closed itemsets).

The closure of an itemset I is the maximal superset of I which has the same support as I. The closed itemset C is the itemset whose support is equal to its closure. If the support is higher than the minimum support, the closed itemsets called frequent closed itemsets.

Definition 5 (Frequent closed itemsets lattice). We use all the itemsets C in the closure to build a complete lattice (C, 5) called frequent closed itemsets lattice.

According to the above defmition, we can conclude: (1) the itemset which has the same support with its superset can be treat in the closure of the superset; (2) according to rule A + B, if A and AB are both in the same closure, the confidence is 1. So we can distinguish the rule into two categories: the class 1 is those rules have the confidence=l, the class 2 is those have the confidence between min-conf and 1. (3) when mining the frequent itemsets, we can solve the problem of fmding frequent closed itemsets instead, just because it will generate less rule without information loss.

3. Frequent Closed Itemsets Lattice We use the following example in this section.

Example: Table 1.

C D W A C T W A C D W 6 C D T column is the items contain in the transaction and the class label is in the third column.

We should construct the lattice at first. Generally, we sort the itemsts in lexicographic order, hut nowadays we find if we put items in specific order, it will improve the efficiency of the process. We use the support-based order introduced in paper[9]. Also do we sort the frequent 1-item in support-based ascend order and use the same Itemset-Tidset structure. We propose FCIL algorithm to construct the Frequent closed itemsets lattice according to the ascend order of I-item D,T,A,W,C(Figure 1). We can  find the advantage of the lattice: 1) It is simple and we can extract frequent closed itemsets easily through the lattice.2) We can draw 'the interesting rules straightforward without information loss.

m DWC(245) TAW( 35) TAC(1 5) TW (135) AWWiWS) U TAWC(135) Figure 1.

The FCIL algorithm: Input: T[l](in ascend order), Min-Sup=3.

Output: frequent closed itemsets lattice    Output: frequent closed itemsets lattice 1) LI={large 1-itemsets X1 Xt(X1) in ascend order]; 2) T[Z]=order T[1] according to L1; 3) Construct the lattice of level-]; 4) for(k=ZLk-l# 4 ;k++) 5) Ck=aprioriAen(Lk-l),(Ck=Xk-l U X1, t(Ck)= 6) forall transactions tE T[2] 7) Ct=suhset(Ck,t); 8) 9 )  c.count++; 10) end 11) End 12) Lk=(c? Ckl c.counttMin-Sup); 13) Lk-1) 14) 15) 16) end 17) return the frequent closed itemsets lattice.

Using the FCIL algorithm, we can get the frequent closed itemsets collections from the lattice easily. In each [ ] are the itemsets have the same closure. In the () are the transactions the itemsets belong. They are [ D,DC(2456)), [DW,DWC(245) 1, [T,TC( 1356)),[TA,TW,T AW,TAC,TWC( 135) ],[A,AW,AC,AWC(1345) 1 ,{ W,WC(l 2345) 1 and [C(123456)).

4. Mining association rules by frequent dosed itemsets lattice t(xk-1) n t(xi); forall candidates CE Ct do if t( one of the item in Lk)=t(one of the item in add the item to the lattice and connect it with the item in Lk-1 has the same t() with it; else add the item to the lattice; When we want to draw the interesting rules, we find the rules can be divided into two categories: the coniidence=l and the confidence between min-Conf and ](Table 2).

If the antecedent and the joint of the antecedent and 26-29 August 2004 llnnnclsinUr Fnqumlelovd ifFMc* decedent of the rule are both in one of the frequent closed itemsets closure, we can get the collection of rules with conf=l. We also can extract the rule from the different frequent closed itemsets closure based on the pre-set min-Conf.

hen we can prune the redundant rules from the table.

For instance: we find A + W, A -+ WC and AC --3 W are at the same row and column, their confidence are equal.

Also can we find that the addition of item C to either the antecedent or the decedent of the rule A + W has no  function. So we can say that the rule A + W is the general one. Using this idea, we can get the final collections of rules are (TW-+A, A+W, W+C, T+C,  D+C, C+W, W+A).

We can add a function association() - to the F C L D DW T TA A W C I I I . .~ algorithm to realize .the process of extract -Association rules.

Function: Association() 1)Using the itemsets in the same closure to generate the candidate rules with Conf=l; 2)Using the itemsets in the different closure to generate the candidate rules with conf between min-Conf and I; 4) Prune the candidate rules to get the most general one.

5. Mining the Classification rules by frequent closed itemsets lattice    itemsets lattice When consbuct the flat classifier, we have to pay attention to the following problems: 1)Understandability of the classifier: Some AI method can build a classifier, but it is really a black box, we cannot understand the thing in it. We want only a white box. In the process of classification, we should under the process definitely.

2)Target-based features: Features should be determined by the class.

3) Property of the feature spaces: In classification problems, we will have a lot of characterized features. So we should choose the proper Generally, we know the target class in advance.

space in the high dimensional space, or we cannot classify the feature correctly.

According to the above problems, we can find the frequent closed itemsets based classifier is a well choice.

We can choose the feature spaces in response to the target class, so do we know the classifier.

In the third column of the Table 1, there are the class labels of the respective transactions. Let us pay attention to one sub-tree of the frequent closed itemsets lattice in figure 2.

TAWl3S) Figure 2 We can find if we use the any one in the same closure will have the same classify ability. So we choose the simple one TA or TW to classify. Just because W is posterior to A in order at level 1, so we choose TA after all.

Using the idea, we can get the candidate classification rules from the frequent closed itemsets collections (Table 3).

In the table 3, we also list the correct classification result of the transactions on the respective rules. In the bracket are According to the correctness of the classifiers, D + Class 2 and A -+ Class 1 have the highest correctness(75%). Because the tidset be classified correctly is the full tidset. So Use the two rules we can classify the tidset.

We should note that 1) If two or more rules can classify the tidset with the same efficiency, we choose the simple one according to the order at the level 1. 2) If two or more rules have the classification ability, we choose the one has the highest correctness. 3) If we choose one rule at first, then we delete the transactions it can classify correctly in the tidset. We choose the additional rules according to the remainder in the tidset.

In previous algorithms, if we want to draw classification rules we have to do another algorithm.

However, now we can make full use of the frequent closed itemsets lattice made in the section 3. We only need to add a new function to the FCIL algorithms called classify().

Function: Classify() 1)Build the sub-tree for the closure of the frequent closed 26-29 August 2004 itemsets; 2)Choose the simple one in the respective closure sub-tree; 3)Create a Table. or other Saving Structure to list the classification efficiency of the simple one according to the class label; 4)Choose the rules according to function choose(); 5)Get the final classification rules.

Sub-Function: Choose() 1)Choose the highest efficient rules in the Table or Structure; 2)If two rules have the same efficiency, select according to the order sequence at level 1; 3)Then delete the tid can be classified correctly by the rule, then choose the new rules to classify the remainder in the tidset.

tidset.

6.

itemsets lattice Clustering the transactions by frequent closed We find the lattice can also be used to cluster the transactions.

Table 4 1 C D W A C D W rZcrw 5 A C D T W 6 D 3 Transaction 1 and 3 belong to the same class I(TAWC) just because they have the same itemsets. Transaction 2 and tranactions 6 belong to the class 2(DWC) and class 3(DC) because they are belong to the different frequent closed itemsets closure. Then we focus on transaction 4 and 5.

According to tranaction 4(DAWC), we cannot find DAWC in the lattice because it is not frequent. Then we consider the nearest subset of it has 3 items: DAW, DAC, DWC and AWC. We cannot find DAW and DAC but DWC and AWC.

Because the support of AWC is higher than that of DWC, so we classify it to the class AWC belongs. With respect to transaction 5, we use the same method and consider the following itemsets: DTAW, DTAC, DTWC, DAWC and TAWC. We only find the TAWC, so we classify it into class 1. So we get the table 4.

1)For every transaction find the frequent closed itemsets closure of it.

2)If we find it and it belongs to one closure, put it into the class the closure belongs.

3)else add the transaction to the class which closure has the highest support belongs.

4)Consider the nearest subsets of the transaction.

5)If they belong to one closure, put it into the class the closure belongs.

We can get the function cluster(); 6)else add the transaction to the class which closure has the highest support belongs.

7. Conclusions Association rules, classification rules and clustering rules mining are indispensable to practical applications. In the past few years, the technology--frequent closed itemsets mining is introduced. It will generate rules smaller than the traditional frequent itemset mining without information loss.

In this paper, based on the theory of Galois Connection, we introduce a new unified structure to mine the three kinds of rules. The structure is called Frequent closed itemsets based lattice. We can add additional function to the structure to carry out the process of mining. We find the new structure is very useful and promising.

